Misrepresentations On Auto Safety
To the Editor:
In "As Cars Get Safer, Drivers Take Risks" (Viewpoints, April 10), Robert S. Chirinko ignores a huge body of scientific literature discrediting the offsetting-behavior, or risk-compensation, theory when it comes to car safety improvements.


Weddings; Suzanne E. Stokes, Mark D. Vieth
Suzanne Elizabeth Stokes, a legislative assistant to Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, was married yesterday to Mark David Vieth, legislative director to Representative Robert A. Borski, Democrat of Pennsylvania.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Philip Wogaman performed the ceremony, assisted by the bridegroom's father, the Rev.
Dr.
Richard Vieth, who is also a Methodist minister, at the Foundry United Methodist Church in Washington.
Ms.
Stokes, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond F. Stokes of Norwalk, Conn.
The bride's father is a district manager at the Simmons-Boardman Publishing Corporation in New York.
Her mother is a head nurse at Fairfield Manor, a home for the elderly in Norwalk.


Hawks Win, Magic Loses, 3 Ejected on the Undercard
Hawks 104, Heat 86
Atlanta's Duane Ferrell came off the bench to score 23 points, including 10 after his basket and a hard foul by the Heat's Grant Long ignited a three-minute brawl, as the Hawks beat Miami, 104-86, last night in Atlanta, evening their three-of-five-game quarterfinal series at 1-1.


Here Come The Video Censors
A whole new "entertainment" industry was born in the early 80's, one that in its extremism may now threaten our liberties.
The new industry was home video of explicitly sexual and violent content -- content that until then had been kept as far from our homes as possible.
On cable's "blue" programs a woman masturbated on the screen; another joined her.
An artist lovingly painted a mother and her pubescent daughter -- not their portraits, their naked bodies.
A dog was brutally murdered, the scene repeated again and again.
X-rated films became accessible to anyone, young or old, who could turn a switch to "On."


Student Deals: New Wrinkles
AT one time, student air fares consistently offered the best deals to young travelers; these days the situation is not so simple.
Larry Joseph, the director of the Eastern region for Council Travel, a division of the Council on Educational Travel and Exchange with headquarters in Boston, says that new low advance purchase air fares make selling harder at his organization.
"Once the student fare was absolutely the lowest," Mr.
Joseph explained, "and we could punch it out and say it was the best. Now the salesperson has to look it up and explain to the student why the advance purchase fare has a two-week stay limit and why it may be better to buy the student fare for a little more."  A Tricky Business
Melissa Visconti, the manager of the Greenwich Village office of S.T.A., another national agency specializing in student travel, agreed that the student-fare picture was no longer straightforward.
As an illustration, she said in early April that the best noncharter price for a one-way trip to Paris between now and June 11 would be on Tower Air, $219 for a Friday trip, which is the same price advertised by Council Travel.
The Tower fare, available to anyone, beat any student fare in her computer, Ms.
Visconti said.


Who Is That Lady?


Word for Word/The Presley Papers; It's Just a Hunka, Hunka Burnin' Nixon Americana
All right, the eulogies for Richard M. Nixon are over and a great American is buried.
But let's not misrepresent the true Nixon gestalt, which encompassed not only the grand mastery and malpractice of politics but also some excursions into absurdity.
Here was a President of many paradoxes, not least of which was his ability (shared by his staff) to seem at once rigidly on top of things and woefully out of touch.
The classic example may be Mr.
Nixon's brief meeting at the White House with Elvis Presley on Dec. 21, 1970, three and a half years before the President's resignation over Watergate and six and a half years before the singer's death amid prescription-drug abuse and self-indulgence.
The famous photograph of that encounter -- two men destined for different types of self-destruction -- has become an icon of both the President and the King.
More illuminating is the record of the meeting, which has been in the public domain since 1986 (unlike many White House records whose release Mr. Nixon successfully fought in court) and is now housed at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project of the National Archives in College Park, Md.
Here are excerpts.
TOM KUNTZ Mailing It Special 'D'
Elvis personally delivered a letter seeking a meeting with the President to a White House guard on the morning of the encounter.
In Presley's hand, it was written on his flight to Washington, to judge from the airline stationery used.
His intention was to add to his collection of law-enforcement paraphernalia by obtaining the credentials of a Federal agent in the war on drugs (and he was rebuffed in this quest on a visit to the Narcotics Bureau, the columnist Jack Anderson later reported):  Dear Mr.
President:
First, I would like to introduce myself.
I am Elvis Presley and admire you and have Great Respect for your office.
I talked to Vice President Agnew in Palm Springs three weeks ago and expressed my concern for our country.
The Drug Culture, the Hippie Elements, the S.D.S.  [ Students for a Democratic Society ] , Black Panthers, etc. do not consider me as their enemy or as they call it the Establishment.
I call it America and I love it. . . .
I have no concerns or motives other than helping the country out.
So I wish not to be given a title or an appointed position.
I can and will do more good if I were made a Federal Agent at Large and I will help out by doing it my through my communications with people of all ages. . . .
I am on this plane with Sen.
George Murphy  [ of California ]  and we have been discussing the problems that our country is faced with.
Sir, I am staying at the Washington Hotel, Room 505-506-507 -- I have 2 men who work with me by the name of Jerry Schilling and Sonny West.
I am registered under the name of Jon Burrows.
I will be here for as long as it takes to get the credentials of a Federal Agent.
I have done an in-depth study of drug abuse and Communist brainwashing techniques and I am right in the middle of the whole thing where I can and will do the most good.
I am glad to help just so long as it is kept very private. . . .
I was nominated this coming year one of America's Ten Most Outstanding Young Men. . . .
I am sending you the short autobiography about myself so you can better understand this approach.
I would love to meet you just to say hello if you're not too busy.
Respectfully, Elvis Presley P.S.
I believe that you Sir were one of the Top Ten Outstanding Men of America also. . . .
Presley's appearance quickly prompted this memo from Dwight L. Chapin, Mr.
Nixon's appointments secretary, to H. R. Haldeman, the President's chief of staff (both aides were later convicted in the Watergate scandal):
SUBJECT: Elvis Presley.
Attached you will find a letter to the President from Elvis Presley.
As you are aware, Presley showed up here this morning and has requested an appointment with the President. . . .
As you are well aware, Presley was voted one of the ten outstanding young men for next year and this was based upon his work in the field of drugs.
The thrust of Presley's letter is that he wants to become a "Federal agent at large" to work against the drug problem by communicating with people of all ages. . . .
I suggest that we do the following:
This morning Bud Krogh  [ Egil Krogh Jr., also convicted in the Watergate scandal ]  will have Mr.
Presley in and talk to him about drugs and about what Presley can do.
Bud will also check to see if there is some kind of honorary agent at large or credential of some sort that we can provide for Presley.
After Bud has met with Presley, it is recommended that we have Bud bring Presley in during the Open Hour to meet briefly with the President. . . .
We both think that it would be wrong to push Presley off on the Vice President since it will take very little of the President's time . . .
In addition, if the President wants to meet with some bright young people outside of the Government, Presley might be a perfect one to start with.  [ Here a note in Mr.
Haldeman's hand is scrawled in the margin: "You must be kidding." ] 'Get High on Life'
Mr.
Haldeman's approval of Mr.
Chapin's plan led to this memorandum to the President: SUBJECT: Meeting with Elvis Presley
TALKING POINTS: . . .
The problem is critical: As of December 14, 1970, 1,022 people died this year in New York alone from just narcotic-related deaths. . . .
Two of youth's folk heroes, Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin, recently died within a period of two weeks reportedly from drug-related causes.
Their deaths are a sharp reminder of how the rock music culture has been linked to the drug sub-culture. . . .
Suggestions for Presley activities:
1. Work with White House staff.
2. . . .
Encourage the creation of an hour Television Special in which Presley narrates as stars such as himself sing popular songs and interpret them for parents in order to show drug and other anti-establishment themes in rock music.
3. Encourage fellow artists to develop a new rock musical theme, "Get High on Life."
4.
Record an album with the theme "Get High on Life" at the federal narcotic rehabilitation and research facility at Lexington, Kentucky. . . .
After the meeting, Mr. Krogh filed notes on it:
The meeting opened with pictures taken of the President and Elvis Presley.
Presley immediately began showing the President his law enforcement paraphernalia including badges from police departments in California, Colorado and Tennessee. . . .
The President mentioned that he thought Presley could reach young people, and that it was important for Presley to retain his credibility.
Presley responded that he did his thing by "just singing." . . .
Presley indicated that he thought the Beatles had been a real force for anti-American spirit.
He said that the Beatles came to this country, made their money, and then returned to England where they promoted an anti-American theme.
The President nodded in agreement and expressed some surprise.
The President then indicated that those who use drugs are also those in the vanguard of anti-American protest. . . .
Presley indicated to the President in a very emotional manner that he was "on your side." . . .
He also mentioned that he is studying Communist brainwashing and the drug culture for over ten years.
He mentioned that he knew a lot about this and was accepted by the hippies. . . .
At the conclusion of the meeting, Presley again told the President how much he supported him, and then, in a surprising, spontaneous gesture, put his left arm around the President and hugged him. . . .
Presley got an honorary badge, and Mr.
Nixon thanked him in a note for his "thoughtfulness in giving me the commemorative World War II Colt 45 pistol, encased in the handsome wooden chest."


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Brainscan  Edward Furlong, Frank Langella Directed by John Flynn R 96 minutes


'There Is a Time for Everything in a Garden'
'T'IS May.
Even as we speak, Patricia Highland, my English gardener, is pruning my crab apple tree, giving it "a nip and a tuck" to clear pathways of light and air through the tangle of branches and shoots.


Weddings; Randi Cohen and Daniel Gluckman
Randi Lynn Cohen, a clinical mental health specialist, is to be married today to Daniel Mark Gluckman, a bank vice president.
Both work in Manhattan.
Rabbi Bruce Ginsburg will perform the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, who works at New York Hospital and also has a psychotherapy practice in Manhattan, graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in nursing from Hunter College.
Her father, Howard I. Cohen, is a Federal Immigration judge in New York City.
Her mother, Helene Cohen, is a first grade teacher at Public School 195 in Rosedale, Queens.


Weddings; Carol Raymond, Steve LaBrecque
Dr.
Carol Anne Raymond, a daughter of William J. Raymond of Farmington, Conn., and Dorothy A. Sarter of Annapolis, Md., was married yesterday to Steve Paul LaBrecque, a son of Alice and C. Paul LaBrecque Jr. of Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
Pamela Mulac performed the Episcopal ceremony at the couple's home in Altadena, Calif.
Dr.
Raymond, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a research geophysicist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., and a visiting associate scientist at the California Institute of Technology there.
She graduated from the University of Georgia and received a Ph.D. in geological sciences from Columbia University.


Sports of The Times; For Rangers and Devils: Look Who's Gone
WHEN the siren ended their 2-1 victory that eliminated the Buffalo Sabres on Friday night, the Devils surrounded and pounded their rookie goaltender, Martin Brodeur, then turned and glided toward center ice for the Stanley Cup ritual: shaking hands, one by one, with their opponents.
In the conga lines, Dominik Hasek, the Sabres' spiderlike goaltender who had allowed only two goals over the last two games while making 114 saves, tapped the shoulder of Stephane Richer, the Devils' left wing who was shut out after scoring three goals in the first five games.
Richer smiled.


Be Patient. Plants Need Time to Recover.
ONE of the hollies looks rather strange this spring.
It is green at the bottom where the snow protected it, but it appears to be quite dead at the top.
The upper parts of the holly are mere sticks, shorn of leaves, poking up into the air.
This particular holly, Nellie R. Stevens, has been in place for three years.
It was doing quite well, until this winter.
Then truth had it out.


When He Croons, Slackers Listen
IT SEEMS THERE IS NOTHING THAT could keep Tony Bennett from having a happy day.
As he strolled through the Baltimore airport to catch an early flight, this man, the sunniest of singers, shrugged off lack of sleep, ignored an oppressively gray morning and belted out "Happy Easter!" to an audience of baggage handlers, desk clerks and surprised travelers as if it were the refrain of his favorite tune.
But as the plane he had boarded climbed through the thick soup of clouds, a flight attendant approached him and said, "You don't remember, but we met about five years ago." It was in Florida where she had helped him find a tennis partner when she was working for a resort in Boca Raton.


Asian-American Lawsuit Tries to Make a Point: Police Caution
John Ng looked up from behind the counter in his ground-floor sewing shop in Brooklyn one day last June to see a dozen police officers, several carrying rifles.
As Mr.
Ng described it in a lawsuit filed last week, one officer barked orders at Mr.
Ng to sit still, while others searched the store and his home upstairs, apparently looking for illegal aliens.
Mr.
Ng says the police broke through two locked doorways upstairs where his family and neighbors live, cracking several walls as they looked for hiding places.
"They came in very fast," said Mr.
Ng (pronounced UNG), who was born in China.
"We had no chance to say anything."


Master of Restraint
LEARNED HAND The Man and the Judge.
By Gerald Gunther.
Illustrated. 818 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Weddings; Joshua S. Silver and Ruth L. Loomis
Ruth Lockwood Loomis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Worthington Loomis of Hartford, is to be married today to Joshua Seth Silver, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman S. Silver of Great Neck, L.I.
Judge Norris O'Neill of State Superior Court in Hartford is to officiate at the Town and County Club in Hartford.
The bride, 39, graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in fine arts from Columbia University.
Her father is president emeritus of the Hartford Graduate Center and was the president of the Dexter Corporation in Windsor Locks, Conn.
Her mother, Louise Earle Loomis, is the director of the Hartford Critical and Creative Thinking Center.


Mischief Under the Travelers Umbrella
WITH two dozen gleaming wood and brass awards for sales and recruiting as a backdrop, Theodore M. Roussis was firing up a dozen or so prospective recruits in Smithtown, L.I., the other day with talk about making money selling insurance for Primerica Financial Services.
Within minutes, however, his pitch had turned into a mix of fact and half-truths.
Travelers Inc., the parent of Primerica Financial, is indeed a $100 billion company, but it is not, as he said, the nation's second-largest financial services corporation in terms of assets. (By that measure, it is not even among the top 10.) Sanford I. Weill, Travelers' chairman, is one of the best-known names on Wall Street, but he did not "run American Express" earlier in his career.
And Mr.
Roussis, a national sales director at Primerica, attended Columbia University in the early 1980's, but did not get a master's there, as he claimed.


Mets Perfecting Art of the Collapse
Dallas Green will not used the word "scared," but, at this point, the feeling is approaching something close to that.
Green picks up the phone to call the Mets' bullpen and it is with some sense of trepidation, as if disaster could be waiting at the other end of line.
Yesterday, it was.
This was a bullpen collapse that topped all the other ugly collapses the Mets have had to watch this early season.
In a spectacle that frustrated the manager and disgusted most of the players, the Mets blew not one, not two, but three five-run leads yesterday at Shea Stadium and finished with a 12-10 loss to the Dodgers that will be all but impossible to forget.


Not-Too-Fancy Carpets Can Be Shampooed With Machines
SPRING is a traditional time to clean carpets and rugs.
They need frequent minor cleaning the year-round, but also benefit from deep cleaning annually or every 18 months.
Leave the care of antique, hand-knotted and other fragile rugs to experts.
Most people can maintain and deep-clean wool and synthetic carpeting.
At least once a week, sweep or vacuum rugs and carpets to prevent dirt from becoming embedded.
Use a power-brush or beater-brush attachment.
They have rollers to sweep and comb the carpet.


Weddings; Claudia Bierman, R. E. Lechtman
Claudia Eve Bierman, a daughter of Rita L. Bierman of New Providence, N.J., and the late Donald I. Bierman, is to be married today to Richard Evan Lechtman, the son of Susan and Duke Lechtman of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene is to officiate at the Chanticler restaurant in Short Hills.
The bride, 26, is the manager of video sales promotion for Columbia House, the mail-order company, in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.


The Workers Are Starting To Win a Few
IT was almost 13 years ago when it became clear that labor unions had lost much of their clout.
President Ronald Reagan broke the air traffic controllers' strike, and left the strikers unemployed.
In retrospect, that action seems to have set the tone for an era in which the power of workers to get "more," as Samuel Gompers is said to have put it when asked what organized labor wanted, had ended.


Weddings; Ruth N. Hill and John L. Klinck Jr.
Ruth Nelson Hill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Hill of Richmond, was married there yesterday to John Leonard Klinck Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Klinck of Middlebury, Vt.
The Rev.
William V. Sullivan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Cathedral.


'Oldest Living Confederate Widow' Tackles Everything
LIKE THE NOVEL ON WHICH IT IS based, "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All," a four-hour mini-series that will be shown on CBS tonight and Tuesday night at 9, covers so many themes that viewers may need time to figure out what it is really about.
The movie, adapted from Allan Gurganus's 1989 book of the same name, chronicles the life of Lucy Marsden, a 99-year-old North Carolina woman who at age 14 married a 50-year-old Confederate veteran of the Civil War and bore nine children (reduced to six for television).
Diane Lane stars as Lucy from her teen-age years into middle age, and Anne Bancroft plays Lucy approaching her 100th birthday, telling her story in flashback.


Niels H. Sonne, Librarian, 86
Dr.
Niels H. Sonne, the retired librarian of the General Theological Seminary in Manhattan, died Friday at the Medical Center of Princeton, N.J.
Dr.
Sonne, who lived in Rossmoor, N.J., was 86.
The cause was internal bleeding after an infection, said his wife, Grace.


Death Duties
TUNNEL OF LOVE By Hilma Wolitzer. 376 pp.
New York: Michael di Capua Books/ HarperCollins Publishers.


Sound Bytes; Assembling a New Whole
WHY build a company when it's faster to buy several and create a whole greater than the sum of its parts?
That's been the mission of Michael Fields, a former executive of the Oracle Systems Corporation who set out to create the first comprehensive management tools, for tasks such as backing up data, security and archival storage, in the uncharted realm of client-server computing.
While commonly available from large mainframe producers, such tools have been lacking in client-server set-ups, which split tasks among more than one computer on a network.
Armed with $35 million in capital from Warburg Pincus, a New York venture capital firm, Mr.
Fields created the Open Visions Technologies Corporation by acquiring nine companies or divisionsof companies, such as the storage management division of the Control Data Corporation.
Open Vision also acquired five products or product families from larger companies.
Like the customers it hopes to serve, Open Vision is a "distributed" company, with headquarters in Pleasanton, Calif., and development centers in seven locations across the country, linked by a computer network.


Rewriting Rules For the East Side
To the Editor:
In "Rewriting Rules for East Side Avenues" on Jan. 23 there was no reference to the essential function of trees in reshaping these urban neighborhoods.


THE PSYCHEDELIC CURE
Although I have no socially proscribed addictions, I would like to try ibogaine ("The Psychedelic Cure," by Alexis Jetter, April 10).
I am 77, and at the request of one of my children, I am planning to put my autobiography on audio-cassette tapes.
Based on the finding that ibogaine unlocks long-shut memory doors, I would find it of great help in fleshing out my story to recover any lost memories of childhood experiences, beliefs, feelings, names, events.
But, alas, I had better not wait, knowing how long it typically takes the Food and Drug Administration to approve new drugs.
GERALD SHIRLEY Tuckahoe, N.Y.


ABOUT BOOKS
Boarding School Life
THERE'S something about a childhood at an English boarding school for boys that makes for great memoirs.
Be it George Orwell, A. N. Wilson or Evelyn Waugh, who wrote afterward that the experience put one "at home in prison," the traumas recalled are often so brutal that perhaps only through expert writing does an adult transcend them.


Why Are Transit Police Playing Social Worker?
To the Editor:
We share Transit Officer Brendan McGarry's concern (in "We're Not Angels, but...," April 10) that chasing homeless people back and forth in the subway system handicaps his ability to carry out his serious -- and dangerous -- responsibilities.
In fact, this million-dollar project does little to improve conditions for anyone.


Economic Watch; In the Northeast, Even Smog Is Trapped in Gridlock
The urban summer smog that chokes asthmatics and confines the elderly to air-conditioned rooms will be gone by early in the next century -- or so Congress decreed in 1990.
But with the 12 states of the Northeast facing a cleanup bill that could run to tens of billions of dollars and with the deadline for explaining who will pay just months away, the diverse interests that influence air-pollution policies have not advanced much further than pointing fingers.


The Art Around the Art
THE building, on a cast-iron SoHo street, is anonymous, undistinguished.
The sign is so discreet it's often missed.
The door is solid, locked and stubbornly resistant to jiggles and shoves.
Only a symphony of knuckles does the trick.
This is Bark Frameworks, the Tiffany of the frame business, an appropriately unobtrusive, and somewhat exclusive, atelier for an art that is seen by all but rarely noticed.
Which is precisely the point.


Rwandans Fleeing
A quarter of a million Rwandans began crossing the border into Tanzania as army troops who had been preventing the refugees from leaving the country retreated before a rebel advance.
The Rwandans began to gather in an open plain where the United Nations plans to build a camp.
Article, page 16.


'Roald the Rotten'
ROALD DAHL A Biography.
By Jeremy Treglown.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Residents of S.I. Neighborhood See Schism
The Clifton section of Staten Island, where a 22-year-old man died after a struggle with the police on Friday night, is itself a kind of island -- an outpost of minority residents that cleaves more toward the tastes of Brooklyn or Manhattan than it does toward those of its neighbors only a mile away.
Unlike most of Staten Island, Clifton is predominantly black and Hispanic.
Many residents moved there from places like Harlem, East New York and West Africa, often hoping that by crossing the Narrows waterway to the borough's northern shore they would find refuge from economic hardship or crime.
But lately, some of those troubles seem to have followed.


Mutual Funds; Ways to Cope When Market Slides
THE long-anticipated stock market decline has left mutual fund investors wondering what to do to preserve what's left of their portfolios -- stay in the market or pull out?
Sit tight, say fund experts.
Risk "is part of the package, and you can't panic when the market falls," said Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
EAST MIDTOWN  $550,000
303 East 57th Street  (Excelsior) 2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining room, powder room, balcony; maintenance $3,000, 40% tax deductible, listed at $595,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Frieda Green &amp; Associates)


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The computerized office of the future is now.
What does that mean for the secretary of the present?
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Jared Bark is a leading practitioner of an art that is seen by all but rarely noticed.
Which is precisely the point.


SPOCK, BRAZELTON AND NOW . . . PENELOPE LEACH
In theory, I don't disagree with many of Penelope Leach's points ("Spock, Brazelton and Now . . . Penelope Leach," by Gwen Kinkead, April 10).
Staying home with our children would be lovely (as dear old Penny would say).
Unfortunately, she grossly simplifies the solution to a very complex issue.
Rather than adopt her proposal, most companies would seek out people free from the constraints of parenthood.
There is some flexibility out there, but only where it makes sense for the company, and usually it's because management can cut pay and benefits, while getting the same work output (I can cite numerous real-life examples).
I considered working part time; however, by the time management cut my pay and benefits, I would never have been able to afford our household expenses and pay for the quality day-care center for my 6-month-old son.


POSTINGS: Panel Discussion Tuesday; Assessing Sony Plaza
After Sony USA took over the former AT&amp;T Building, it set about to turn the 60-foot-high public arcade along Madison Avenue into stores and to remodel the covered mid-block passageway from 55th to 56th Street.
Although intended as a grand gesture, the arcade functioned more like a furnished wind tunnel.
Yet there were those who warned that the conversion of public space into retail space would set a dangerous precedent.
With Sony Plaza nearing completion, the time has come to assess the project.
The New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects is holding a discussion Tuesday titled "Sony Plaza: Public Space or Corporate Face?"


No Headline
"All through college I've worked full time. The important thing is the work experience you accumulate in school. I know a lot of people who are smarter than me, but they're still looking for jobs." NINO TOSCANO, an economics major at the University of Delaware.  [ 26:2. ]


Kissinger's 'Diplomacy'
In a letter to the editor (April 24), Henry Kissinger charged that my review of his "Diplomacy" reflected ideological or personal animus.
I am surprised at such a reaction to a review that compliments the book's unusual "marriage of vision and shrewdness," likens it to Machiavelli's classic "Discourses" and predicts that future generations will read it, like Machiavelli's book, "for its wisdom." Far from quoting Mr.
Kissinger as praising Stalin and Mao to establish that he "never met a dictator  [ he ]  did not like," the review stresses his new insistence that political leaders must respect values as well as power.
The review does criticize "Diplomacy" as a history.
It cites some examples of mistakes about particulars.
Though Mr.
Kissinger protests that these examples are distorted, his letter actually makes them more telling.


On Ile de Re, a Luminous Seascape
TWO miles off the Atlantic coast of France, facing La Rochelle, lies the Ile de Re.
It's an island of whitewashed fishermen's villages, fine sand beaches, wild hollyhocks, salt marshes and a luminosity so subtle and intense that it can move the most prosaic visitors to grab their watercolors and try to capture the shimmering reflections of the light at low tide.
Others, however, might have a sudden yen to go shelling and bring back buckets of bigorneaux, black snail-like shells so tiny you have to extract their flesh with the head of a pin.
Ile de Re also shares the privilege with the Cote d'Azur of being one of the sunniest regions of France.
Its climate is mild, and the temperature almost never goes below freezing.
Its vegetation is surprisingly southern, almost Mediterranean.
Pine trees and palms grow there easily, and the glare of the white houses against the deep blue sky irresistibly evokes some Greek village adrift on the Atlantic Ocean.


Children Without Mothers Are at Special Risk
To the Editor:
I have been disheartened to see that recent reports about the vulnerability of America's children ("Study Confirms Some Fears on U.S. Children," news article, April 12; "4 Million Children Said to Live in 'Distress,' " news article, April 25) omit any mention of a specific population at high risk for later troubles: motherless children.
"Single-parent households" are almost routinely assumed to be female-headed, when in fact many thousands of children in this country are being raised by fathers or other relatives.


Subtract the Ads
To the Sports Editor:
First, they took down the facade at Yankee Stadium.
Then, they disturbed the outfield dimensions.
Next, they made nearly all field-level seats the exclusive property of the landed gentry.
For good measure, nearly all games are unavailable on Channel 11.


Rooms Within Rooms Within A $2,000 Box
MUSIC CRITICS ARE, BY DEFINITION, fetishists of sorts.
Consider this oddity: I have been listening to a stunning set of recordings of Buxtehude's complete organ music (played by Rene Saorgin in a recent repackaging from Harmonia Mundi France) through nine speakers and enough cable to wire Radio City Music Hall.
One purpose of this array, which practically edges a listener out of the room, is to reproduce the acoustics of a particular church in Freiburg, Germany.
The building has a high, pointed dome, columns along the sides and a long reverberation time.
My remote control can shrink the distance between the walls or effectively hang tapestries on them.
Even more perverse, a touch of a button can transport the same organ into the Roxy Theater in Los Angeles or the Village Gate in New York.
Harmonia Mundi has, of course, already given these releases a refined acoustic ambiance, recording Baroque organs in German, Dutch and Swiss churches.
With good reason, a purist might simply look for a "sweet spot" for listening between two stereo speakers: well-engineered stereo recordings like these can create refined aural images of the instruments, reproducing overtones accurately, giving a sense of the acoustics of the original space.
There is something almost ridiculous about overlaying another set of acoustics on the one already recorded, which is itself already overlaid on the acoustics of the room in which the audio system is being played.
Ridiculous but pleasing.


Shrimps in the Thai Style Help Hold the Line on Fat and Salt
NOT long ago Chinese food, especially Chinese takeout, came under fire for being too high in fat and sodium.
The Chinese restaurant community cried "foul!" They insisted, correctly, that although some dishes might deserve to be avoided by dieters and others interested in healthy eating, there were still many suitable options in Chinese restaurants.
Thai food was not subjected to the same scrutiny.
And while a number of Thai specialties are deep-fried and many come bathed in artery-clogging coconut milk, Thai is a cuisine that offers many specialties that are extremely low in fat and not outrageously high in sodium, either.


Masters Debate
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson is dead right in his comment about the front nine at Augusta ("The Masters' Invisible Front Nine," The Times, April 10).
I found it very irritating to wait for the start of the broadcast until 4 P.M., by which time even the last starters had been playing for nearly two hours.


At Penn Station, The Future Pulls In, Recalling the Past
There is the remembered grandeur of the Penn Station demolished in 1963 and the envisioned grandeur of the new Penn Station proposed at the post office site.
In between is a dreary, sweltering, subterranean hub with an industrial-basement atmosphere.
But this summer, in the culmination of a $190 million renovation by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, a new central entrance will open: a 90-foot-high glass and brick tower on the south side of 34th Street just west of Seventh Avenue.
A rediscovered clock from the original Pennsylvania Station will hang there.


GROWING UP HALDEMAN
During six years as a reporter covering the Nixon White House, I found no mystery more beguiling and frustrating -- lying as it did near the heart of the Watergate crimes -- than the personality and character of Harry Robbins Haldeman.
Now, in his wrenching memoir "Growing Up Haldeman" (April 3), Peter Haldeman says this cold and rigid man, who so many of us failed to know and understand, was a father who lived and died also beyond his own son's reach.
The deeper why of the thing still gnaws, why so much was risked so recklessly.
The son's painful gropings suggest that the question is absurd.
For all its Machiavellian cast, Watergate was, at last, the shabby, cobbled work of true believers and preposterous adventurers.
Even the father's diary will permit only small adjustments to old conclusions.
After 20 years, the son says, let it lie.


U.S. Team Finds Errors At Salem Nuclear Plant
A TEAM of inspectors from the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission has decided that what went wrong at the Salem nuclear plant on April 7 was significant mainly for its implications, not its direct consequences, which were small.
Despite a seven-hour emergency, none of the three barriers preventing the release of radiation were breached, nor was there any serious damage to the plant itself, the commission said.
The reactor, Salem 1, which is owned by the Public Service Electric and Gas Company but delivers 1,100 megawatts to all the Middle Atlantic states, will be back in service soon, the company said last week.


U.S. EXAMINES WAY TO ASSIST RWANDA WITHOUT TROOPS
Clinton Administration officials said today that they were examining the idea of helping to organize and pay for military intervention in Rwanda by neighboring African countries.
But they have apparently rejected any direct American action to stop the civil war in the central African nation.
Thousands of Rwandans trying to flee the massacres in their country were trapped when forces of the Rwanda Patriotic Front captured and closed the country's frontier with Tanzania on Friday evening, officials of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported from Geneva today.
Until then, the Rwandan Army, which is predominantly made up of members of the Hutu tribe, had guarded the border.
The Rwandan Patriotic Front is made up mostly of ethnic Tutsis.


Mood Swing Hits Tokyo
When Morihiro Hosokawa took office last summer promising to clean up rampant political corruption and open up the minutely regulated economy, he was greeted with almost giddy optimism.
Nobody expected change overnight, but just placing it on the agenda after 39 years of one-party rule gave Mr.
Hosokawa the highest approval ratings of any Prime Minister in the postwar era.
On Monday a close ally of Mr.
Hosokawa's, Tsutomu Hata, became Prime Minister and pledged to continue the reforms, but the mood this time is a mixture of wary hopefulness and cynicism.


Corrections
A jazz listing in the Arts and Leisure section today includes an outdated entry for Prospect Park in Brooklyn.
David Murray and Dave Burrell will not play this afternoon at the Prospect Park Picnic House; that concert is scheduled for May 15.
Seamus Egan and Friends will present Irish music at 3 P.M. today at the Picnic House, Prospect Park West and Third Street.


Tobago Rental
To the Editor: "Island Life in a Rented Villa," by Gary Paul Gates, (May 2, 1993) evoked such warm memories of a previous visit to Tobago that my wife and I decided to spend most of January there.
Taking Mr.
Gates's advice, I wrote Jane Gruny of Tobago Villas Agency seeking a villa on or near a beach.
Ms.
Gruny offered us "a very nice two-bedroom villa with access to its own private beach." One of "two self-contained, completely furnished units with fully equipped modern kitchens" that shared "the same private beach," our unit, Licorish Cove, was described as two bedrooms, two baths, living and dining rooms, and a covered patio.
The other unit, Licorish Lagoon, which the articlementioned, was smaller.
I telephoned with some questions.
A photo from Ms.
Gruny had shown a steep stone stairway leading down to a piece of sand too small for a beach towel, so I asked about the beach.
It was much larger than the picture showed, Ms.
Gruny's son Gregory said.
Weekly rent for our villa was $1,400, but with 10 percent off for three weeks, our total cost would be $3,780.
I sent off the deposit of $1,134.


U.N. Says Its Forces Clashed With Serb Fighters in Gorazde
British peacekeeping troops clashed on Friday with Bosnian Serb forces within an exclusion zone around the town that was supposed to be clear of Serbian soldiers, a United Nations military spokesman said here today.
The spokesman, Comdr.
Eric Chaperon, declined to explain what the Serbian soldiers were doing there when the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose of Britain, has been insisting for days that all Serbian forces had left the 1.9-mile zone imposed by NATO a week ago.


Asbestos-Free Slate That Isn't Quite Slate
WHAT happens to a successful manufacturing company when the decree comes from on high that the essential material used in its products will be banned from the marketplace?
Does the president lock the factory door and throw away the key?
Or does he resolve to stay the course and reinvent the product?
For Supradur in Rye, manufacturers of roofing tiles and siding, the crisis began in the late 1970's when asbestos fiber became the first hot environmental issue, Supradur's president, Alfred E. Netter, said.


INSIDE
Battle Over Smog Rules
With a deadline fast approaching, business and environmental groups in the Northeast are still fighting over the best way to reduce the haze that surrounds cities in summer.
Page 36.
Overhauling Regents' Tests
Responding to criticism of multiple-choice tests, the Board of Regents has begun revamping New York State's famed, feared exams.
Page 45.
Tensions in Staten Island
Trying to calm neighborhood anger, Mayor Giuliani pledged a complete inquiry into the death of a man in police custody.
Page 45.
War Stories, From Boys
"My father and my older brother were taken away," said an 11-year-old, as four young refugees in Bosnia told their stories.
Page 12.


Near Transfer Of a Captain: Never Mind
Two weeks ago, when Sunset Park residents heard that the new captain of the 72d Precinct, Thomas Palazzo, was slated to be transferred, they immediately began planning a way to keep him.
In his first three months, community leaders say, the captain had begun improving the previously strained communications between the residents and the police.


Correction
An illustration on April 17 with a review of "What a Piece of Work I Am," by Eric Kraft, was erroneously credited.
The illustrator was John Nickle.


Wall Street; A Tabloid Publisher's Unsensational Performance
INQUIRING minds may have wondered last week if the stock chart of Enquirer/ Star Group had been printed backward.
Shares of the company, which publishes The National Enquirer and Star, actually fell in the months leading into an offer to buy all the public shares on Thursday.
Then the stock did what the textbooks call for: it rose on Thursday on heavy volume on the news that Macfadden and Boston Ventures would take it private.
Macfadden, a New York publisher, and Boston Ventures, which invests in media companies, said they would pay $17.50 a share for the 18 million shares they do not already own.
Shares rose $2.75, to $17.25, on Thursday and were unchanged Friday.


Correction
An article on March 27 about a line of toys by A. S. Bacque Enterprises of New Brunswick mentioned two toy awards erroneously and misidentified their sponsors.
The Parents' Choice Award is administered by the Parents' Choice Foundation, which is not affiliated with Parents magazine.
The award described as Oppenheimer is actually a listing, in the Oppenheim Toy Portfolio newsletter.
The Bacque line did not receive either distinction.
Parents' Choice called attention to the errors in a letter dated March 29 and received on April 11.
Efforts to confirm the information delayed this correction.


Bosnia Refracted in a Prism of Boys Playing War
The guns are quieter than they were here, and the boys were laughing in the sunshine.
Darting behind pockmarked walls, four of them played their own war game, firing slender paper darts at each other out of blowguns fashioned from metal tubes.
"I'm not so frightened now," said Almer Bjelonja, 10, who does not flinch at the occasional sound of sniper fire, "but I was before." His friend, Almir Pleco, who is 11, added, "Oh yes, when they really started shooting, I would get diarrhea"


At Brink of Death, Carousel Comes Around
It is the rarest of carousels, sculptured by the "Michelangelo of wood carvers," says one of the men who brought it back to life.
And now, after years of abuse and orphanage, it has found a new and loving parent.
"I don't want a carousel to be closed," said Carlos Colon, who signed a five-year concessionaire's contract with the Department of Parks and Recreation last week to operate the 92-year-old Muller Carousel in Forest Park.
"I want all the children to enjoy it."


Venice at Twilight


100 Years Of Service
A party for the Lenox Hill Neighborhood House; Sotheby's, April 18.


Surfin' Again
Dick Dale doesn't just break guitar strings: he burns through them.
The 56-year-old king of surf guitar plays hard, proud of his place in rock history as a pioneer of power guitar.
His trademark is a skittering, stuttering tremolo combined with swooping slides that sound like an avalanche, a roar, a sea gull's cry.
"The staccato is so fast it heat-treats the strings," he said.
"They turn purple and black and they snap. And when I play, you'll see a flurry of plastic -- it just falls down like snow. I used to think it was dandruff. But I grind so hard that the guitar picks just melt down."


U.S. Allows Double Agent to Keep His Real Estate in Colombia
Aldrich H. Ames, the C.I.A. officer who along with his wife, Rosario, pleaded guilty to espionage charges on Thursday, will be allowed to keep a ranch and two apartments in Colombia as part of the couple's plea agreement with the Government, law-enforcement officials said today.
Federal prosecutors, who initially said after the plea hearing that the agreement would leave the Ameses penniless, agreed not to try to seize the couple's real estate in Colombia apparently as a last-minute concession to overcome Mrs.
Ames's reluctance to pleading guilty with her husband.


Environmental Group Divided by Federal Logging Proposal
The Sierra Club, one of the nation's most prominent environmental organizations, is being torn by dissension over legislation that would protect millions of acres of Montana's untouched back country but would leave millions of acres more open to logging and other development.
The club's leaders have guardedly endorsed the proposal, but a significant number of members have criticized the action, accusing the leadership of going too far to compromise.
In response, the leadership calls the dissidents idealists.


. . . AND IN OTHER FOOTBRIDGE NEWS
A long-sought pedestrian bridge has been built across 10th Avenue at Dyckman Street, giving students at Public School 5 a safe crossing over the busy intersection.
The bridge will eventually be be replaced with a more permanent model. (Rebecca Cooney for The New York Times)


Co-op Building Repairs
CO-OPS in the New York metropolitan region have traditionally paid for most major repairs and renovations by refinancing the building's underlying mortgage.
They might add, say, $200,000 to an existing loan amount and use it for partially underwriting the cost of a new roof or facade repairs, with the rest coming out of reserves.


How to Build a Bridge, Dollar by Dollar
News of plans for a graceful footbridge, designed by the architect Paul Willen, is being warmly welcomed in Washington Heights.
But when it will be built is uncertain.
Estimates range from hopeful ("1995?") to conservative ("1997, if everything goes as planned").
The outcome depends on a maze of arrangements and expectations.


Bulk Buyers of Co-ops Slip Into Sponsors' Old Shoes
"THE three-bedrooms went first, as I knew they would," said Susan Wazolek, the resident manager of Westchester Towers in Yonkers.
Ms.
Wazolek led the sales campaign that found buyers for a handful of vacancies that went on the market a year ago at Westchester Towers, a 423-unit apartment complex off Central Park Avenue.
The seller was Goldfein Properties of Manhattan, which came into the picture as purchaser of a conversion sponsor's 79 unsold apartments.


Landfill Is No Solution For a Waterfront Design
To the Editor:
In his March 20 Soapbox article "Missing the Boat on the Waterfront," Kevin Bone makes a number of good points about the under-utilization of New York City's waterfront.
However, the Waterfront Committee of the American Planning Association's Metro Chapter, of which we are members, believes that Mr.
Bone himself is "missing the boat" when he suggests that landfill or offshore platforms are the answer to creating desirable areas along the Hudson River from Riverside Park to Battery Park City, and that too stringent environmental regulations and community-based "over-reaction" are hindering these efforts.


Majority of Americans Say Cigarettes Spur Addiction
An overwhelming majority of Americans say that cigarettes are addictive and that tobacco companies do not tell the whole truth in acknowledging the health risks of smoking, the latest New York Times/CBS News poll shows.
The results indicated strong sentiments against smoking and tobacco companies at a time when cigarette company executives are defending themselves in Congress against charges that they are manipulating the levels of nicotine in cigarettes and have suppressed research showing the addictive effects of smoking.


May Day Celebrations In Song and Dance
THE first day of May means lots of concert activity with programs arriving almost every afternoon hour on the hour.
May Day dances around the brightly decorated Maypole at the Trailside Nature Museum in Cross River begin at 2 P.M.
The costumed Mianus Morris Dancers will lead the way, but according to the sponsoring Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, "Everyone is invited to join in the fun and dancing." Admission is free, but there is a parking fee of $6, $2.50 with a County Park Pass.
For more details, call 763-3993.


Kunin No Essentialist
To the Editor:
William Chafe ends his otherwise excellent review of Madeleine Kunin's memoir of her political life (March 27) with the charge of "what feminist scholars refer to as 'essentialism.' " Yet the terms in which he levels this charge make it clear that Ms.
Kunin herself did not claim that anything biologically "essential" unites all females.
"By implication," he writes, "there is almost a biological basis for these differences -- a basis that Ms. Kunin seems to accept, as in her assertion that 'only by writing our stories can we pass the political DNA from one generation to another.' " The phrases I have italicized make it plain that Ms.
Kunin did not claim any biological basis for the patterns of behavior she experienced and observed.
The very quotation Mr.
Chafe reproduced belies such a claim: if women's ways of living a political life were biologically preordained, women would not need to tell their stories to pass them on.
Picking on the metaphoric use of DNA is a distortion.


A Little Late, Warhol Goes Home to Pittsburgh
IT'S A STORY AS AMERICAN AS, WELL, Campbell's soup.
A poor but artistically gifted boy grows up in the steel-and-smog city of Pittsburgh, moves to New York, helps invent Pop Art, becomes world famous, and dies at the age of 58, leaving a multimillion-dollar estate.
And now -- as a bitter court battle drags on about the value of legal services rendered to that estate -- his rehabilitated hometown is about to memorialize him with a $12 million shrine, the Andy Warhol Museum.
Although it's the biggest single-artist museum in the United States, and the most ambitious outside of the Picasso Museum in Paris, here's the irony: Andy would have hated it.
"Pittsburgh? He'd have a fit," said Brigid Berlin, a Superstar in Warhol movies and a pal of the artist since 1963.
"He spent his whole life trying to get out of there."


Weddings; Stephanie Gebel, Adam Silverstein
Stephanie Gebel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Gebel of Port Washington, L.I., and Adam Craig Silverstein, a son of Leah Silverstein and the late Phillip Silverstein of Haworth, N.J., will be married today.
Justice Irving Tenenbaum of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., will officiate at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
The bride, 27, is a guidance counselor at Hicksville High School on Long Island.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in education from Hofstra University.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Wafra Investment Advisory Group in Manhattan.


Thomas Hardy's House Opens to the Public
Max Gate, the house that Thomas Hardy designed and built in 1885 and in which he lived until his death in 1928, is now open to the public.
Previously only scholars and literary societies were guaranteed access to the Victorian house, situated on the outskirts of Dorchester, 136 miles southwest of London.
It was left to the National Trust in 1940 by Hardy's sister Kate and continues to be lived in as a family home by tenants.
The opening of Max Gate offers visitors another piece in the jigsaw of Hardy's life.
While the house does not contain any Hardy memorabilia -- his second wife, Florence, gave his study and all its contents to the nearby County Museum in Dorchester -- the garden, referred to in several of Hardy's poems, contains a pet cemetery where Hardy's dog, Wessex, is buried.
The exterior of the red brick, turreted house and the drawing room remain as designed by Hardy, who originally trained as an architect.
Among the distinguished visitors entertained by the writer in the drawing room were Robert Louis Stevenson, Virginia Woolf and John Galsworthy (who was one of the many visitors bitten by Wessex).


Weddings; Eileen Heaney, Lucas Ligtenberg
Eileen Kathryn Heaney, a daughter of Therese H. Heaney of Pittsburgh and the late Donald F. Heaney, was married yesterday to Lucas Adrianus Maria Ligtenberg, a son of Charlotte L. Noordman and Dr.
Wim J. J. Ligtenberg of Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
Edward J. Murphy performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Athens, N.Y.
Ms.
Heaney, 36, is keeping her name.
She is an infant-development specialist in the Infant and Child Learning Center at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
She graduated from Evergreen State College and received a master's degree in infant-parent development from Bank Street College of Education.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Help Wanted: Actors
Who better to coach the unemployed than actors, who are always out of work?
The idea may seem perverse, but that's what the New York State Department of Labor and the Actors' Work Program are doing with the Theater of the Employed.
Gail Parker, an actor, led a recent workshop in this program in the garment district of Manhattan.
"For better or worse, actors are pros at rejection," she said.
Parker has also been a "certified fitness instructor," "trainer" and "communications professional."


Pope Is Recovering Very Rapidly, Doctors Say
Pope John Paul II was reported today to be recovering more rapidly than his doctors had expected after he underwent two hours of surgery on Friday to repair a broken thigh.
"The Pope is in very satisfactory condition, better than we anticipated," said Dr.
Emilio Tresalti, medical director of Gemelli hospital here.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Words to Music
Poetry and music are always flirting with each other.
From antiquity to the Beats (Steve Allen played piano while Jack Kerouac read from "On the Road") to, lately, Piri Thomas (above), author of "Down These Mean Streets," wordsmiths have occasionally turned to a band for backup.
They are doing it again in a flourishing new mix of music and poetry that Thomas calls "word songs." A mixed bag of poets including Allen Ginsberg, Ed Sanders (who founded the unforgettable band the Fugs) and Kenward Elmslie, a New York poet, have been recording albums of their poetry with musical backup.
Thomas is putting his gritty, urban poetry to a background of blues, jazz and salsa this spring.


Gas Blast at Home Burns an Officer Badly
An off-duty police officer was critically injured early yesterday after an explosion apparently caused by gas destroyed his house on Staten Island, the authorities said.
Officer James Galyas, 30, who had been on the force since January 1988 and was assigned to the 67th Precinct in East Flatbush, was taken to the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center burn unit with second-degree burns, said Officer Merri Pearsall, a police spokeswoman.


April 24-30: Clinton and Haiti; A Policy Founders And More Haitians Die
The bodies of murdered Haitians were washing up -- and American policy was foundering -- on Haiti's shores last week.
"We ought to change our policy," President Clinton said about Haiti last month.
The Administration has acknowledged that its policy has failed to restore to power the freely elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Last week one of the authors of that policy and a principal spokesman for it, Lawrence A. Pezzullo, was made to bear the weight of that failure when he was forced to step down as special envoy to Haiti.


Can Holy Bull Keep Going When Genes Say Stop?
It is the landmark race of the thoroughbred business, it can make you rich and famous in two minutes, it can establish breeding fortunes and enhance bloodlines for generations to come.
And every now and then, the Kentucky Derby is won by a horse of modest or even obscure pedigree, something of a genetic freak, a carpetbagger in the bluegrass.
And this year, the issue of breeding lurks behind every barn at Churchill Downs.
The favorite is Holy Bull, the big, gray colt who has won seven of his eight races while leading almost every step of the way.
But many experts will warn you, and even bet you, that he may not have the pedigree to win the most important race in America, that he comes up short in both distance and class genes.


RISK MANAGEMENT
Styron is trying to make a gender issue out of her own overprotectiveness when she argues that women are more sensitive to risks than men are.
From her article, it looks less like a question of protection than of control.
Take Styron's example of the day she refused to let her son drive two miles home because he was uninsured.
This shows more concern for liability than for her son's physical safety.
Are we to take from this that women have an innate need for insurance as well?
ALISON W. MCCULLOCH Spokane, Wash.


Weddings; Ms. Haverty, Dr. Andresen-Guimaraes
Sallie Anne Haverty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Haverty of Atlanta, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Fernando Andresen-Guimaraes, a son of Ambassador Fernando Andresen-Guimaraes and Sofia da Costa Cabral, both of Lisbon.
The ceremony was performed at the Dunwoody United Methodist Church by the Rev.
Dr.
B.
Wiley Stevens.
The bride, 32, teaches special education at the New York League for Early Learning in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara and received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.
Her father is vice president of sales and marketing for Bell Canada International Inc.


April 24-30; How About Some Popcorn With Your Fat?
The scariest thing at the movies isn't Jason or Freddy Krueger.
It isn't even Mickey Rourke in a dramatic role.
It's popcorn.
In a report released last week, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a national consumer group that specializes in food and nutrition issues, announced that the popcorn sold in the typical movie theater absolutely drips with unsaturated fat, the kind that raises blood cholesterol and clogs arteries.


Rethinking A Timeless Query
To the Editor:
For centuries, the question has remained: Does art imitate life or does life imitate art?
With the arrival on Broadway of Disney's "Beauty and the Beast"  [ "Is Disney the Newest Broadway Baby?," April 17 ]  perhaps the question should be: Do cartoons imitate life or does art imitate cartoons?
TEDD SMITH  Mount Vernon, N. Y.


April 24-30: 23-Day Strike; Truckers and Teamsters Reach an Accord
A tentative agreement was reached last week in the longest truckers' strike in the history of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, and the terms said a lot about the declining power of the union.
Union officials said that while the Teamsters had been able to resist the use of part-time workers, they had yielded ground in allowing the 22 companies affected by the strike to make more shipments by rail and by accepting a no-strike clause in the proposed new contract.


A FINE LINE
One day in a Paris department store, I found myself before a display of wire whisks.
At first the eight racks appeared identical.
Then a whisk lit up above me like the cartoonish light bulb of revelation, and I realized that here were eight varieties of whisks.
Not eight brands -- no, eight barely differentiable kinds: rounder overall, or more slender, spun from thicker or thinner, more or fewer wires.
Each whisk's bulblike end resembled an old-fashioned drawing of an atom, or of the pathways taken by the electrons of various atoms, which, to most of us, also look the same.
But what else did the whisks remind me of?
Suddenly I remembered my first time in Japan.
Gazing out a bus window at illegible signs, I marveled that anyone could distinguish one ideogram from thousands of others.
Noting differences, I came to learn, wasn't everything.
You became a reader when you recognized the character you saw today as the one you saw yesterday.


Weddings; Ann Hagerty, John Boyce Jr.
Ann Fleming Hagerty, an architect in New York, and John Cowman George Boyce Jr., a senior vice president at Smith Barney Shearson in Baltimore, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
William P. Rhett Jr., an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
James Campbell, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Point House, the Hagerty family beach house on Sullivan's Island, S.C.
Mrs.
Boyce graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Fleming Hagerty of Charleston, S.C.
Her father, who is retired, was a plastic surgeon in Charleston.
Her mother, Mary L. Hagerty, is the conservator who built the sea walls on the western end of Sullivan's Island.


Of Sports, Comebacks And Nixon
If Watergate was the political equivalent of the Black Sox scandal, the loss of innocence in a national pastime, then perhaps Richard M. Nixon was our President Shoeless Joe Jackson, a great hitter whose passion for the arena should earn him the peace of forgiveness.
Joe played in New Jersey sandlots under assumed names into middle age.
Former President Nixon also never stopped coming back after he was banned from the game.
Of all American powerboys, successful politicians and elite athletes seem most alike in their fierce dedication to goals, their personal selfishness, their sense of entitlement.
And more than any other President of our time, Nixon was shaped by the dark side of SportsWorld, that relentless pressure to win at any cost.
"The president thinks football is a way of life," said his old friend the late Coach George Allen.
"He is a competitor. One of the things I admire in the President is not that he came back and won, but came back after being beaten twice. The determination to come back shows he is a competitor and that is why he likes football."


BENEFITS
Spielberg Honored  TONIGHT -- The director Steven Spielberg will receive a medal of honor for his contributions "to the arts, Jewish memory and continuity" from Beth Hatesfutsoth, the Nathum Goldmann Museum of the Jewish Diaspora in Tel Aviv.
The black-tie dinner will start with cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Plaza.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 339-6022.
Scholarship Fund Dinner  MONDAY -- The Inner-City Scholarship Fund, which raises money to help support students in schools of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, will hold a black-tie dinner at the United Nations Delegates' Dining Room.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and a viewing of the art at the U.N.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 753-8583.


Harnessing the Power of Reward
To the Editor:
It would be easy to write off Robert Nelson's new book, "1,011 Ways to Reward Employees" ("Preaching the Gospel of Reward," At Work, April 17), as overly simplistic pop management.
But in the right setting, rewards like sending pistachios to salespeople who excel may be appropriate and worthwhile recognition tools.


A Mother's Lament


Weddings; Caroline Earle, Eric F. Walsh
Caroline Ewing McKenzie Earle, a daughter of Eleanor Forbes Owens Earle of Narragansett, R.I., and Ralph Earle 2d of Washington, was married yesterday to First Lieut.
Eric Ferguson Walsh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence S. Walsh of Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's by the Sea Church in Narragansett.
Mrs.
Walsh, a graduate of Harvard University, teaches English at the Harbor Day School in Corona del Mar, Calif.
Her father, the chairman of the Lawyers' Alliance for World Security in Washington, was a director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the chief negotiator for the second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.
Her mother is an archeological researcher specializing in Etruscan studies.
The bride's grandfather the late George H. Earle 3d was the Governor of Pennsylvania from 1935 to 1939.


Once Quarterback of Future, Nagle Now Waits in Limbo
Perhaps the main thing that Browning Nagle has learned over the last three years with the Jets is to expect the unexpected and roll with the changes.
Maybe that's why he seems so unaffected by the roiling waters of the Jets' search for a more experienced veteran to supplant him as backup to Boomer Esiason.
In three years, Nagle has gone from rookie with a bright future, to starter on a 4-12 team, to backup to Esiason, to possible third team.
Before the season begins he could be out altogether.


Washington Growing as a Financial Angel to Industry
IMAGINE being able to place a drop of blood on a computer chip and get an instant analysis of its DNA structure.
Then you could produce a device so simple that a family doctor could determine a person's genetic predisposition to cancer during a routine checkup.
Far-fetched?
Not for the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the technology arm of the Commerce Department.
It is giving a consortium that includes Beckman Instruments and the Baylor College of Medicine $9.2 million to develop just such a computer chip.


The Nation; And Landscape Architects Are Tilling the Soil
Throughout American history, in voices as disparate as those of Thomas Jefferson, Henry David Thoreau and Country Joe and the Fish, many have rhapsodized about the rural life.
In the country, lungs breathe clean, souls tune in to nature's rhythms and democracy grows its strongest roots.
Yet in spite of those paeans to arcadian joys, Americans have deserted farms and small towns at such a startling pace that the 1990 census showed that less than one-fourth of the population was rural -- down from about half in 1920.
Even as the rural population dwindled, the trappings of country life followed Americans to the cities, pushed along by the modern-day environmental movement and shrewd marketing.
Consumers bought rugged clothes from retailers like L. L. Bean and the western look from designers like Ralph Lauren, remodeled their kitchens to resemble weathered cupboards in Iowa farmhouses and drank beer said to be brewed from "pure mountain water." If the life in rural America could not be lived in earnest, it could, at least psychologically, be replicated.


Correction
A picture caption last week with an article about Harvey and Bob Weinstein, the founders of Miramax Films, mischaracterized the movie "Mrs. Parker" because of incorrect information supplied by a film company.
The movie (also titled "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle") will be distributed by Fine Line in the United States, not Miramax, which controls foreign rights only.


Transforming The Merely Naked Into the Nobly Nude
IF THERE'S SUCH A THING AS classicism in contemporary architecture, it resides in the coherent relationship of structure and form.
Or so I'm prepared to believe after looking at the exhilarating new gymnasium Rafael Vinoly has designed for Lehman College in the Bronx.
Maybe it's the bodies.
Maybe it's all those antique associations that come attached to words like athletics, gymnasium, Olympiad, palestra.
Lehman College calls its new gym the Apex, after the Latin word for point.
And the point of this building appears to be the classical belief that the human form lies at the root of the idea of beauty.
Mr.
Vinoly employs no caryatids or Ionic orders to render this ancient concept.
Rather, he integrates engineering and esthetics into one impeccably toned physique.


Shrimps in the Thai Style Help Hold the Line on Fat and Salt
NOT long ago Chinese food, especially Chinese takeout, came under fire for being too high in fat and sodium.
The Chinese restaurant community cried "foul!" They insisted, correctly, that although some dishes might deserve to be avoided by dieters and others interested in healthy eating, there were still many suitable options in Chinese restaurants.
Thai food was not subjected to the same scrutiny.
And while a number of Thai specialties are deep-fried and many come bathed in artery-clogging coconut milk, Thai is a cuisine that offers many specialties that are extremely low in fat and not outrageously high in sodium, either.


School Administrators Feeble on Hats
Bruce Stasuik  [ "Stop Assaults in School, Not Hats," Letters, April 10 ]  and other naive well-meaning individuals need to have taught in public school to fully understand the significance of students' wearing baseball caps in school and class.
The gobblydegook that the writer spewed out in his letter, flinging meaningless spitballs hither and yon, missed the point entirely.
For the classroom teacher -- the only important cog in the whole wheel of education -- anything that would diminish or detract from the educational atmosphere of teaching and learning should be swiftly eliminated, and that definitely includes wearing hats, not only in the sacrosanct classroom, but throughout the building.


Grand New Amtrak Terminal: Arriving, the First $10 Million
In the two years since Amtrak unveiled plans to turn the General Post Office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue into a grand new railroad terminal that evokes the classic elegance of the original Pennsylvania Station, one crucial question has remained: Where will the $315 million necessary to fulfill the plan come from?
Last week, the first drop fell in the bucket, when Amtrak's directors approved $9 million for designs and engineering studies and $1 million for historic research and environmental assessment.
The Clinton Administration included $90 million for the station in the 1995 budget proposal presented to Congress.
By the end of May, a "memorandum of understanding" on how to fill the rest of the bucket is expected to be reached among Amtrak, the Federal Department of Transportation, and New York City and State, said Francis C. Marino, a spokesman for the developer, Pennsyvlania Station Associates.


THE AGE OF INTIMACY
I appreciated Morton Hunt's touching description of the pleasure he now takes, in older age, in the candor and intimacy he and his friends have come to enjoy (About Men: "The Age of Intimacy," April 10).
I, too, enjoy this kind of intimacy with male friends, though I am only half his age.
Living in a time when AIDS continues to prematurely rob me and other gay men of so many friends with whom we expected to grow old has forced many of us to confront mortality earlier.


Not-Too-Fancy Carpets Can Be Shampooed With Machines
SPRING is a traditional time to clean carpets and rugs.
They need frequent minor cleaning the year-round, but also benefit from deep cleaning annually or every 18 months.
Leave the care of antique, hand-knotted and other fragile rugs to experts.
Most people can maintain and deep-clean wool and synthetic carpeting.
At least once a week, sweep or vacuum rugs and carpets to prevent dirt from becoming embedded.
Use a power-brush or beater-brush attachment.
They have rollers to sweep and comb the carpet.


The Man for South Africa's Future
In the final months of the 27 years he spent imprisoned for subversion, Nelson Mandela resided in a warden's bungalow at Victor Verster Prison outside Cape Town, recuperating from tuberculosis and meeting secretly with state visitors.
After his release in 1990, he built a vacation home across the road from his ancestral village, an exact brick replica of the warden's house.


Agency Shift Wins Support From Clinton
In a reversal of Administration policy, President Clinton says he now supports the creation of an independent Federal agency to run Social Security, the nation's biggest social welfare program.
The change, Administration officials say, is the result of an informal deal between Mr.
Clinton and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is chairman of the Finance Committee.
In exchange for the President's support for the new agency, the officials said, Mr.
Moynihan will redouble his efforts to get a health bill out of the Finance Committee by the end of May.


A Giant Gym: Lincoln Sq. Foes Declare War
It would be the largest health club in New York and, its developers say, probably the largest in the world: a six-level fitness center covering 125,000 square feet, complete with computerized skiing simulators, a 25-yard pool and a three-story rock-climbing wall.
To the creators of the Lincoln Square complex at Columbus Avenue and 68th Street, and for the club's corporate sponsor, Reebok International, it would be a state-of-the-art athletic Valhalla.


SARAJEVO'S 700 DAYS
I read Zlatko Dizdarevic's heart-rending piece "As Bad as Things Were, the Emptiness Is Worse" (April 10).
I was glad to hear that he and his family have survived.
We met when I was one of the cultural officers at the United States Embassy in Belgrade, and he was kind enough to show me "his Sarajevo." From those days and other visits before my departure from Yugoslavia in 1982, I gathered a vision of a city of grace and ease -- and that makes the current situation that much more horrifying.
When the crises began to tumble one after the other in brutal cascades, I felt deeply frustrated, in that I wanted to help, but didn't know how.
My only response was to try to bring the word about the real Sarajevo to audiences in our local community and state through public speeches and articles, and to encourage our citizens to contribute to relief agencies working in the former Yugoslavia.


Where the Entrees Take Star Billing
THE wood-burning pizza oven at Carmelina is cold.
It had been a prima donna at Caffe Milano, the last occupant of the double storefront in Woodmere.
Now it is an unused leftover.
The owner of Carmelina plans to remove it to make room for additional tables.
That unwanted oven is a symbol of the shift from the casual Caffe Milano to the more toney Carmelina.
Gone is the tile floor, replaced by floral carpeting.
Walls are now dotted with large mirrors and traditional Old World pictures.


The Man for South Africa's Future; After Days of Voting, Days of Counting
Hopes for an early clear trend in South Africa's first fully democratic elections receded in confusion and a maze of problems, as the nation's 20 million voters waited expectantly for the votes to be counted.
The results, which will take days to tally, are expected to result in the election of Nelson Mandela, the longtime political prisoner of the white apartheid regime, as the nation's first black president.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 1, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
2
11
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
3
2
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
4
6
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
5
17
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
6
1
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her bad reputation.
7
2
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
8
1
PRIVATE SCANDALS, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance, rivalry and revenge beset the hostesses of television talk shows.
9
6
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
10
1
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
11
1
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
12
1
DEBTORS' PLANET, by W.R.
Thompson. (Pocket, $5.50.) A "Star Trek" expedition to a planet where society is radically changing.
13
1
PRIMAL FEAR, by William Diehl. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A singular lawyer defends a young man charged with murdering an archbishop.
14
3
THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, by Isabel Allende. (Bantam, $5.99.) Love, hate and tragedies in generations of a Chilean family.
15*
6
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
16
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
547
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
16
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
4
63
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
2
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
6
5
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
7
1
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
8*
133
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9*
48
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
10
8
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
11*
147
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12
26
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
13*
146
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14*
5
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the 1970's and 80's.
15
33
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
163
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
170
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
28
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
3
THE ERNST &amp; YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1994. (Wiley, $13.95.) Ways to cope with the I.R.S.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 16, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Q and A
Africa's Jackass Penguins
Q.
My husband and I are planning to visit South Africa in July or August.
How can we see jackass penguins? -- Maida Maxham, Worcester, Vt.


Children Without Mothers Are at Special Risk; Justice's Mixed Signals
To the Editor:
They do adjudicate violent crimes and these cases are given high priority.


Stadium Strife
To the Sports Editor:
On opening day at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees played a magnificent game on bright, green grass under a clear, blue sky.
So, what could be wrong?


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


F.D.A. Throws Its Best Pitches For Food Label
Curious George, the Goodyear blimp and Roger Clemens are going to work for the Clinton Administration.
No charge, of course.
In a media blitz worthy of Madison Avenue, the Federal Government has enlisted their help in making the public aware of the new nutrition labels that food makers must use starting on May 8.
The Government has never gone to such lengths to promote new food regulations.


No House for Governor Kunin
To the Editor:
Madeleine Kunin was an outstanding Governor (Governess?) of Vermont, and William H. Chafe's friendly review (March 27) correctly praises Ms.
Kunin's personal memoir.
I hasten to point out, however, that Madeleine Kunin did not, as your headline put it, make it "to the inside of the Governor's mansion."


Washington Memo; Congress Is Following Its Own Trails Toward Consensus on Health Care
As George J. Mitchell tries to nudge the other 55 Senate Democrats toward consensus on health care, his task seems like herding cats.
Some of his skittish colleagues are always dozing, wandering off or trying to nibble the flowers on the centerpiece.
It is a delicate effort as the majority leader plays a series of variations on the Clinton health care theme.
A couple of weekends back, he laid out for the Democrats three ways to save some money for the Government and make paying for insurance easier for small business.
Then on Tuesday, he offered them three more permutations on one of those earlier variations.


At Work; Putting Women on the Agenda
THE latest installment of Robert Skidelsky's biography of John Maynard Keynes indicates the eminent economist was not much interested in women, at least not until he met Lydia Lopokova, the ballerina who became the source and object of a grand passion Keynes had previously reserved for monetary theory.
Irony therefore was especially delicious for some of the participants in an unusual gathering in mid-April at Oxford University.
Under the very gaze of the dominant economic theorist of the 20th century -- his portrait hangs prominently in Magdalen College, where the group met -- they put the topic of women as an economic force on the table.
To be sure, the social democratic and progressive academics, trade unionists, think tank representatives and journalists from North America, Europe, Australia and Britain who gathered for the International Seminar on Growth and Unemployment weren't there only to be amused by juxtaposition.
They were, for one thing, intent on restoring Keynes's reputation, sullied in the United States during 12 Republican years of rising deficits and tax breaks for the rich.
"We were in the land of Keynes," said Jeff Faux, director of the Economic Policy Institute in Washington.
"There was a fair amount of talk about how Keynes had been bastardized."


Q. &amp; A.
A Co-op's Open-Door Policies Q. Some people in the co-op building I live in have divided up their apartment to make additional rooms, apparently without getting the board's permission to do so.
The new walls close the windows off from certain parts of the apartment, shutting off the access to light and fresh air.


Profile; Don't Ever Judge This Consultant by Her Cover
LESS than four years ago, Bain &amp; Company, the management consulting firm that was once a high-flying sounding board for many chief executives, was on the verge of collapse.
In the mid-1980's, the firm's eight founders, including Bill Bain, created an employee stock ownership plan, borrowed against it and took $200 million in what they viewed as richly deserved profits, nearly drowning the firm in debt.
But now, after three years of negotiation and struggle, Bain has re-emerged, financially sound and with a flood of new employees -- and, for this starched, button-down partnership, a highly unlikely leader.


Will Rocket Beds Lure a New Generation of Museum-Goers?
RAFAEL HIRALDO admired the bed, which was supported by carved rockets and depicted the heavens on its headboard.
"I like the spaceships on the sides and the stars in the middle," said Rafael, age 10.
His friend Joshua Rivera, age 8, studied a nearby piece of furniture of urethane and fabric.
"Feel it -- it's strange," Joshua advised.
Then he consulted his father.
"What IS that?" he asked.


GENERATION RAP
Ice Cube is not a teacher ("Generation Rap," April 3).
A teacher, a true one, gives out new information that helps you to grow and develop.
He or she does not spit back at you the venom that keeps you in your state of oppression and ignorance.
Q-Tip, of the rap group Tribe Called Quest, has a rap called "Sucka' Nigga," which speaks of the derivation of the term "nigga," how it is now used and the implications of its employment.
He talks about how the term prevents growth and admits the trouble he has in removing the word from his own vocabulary.
But he is not validating or perpetrating its use and, in fact, gives it a new meaning.
That is education.
I'm not saying that all rap should preach, but calling Ice Cube a teacher is misrepresentation.
He may in fact be "growing" and I'm happy to see his "evolution," but the term teacher connotes so much more.
ZUHAIRAH KHALDUN New York, N.Y.


Farmer Fights to Keep His Piece of Earth
WILLIAM PULDA beckoned a visitor to come in from a soaking spring rain.
His two small dogs, lapping at his feet, followed him into a dining room cluttered with desk lamps, a worn sideboard filled with owl statues, several clocks and a brass American bald eagle spanning a wall.
The sweet smell of smoke from his 1920's cast-iron stove seeped into the room.
Pulling up a chair, Mr.
Pulda lowered a hanging light over a clothed wooden table, as if to illuminate his thoughts.
"I feel like it's over," said Mr.
Pulda, a retired 72-year-old farmer, alluding to the controversy that has thrown him into a public spotlight in North Brunswick Township and beyond.


Why Are Transit Police Playing Social Worker?
To the Editor:
We share Transit Officer Brendan McGarry's concern (in "We're Not Angels, but...," April 10) that chasing homeless people back and forth in the subway system handicaps his ability to carry out his serious -- and dangerous -- responsibilities.
In fact, this million-dollar project does little to improve conditions for anyone.


Canada Bars Speech by Ex-Aide of Farrakhan
Canada's Ministry of Immigration has barred a former senior aide of Louis Farrakhan, the American black nationalist leader, from making a speech today before a black student group at the University of Toronto.
Immigration officials said Friday that the former aide, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, had been declared inadmissible to Canada because he had a criminal record and because they had "reason to believe he would engage in criminal activities" by violating hate-crime provisions in the Criminal Code of Canada.


Weddings; Susan L. Batty, John G. Birle
Susan Leslie Batty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Batty of Trumbull, Conn., was married there yesterday to John George Birle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Birle of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Harold Vink officiated at Nichols United Methodist Church.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 27, is an account executive for Harrison Conference Centers in Tarrytown, N.Y.
She and her husband graduated from Wittenberg University in Springfield, Ohio.
Her father is a program manager for media relations at the General Electric Company in Fairfield, Conn.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
101.70
103.26
110.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6540
1.6892
1.5850
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3823
1.3781
1.2735
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5185
1.4886
1.5735
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.60
$371.00
$355.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Weddings; Debra J. Hirsch, Jerald M. Boyle
Debra Jane Hirsch and Jerald Michael Boyle, executives at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, were married yesterday evening in Bernardsville, N.J.
Rabbi Rachel Cowan officiated at the Bernards Inn.
The bride, 30, is an account supervisor.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Marilyn and Donald Hirsch of Holmdell, N.J.


An Honest Soaking In the Salmon River
UP ahead was Ludwig, its white water churning like a stormy ocean.
The boatmen who guided our raft trip down the Salmon River in Idaho offered names for all the big rapids -- Vinegar, Gunbarrel, Dried Meat, Whiplash and Elk Horn.
Those were all Class III rapids, meaning they offered a good ride and an honest soaking but were tame compared with the killer Class V rapids that characterize the world's most-challenging rivers, like the Colorado or the Zambezi in Africa.
The Salmon itself offers dangerous Class V rapids during periods of high water levels, generally in the spring after the winter runoff from the nearby mountains.
For me, this was adventure enough.
I was sitting in an inflatable kayak, a ducky as it's called by our guides.
It was the most ambitious option on the six-day raft trip down the main Salmon, a 90-mile luxury cruise with an edge.


Spring Cleaning for a Good Cause


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE HEALER By Aharon Appelfeld.
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green.
Grove, $11.
An assimilated Jew in prewar Vienna takes his mysteriously ill daughter to a reputed healer in the Carpathian Mountains.
Traveling with his family, he encounters both the deep faith of the peasant population and the rising anti-Semitism soon to overwhelm the land.
In 1990 our reviewer, Lore Segal, said this "marvelous" novel "leaves us off at the very entrance to the nightmare from which we have only recently awakened."


Political Memo; Budget Opponents Try To Slow Up Whitman
A hundred days into Christine Todd Whitman's administration, the political opposition is finally chasing after the fast-starting Governor.
Her critics have loosed wave after wave of objections, which may be too little, too late to derail her budget.
But their protests at least are strong enough to give some legislators pause, and they still have six weeks to think about it.


A Deserted House Dies of Love
UNCONQUERED COUNTRIES Four Novellas.
By Geoff Ryman. 275 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $20.95.


Weddings; S. B. Ehrenpreis, Michael E. Flaster
Sandra Beth Ehrenpreis, a daughter of Walter and Pearl Ehrenpreis of Hollis Hills, Queens, is to be married today to Michael Edward Flaster, a son of Gerald and Edith Flaster of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi Jeffrey Salkin is to perform the ceremony at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
The bride, 25, is an assistant vice president in the fixed-income group at Mitchell Hutchins, a mutual fund company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylania.
Her father, now retired, was a technical service representative for TWA Inc. in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother, also retired, taught the sixth grade at Public School 174 in Rego Park, Queens.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Purchasing managers index, April
56.7
56.0
Tuesday
Leading indicators, Mar., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.6
Wednesday
Factory-goods orders, Mar., pct. chg.
-0.1
0.6
Auto sales, April, millions, ann. rate
7.6
7.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
333
335
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Apr., chg., thousands
450
185
Unemployment rate, April, pct.
6.5
6.5
Consumer credit, March, billions
$3.5
$4.8
This Week's Deveopments
Wednesday
Federal Reserve beige book released
Treasury refunding announcement
Thursday
U.S. chain stores release sales data


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Rich Becker, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 29.
Recalled Brett Merriman, pitcher, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.


Not-Too-Fancy Carpets Can Be Shampooed With Machines
SPRING is a traditional time to clean carpets and rugs.
They need frequent minor cleaning the year-round, but also benefit from deep cleaning annually or every 18 months.
Leave the care of antique, hand-knotted and other fragile rugs to experts.
Most people can maintain and deep-clean wool and synthetic carpeting.
At least once a week, sweep or vacuum rugs and carpets to prevent dirt from becoming embedded.
Use a power-brush or beater-brush attachment.
They have rollers to sweep and comb the carpet.


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Serial Mom  Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake Directed by John Waters R 93 minutes


April 24-30; N.B.A. Jumps The Border
The National (sic) Basketball Association is adding two new teams, so far nameless, raising the possibility the league may soon need a new name of its own.
Both teams are in Canada.
One was a franchise approved for Toronto last November; the second was awarded last week to a group in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Both clubs are paying fees of $125 million and will play in 1995.


Weddings; Martin Obten and Nessa Darren
Nessa Darren, a social work program coordinator, was married last evening to Martin Obten, a lawyer.
Both work in New York.
Judge Michael D. Stallman of the New York City Civil Court officiated at the Beekman Towers Hotel in New York.
The bride, 52, is a case management coordinator for New York University's Lower New York Consortium for Families With H.I.V.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received master's degrees in social work from Columbia University and New York University.
She is a daughter of Florence Berk of Long Beach, L.I., and the late Nathan Chipurnoi.


Weddings; Michele Pistone, John Hoeffner
Michele Rose Pistone, a daughter of Anthony and Rachael Pistone of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to John Hoeffner, a son of Jack and Patricia Hoeffner of North Valley Stream, L.I.
Msgr.
Anthony Baretta performed the ceremony in Dahlgren Chapel at Georgetown University in Washington.
The bride, 30, is an associate in Washington with Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from New York University.
She and her husband received law degrees from St.
John's University.
Her father is a lawyer in Flushing, Queens.
Her mother is a real estate broker for Kappeli Realty in Manhasset, L.I.


Seton Hall Sprinter A Winner By Inches
At the end of a long, frustrating day, the members of the Seton Hall track team found something to cheer them up today as the 100th Penn Relays ended.
The architect was Flirtisha Harris, a 5-foot senior from St.
Leonard's, Md., and the best female sprinter ever to run for this college, which has such a rich track tradition.
A crowd of 43,830, the largest ever at America's oldest, biggest and best relay carnival, had watched the Seton Hall men come so close to winning.
Its sprint medley team seemed ready to win, only to fade at the end as Tennessee, with a spectacular finish, won in 3 minutes 13.28 seconds, a meet record.
Later, the Seton Hall 3,200-meter team lost only when Alex Morgan of George Mason, wobbling from exhaustion, somehow leaned at the finish and beat Albert Royster of Seton Hall by inches in 7:15.28.
Arizona State Was Leading
In the next-to-last event of the meet, the women's 1,600-meter relay, the anchor leg began with Arizona State leading and Seton Hall fourth.
Harris was 20 meters behind.
Then Harris, so small that many college coaches did not bother to recruit her, started closing the gap.


Be Patient. Plants Need Time to Recover.
ONE of the hollies looks rather strange this spring.
It is green at the bottom where the snow protected it, but it appears to be quite dead at the top.
The upper parts of the holly are mere sticks, shorn of leaves, poking up into the air.
This particular holly, Nellie R. Stevens, has been in place for three years.
It was doing quite well, until this winter.
Then truth had it out.


Empty Pedestal in Rome Fuels Debate Over Statue
On the Campidoglio in Rome stands an empty pedestal, a forlorn marble stump making the square, which was designed by Michelangelo, into a kind of eye without a pupil.
In 1981, a statue of the philosopher-emperor Marcus Aurelius that had been put there in 1538 by Michelangelo was removed for restoration.
In 1990, the statue was restored to the Campidoglio, not to its original pedestal, but to an air-conditioned glass box in the nearby Capitoline Museum.
Since then, debate has raged about whether the emperor should remain in his glass cage, or be restored to the original base.
Experts say that even clean rainwater would have a corrosive effect on the statue's 1,800-year-old bronze skin.
Rome's polluted elements would be devastating, they say.


Technology; Putting Space-Age Expertise in the Driver's Seat
IN a rare example of a military contractor successfully converting its technical expertise into viable commercial products, the Rockwell International Corporation has developed several promising new technologies for the fast-emerging market for smart cars and the smart highways on which they will travel.
The products will allow motorists to receive directions orally to any destination from a device in their cars; trucking companies to track and communicate anywhere with their entire fleets; and transportation agencies to more readily monitor traffic flow.
Many of the products cost about half as much as systems currently being used.


Weddings; Pamela Kaufman and Richard Tepper
Pamela Wendi Kaufman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Kaufman of East Windsor, N.J., was married last evening to Richard Eric Tepper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Tepper of Dix Hills, L.I.
Cantor Jeffrey Forman performed the ceremony at the Huntington Town House in Huntington Station, L.I.
Mrs.
Tepper, 25, teaches the second grade at the Partnership School in New York.
She graduated from West Chester University.


Just What Is It About These Pirates (and Braves)?
Pirates 2, Braves 1
Denny Neagle outpitched the two-time Cy Young Award winner Greg Maddux and the Pirates beat the Atlanta Braves for the fourth time in five games, winning by 2-1 in Pittsburgh last night.


April 24-30: Third-World Prognosis; AIDS Is Likely to Reverse Gains in Life Expectancy
Notwithstanding floods, famine or wars, the overall quality of life in the third world has been improving for two decades.
But now, there is evidence that hard-won gains in life expectancy and childhood mortality are being reversed in many places by a new scourge: AIDS.
Last week, demographers at the Census Bureau's Center for International Research said that by the year 2010 AIDS will cut overall life expectancy in 13 sub-Saharan nations, Haiti, Brazil and Thailand.
Life expectancy had been rising in all of them, but in some, like Uganda, the epidemic will lop off 27 years from the average life span.


Sherlock Holmes Inc.
IT is 100 years since the many fans of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle read to their dismay that Sherlock Holmes had perished near the little Swiss town of Meiringen.
As "The Final Problem" narrated it, Holmes had been pursued to the Bernese Oberland by the Napoleon of Crime, the fiendish Professor Moriarty, and both died when, locked in ferocious struggle, they fell into the churning abyss of the Reichenbach Falls.
The cascades -- five consecutive waterfalls thundering down an Alpine cleft -- are still an awesome natural spectacle.
The narrow rock ledge on which the detective and the criminal mastermind were supposed to have had their mortal combat can now be comfortably reached by a footpath and, in summer, in the red gondola of a funicular.


Tokyo Story


The World; A Nixon Legacy Devalued By a Cold War Standard
IN most of the obituaries and retrospectives about the life and times of President Richard M. Nixon, his foreign policy achievements were hailed as the centerpiece of his Presidency.
But oddly, all of these eulogies either ignored, or mentioned only in passing, what may have been one of the most enduring of Mr.
Nixon's foreign policy initiatives: his decision in 1971 to take the dollar off the gold standard and demolish the Bretton Woods monetary system -- bidding both farewell with that memorable line about the Italian currency: "I don't give a (bleep) about the lira."
Bretton Woods was the town in New Hampshire where, in July of 1944, American and British officials gathered to set up a monetary system that would restore global trade and economics after the war.
The Bretton Woods system was based on the conviction that the world should not return to the laissez-faire chaos of the 1930's, when exchange rates were allowed to float and fluctuate wildly.
The Bretton Woods agreement established that the dollar would be the fixed center of a new economic solar system.
Each country would declare a value of its currency against the dollar, and it would be allowed to float only 1 percent up or down.
The dollar would be linked to gold at a rate of $35 an ounce.
Any country that piled up dollars could come to the teller window at Fort Knox and redeem them for gold at that fixed rate.


Who's Counting Generation X
To the Editor:
"How Do You Turn On the Twentysomething Market?" (April 17) alluded to the "42 million people in their 20's now known as Generation X." Perhaps the figure grew in sympathy with the growing population of articles on this market segment, but it seems out of sync with the Census Bureau's data.
The Census count for the 20-29 group in 1991 was 39,912,000, but projections for 1994 suggest about a 3 percent decline for those figures to about 38,700,000.
These discrepancies, however, may be the result of inconsistencies in age-range definitions, ie. including 19- and 30-year-olds in the group.


The Beethoven Sonatas, Once More, and at Leisure
THE PIANIST ALFRED Brendel believes in total immersion when studying a composer's music.
Starting from the musical text, he gleans clues for performance and interpretation from all over the historical landscape: in the composer's works for other instruments, in letters and essays, in the artistic and cultural surroundings.
His programming has a similar sweep, though less comprehensively; his multiconcert presentations of the great Viennese Classical composers -- Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert -- concentrate on what he considers the masterpieces.
In an age when the CD encourages massive inclusiveness, Mr.
Brendel eschews the every-last-note syndrome even when recording, avoiding things he considers of merely historical interest -- no juvenilia, no potboilers.


Weddings; Gail Hill, David Kurman
Gail Hill, a certified public accountant, was married yesterday to David Kurman, the director of sports and feature programs for the CBS Radio Network in New York.
The Rev.
W.
Cameron Allan, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Milleridge Inn in Jericho, L.I.
Mrs.
Kurman is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Hill of Cocoa Beach, Fla.
She graduated from Florida Atlantic University.


An L.P.G.A. Star Waiting to Happen
At the 17th hole at Indigo Lakes on Thursday, Michelle McGann pulled her new driver from her bag and took a quick look down the fairway.
Standing on the tee surveying her options, smiling underneath her trademark wide-brim hat, McGann embodied power and grace, youth and vigor, the elements that the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour needs and wants from its players these days.
Coming into the 478-yard, par-5 hole, McGann, 24 years old, stood at four under par, one stroke behind leader Trish Johnson in the first round of the $1.2 million Sprint Championship.
This hole figured to be a pushover birdie for her.
With a smooth, almost effortless move, she lit into her drive.
The ball jumped off the face of her Lynx "Boom Boom" driver, soaring into one of her patented high-arcing tee balls.


Wall Street; Throwing the Book at the Boss
A NOTE of caution to any foxes in the business of watching over chicken coops: If your coop of choice is in the Wall Street area, you might ask around for the names of a few good lawyers.
Securities regulators have been taking a new tack when it comes to punishing bad guys.
Instead of simply throwing the bums out, they're also poking around to find out who the bums' bosses were and charging those people with wrongdoing too.


The Nation; Making Abuse a Crime A Spouse Can't Forgive
For much of America's history, domestic violence was just another little problem at home.
A bruising blow from an abusive spouse could be dismissed by police as a flash rebuke for a burnt dinner.
Sometimes those blows broke bones, or worse.
Still, the assault, however ugly and unfortunate, rarely became a criminal affair.
Now, in several states, it is a crime even if the victim says it's not.


Waltzing Around the Bumps and Grinds of Springtime
THE cab darted this way and that, sort of dithering and occasionally going thud! as the driver picked his way through a minefield of potholes.
"Two weeks ago," he said, "I hit one of those holes so hard that I blew a tire. When I got the car back to the garage, I told the dispatcher he ought to have the alignment checked. He just laughed."


April 24-30; Uneasy Days for Tobacco Makers
There were more portents of long-term trouble for tobacco companies last week, as researchers who worked at Philip Morris Company testified in Congress that important scientific findings on nicotine and addiction had been made in the tobacco company's laboratories more than a decade ago, but that the findings were suppressed.
Former Philip Morris researchers said that in the early 1980's they had discovered an artificial form of nicotine that had similar effects on the brain, but apparently none of the harmful effects nicotine has on the heart.
Presumably this could have led to a safer cigarette, but the research was dropped in a climate of fear of litigation and regulation, the researchers said.


'Not Fit For Man or Beast'
To the Editor:
I found Alex Witchel's article on Disney's "Beauty and the Beast" especially interesting since I had just seen the show with 100 of my seventh-grade students.
The Disney people do things very thoroughly and spent a great deal of money on this show, but they forgot something: The balcony seats of the Palace Theater are not fit for man or beast (not even for seventh graders).


Policing the Police
Seasoned officers concede that police corruption is always around and springs into life whenever the department's vigilance flags.
Anyone who doubts this need only consider the events of April.
First, in the largest corruption case in a decade, a dozen New York City officers were charged with selling protection to drug dealers -- and sometimes trafficking in drugs themselves.
Then came a draft report from the Mollen Commission, asserting that the Police Department's Internal Affairs Division had routinely "buried" corruption cases.
The report also said officers routinely made false arrests, tampered with evidence and perjured themselves in court.


Russia's Cold Kiss
Now that Russia has opened its cities and countryside to foreigners, what shocks most is the gloomy monotony of this vast, centralized empire.
The same corroded aluminum surrounds the same pitted window glass, the same airport greets the traveler everywhere, the same set of doors opens onto the same parquet flooring covered by the same patterned runner of red and green, all done to Gosstandart, the state standard.
Every hotel offers the same tiny bed, every bathroom drain is made of the same, fibrous yellowing plastic; in every building, public or private, one sees the same varieties of linoleum.


Weddings; Joy V. Seppala, W. J. Florence 3d
Joy Victoria Seppala, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Seppala of Charlotte, N.C., was married yesterday to William James Florence 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Florence Jr. of Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harold P. Theriault performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Theresa in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The bride, 32, is a vice president in the high yield/equity arbitrage department of the Paribas Corporation, a merchant banking concern in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as a senior project manager in McLean, Va., for the International Business Machines Corporation.


A Controversial World Cup Coach Keeps Them All Guessing
Arrigo Sacchi?
The man is crazy, his critics are howling.
Fire him now before all of Italy is humiliated.
Only 50 days until the World Cup and Sacchi has still not named his team.
The man can't make up his mind.
He is a juggler, not a coach.
He has called up 73 players to the national team in two and half years.
Seventy-three!
Guerin Sportivo, a soccer magazine, once ran pictures of all 73 and threw in mug shots of Pope John Paul II, Robin Williams as Popeye and Sylvester Stallone as Rambo to illustrate Sacchi's indecisiveness.
"Arrigo, have you forgotten anyone?" the headline snorted.


A Tribute, So Altmanesque
Uptown -- The tribute to Robert Altman by the Film Society of Lincoln Center on April 18 was about to begin, and the Green Room at Avery Fisher Hall was starting to resemble a scene from one of the director's slightly twisted, ensemble-driven movies.
"You upstaged us outside in front of CNN, HBO and everybody else," Lily Tomlin told Harry Belafonte.


Trophy Wife
"The ultimate ambition of a gold digger is to end up as a trophy wife," Lynn Barber writes in The Times of London.
Using that phrase in its most pejorative sense, she quotes Sally Burton, who married the actor Richard Burton a year before he died, as one who was not a trophy herself but seemed to know plenty who were: "The golden rule if you are a trophy wife is that you do not stray while the old man is still alive."
A somewhat less insulting sense of the phrase appeared in a January interview with the actress Bo Derek in The Chicago Tribune.
Bart Mills, describing her role in a cable-television movie, wrote, "She plays a former megamodel turned trophy wife who gets enmeshed in a plot to kill her rich husband." A megamodel is a force in the fashion industry, outearning run-of-the-midway supermodels, and is more often gold-dug than gold-digging.


Canadian Hemophiliacs Face AIDS
Pierre Desmarais, one of the estimated 1,000 Canadians who have contracted the AIDS virus through tainted blood and blood products, still considers himself lucky.
Despite being infected from an operation in 1984 and his discovery of it in 1988, Mr.
Desmarais, has married, and now he and his wife, France, are planning to have children through artificial insemination with an anonymous donor.


April 24-30: Israel and the P.L.O.; Next Will Come The Tryout for Palestinian Self-Rule
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization seem ready, at last, to get Palestinian self-rule going in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
On Friday, they signed an agreement in Paris establishing their future economic relationship.
More crucially, this Wednesday in Cairo they are to sign off on security and civil arrangements for the two autonomous areas.
Almost immediately afterward, Israeli forces are to withdraw and Palestinian police officers to move in.


Crackdown: Knicks Send No-Points Bulletin
The Knicks' defense has presented a problem for the Nets.
And New Jersey must try to solve it before it's too late.
Game 2 of the Nets-Knicks playoff series will be played this afternoon at Madison Square Garden, a pivotal encounter for both teams.
If the Knicks win, they will take a 2-0 lead in the three-of-five-game series.
But if the Nets win, the series will be tied, and New Jersey will have momentum plus the home-court advantage.


RISK MANAGEMENT
At first, I expected a tribute to Susanna Styron's husband, when she began her essay "Risk Management" (Hers, April 3) by describing his brave behavior in the wake of the recent Los Angeles earthquake.
He was calm, reassuring and practical, checking the gas and distributing shoes to the kids, while she "huddled" on the couch with her daughters, "trembling."
But it turns out that she was actually the brave one, and he was the coward, since she was brave enough to be a coward, while he only acted brave because deep down he was too cowardly to be a coward.
They reacted in these ways because she's a woman and he's a man.
Her way is better than his (even though she acknowledges, in his favor, that he does "cry easily").
So the point is, it takes a strong woman to fall apart when the floor is covered with broken glass and her children need her.


Weddings; Jennifer Clarke, Thomas Sommers
Jennifer Lynn Clarke, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Leslie Clarke of Pelham, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Clarke, was married yesterday to Thomas H. Sommers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Sommers of West Union, Ohio.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of Christ the Redeemer in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Clarke-Sommers, 33, is a lawyer in Boston.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Duke University.
Her father was an associate professor of clinical surgery at New York Hospital.


Arthur Miller Still Holds to His Moral Vision
TIME HASN'T HAD A STOP, BUT it's doing a graceful pause at the Booth Theater, where "Broken Glass," Arthur Miller's small, intense, deceptively prosy new drama, has set up shop.
It was just a half-century ago that Mr.
Miller made his Broadway debut with "The Man Who Had All the Luck," which closed after four performances, to begin a career that in 1949 was to include "Death of a Salesman," a modern classic and the work by which everything he has since written continues to be judged.
In a metier where people burn out fast, he's still remarkable for the acuity and scope of his moral vision.
It's this vision, as well as the Miller voice, which remains as strong and unrelenting as a prophet's, that distinguish "Broken Glass" and give it a poignance so rare these days that it's almost new-fashioned.
The play is ostensibly about a failed marriage, but the failure Mr.
Miller examines has less to do with connubial relations than with one man's warped perception of the American way.
Like Willy Loman in "Death of a Salesman," the hero of "Broken Glass" hasn't misread society's signals so much as he has blindly accepted them.


Weddings; Rebecca Brooks, Marc Maidenberg
Rebecca Brooks, a daughter of Dr.
Michael and Bonnie Brooks of St.
James, L.I., and Marc Maidenberg, a son of Zvi and Hadassa Maidenberg of South Orange, N.J., were married yesterday evening.
Rabbi Elliot Spar performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 24, is an account executive at BurtonLuch Public Relations in New York.
She graduated from Boston University, as did her husband.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Smithtown, L.I.
Her mother is his office manager.


Logging Free Miles Without Flying
Those who travel frequently know they don't always have to be in the air to build up mileage.
Credits can be earned for renting a car, staying in a hotel, eating in a hotel restaurant, taking a cruise, using a credit card or making a long-distance phone call.
Among new affiliations are Red Lion Hotels and Inns with Alaska Airlines; Hertz car rental, also with Alaska Airlines, and Alamo Rent a Car with American Airlines.


Weddings; Rachel L. Evans, Karl I. Lifchitz
Rachel Leslie Evans, the daughter of Judge Saralee Evans and Sanford Evans, both of New York, is to be married today to Karl Isaac Lifchitz, a son of Dr.
Fima Lifchitz of New York and Linda Moscona of Great Neck, L.I.
The bride's mother, a New York City Civil Court judge, is to officiate at Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Evans, who is keeping keep her name, is a film and television actress.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father is a creative director at Mezzina/Brown Inc., a New York advertising agency.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Test Walkers
Test pilots are at the top of the ziggurat -- always pushing the envelope.
Test drivers are next, checking how a BMW or (on a bad day) a Honda Civic corners on wet pavement.
At the bottom are the unsung heroes who test shoes -- the test walkers.
There are 2,000 of them in Naperville, Ill.
They try out running shoes and cross-trainers and all variety of sneakers for the Athlete's Foot Wear Test Center.
The testers are uncompensated.
They don't keep the shoes, and the center accepts no money from shoe manufacturers.


German Coalition Is Divided Over Kohl's Choice for President
With a special assembly to choose a new President less than a month away, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's hand-picked candidate is still not assured of solid backing by the Government's junior coalition partner, leading politicians say.
Last year, Mr.
Kohl selected Roman Herzog, the 60-year-old president of the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe, after his previous choice, the Saxon Minister of Justice, Steffen Heitmann, had to withdraw because of an uproar about statements he made on the German past, ethnic conflict and the role of women.


From Old Houses to Show Houses
IF it hadn't been for Tom O'Toole's first appearance at the Kips Bay Decorator Show House, he never would have made it to Connecticut.
Putting the finishing touches on his fifth room in what is regarded as the most trend-revealing show house in the country, Mr.
O'Toole talked about how being invited to and participating in the fundraising event for the Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club in New York City, starting in 1978, has affected his career and life style.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Another Discount Giant Sizes Up Union Square Kmart may be thinking about joining Bradlees and Toys "R" Us in a move to Union Square.
"We are talking to Kmart," said Daniel A. Birnant, a partner in a law firm that owns a vacant 27,000-square-foot site on 14th Street between Broadway and Fourth Avenue.
But Mr.
Birnant said his firm, Fastenberg &amp; Birnant, was also talking with other companies.
"We have no intentions of selling the land," he added, "just renting or leasing."


U.S. Says It Is Pleased Syrians Are Acting to Limit Terrorism
Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Syrian officials today that the United States was pleased that Damascus has taken steps recently to curb terrorism, among them closing two training camps run by Abu Nidal, the prominent terrorist leader.
Mr.
Christopher met late into the night with President Hafez al-Assad and other Syrian officials to discuss a new Israeli peace plan.
In an earlier session with Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa, he said Damascus had made some progress on terrorism at a time when Syria hopes to be removed from Washington's list of countries that sponsor terrorism.


Alternatives to Summer Camp as Usual
ALTHOUGH summer may still seem a long way off, parents whose youngsters' vacation plans include sleep-away camp have already ordered name tags and trunks in anticipation of their children's departure.
Even many day camps were fully booked while snow was still on the ground.
Still, the traditional camp program of sports, swimming and arts and crafts doesn't appeal to every youngster -- and parents who have postponed making summer plans need not fear that there will be nothing for their offspring to do.
Many children seek to develop special interests or talents during the summer months.
Some enjoy the circus program and performing arts offerings at Purchase College or at many of the county's Y's.
The following is a selected list of some less traditional possibilities.
Parents are advised to make arrangements as soon as possible.
Classes and Courses
There are children whose idea of summer fun is learning about new subjects and having experiences that aren't usually part of the regular school curriculum or other camp programs.
Challenge '94, which is run out of the Gifted and Talented Development Center at Iona Preparatory, Wilmot Road in New Rochelle, offers enrichment classes throughout the year and provides those kinds of mind-stretching activities.
This summer program is offered to children from prekindergarten through ninth grade: activities include drama, architecture, chess, business, mythology, politics, environmental issues, creative writing and running a restaurant.
Children can choose to attend the entire seven-week program from June 27 through Aug. 12 or take segments from June 27 through July 22 and July 25 through Aug. 12.
Workshops run from 9 A.M to noon.


Harriet Beecher Stowe
To the Editor:
Your review of Joan D. Hedrick's "Harriet Beecher Stowe: A Life" (Feb. 13) was accompanied by an interview calling this book "the first biography of Harriet Beecher Stowe since the coming of the civil rights and women's movements." In fact several studies of Stowe have appeared during the past quarter-century.
The most recent, it may be, was my "Woman Against Slavery: The Story of Harriet Beecher Stowe," published in the Women of America series in 1978.


Update
Owner Regains Control Of Umberto's Clam House
After seven years of supervising Umberto's Clam House in Little Italy, the Federal Government has returned daily control of the restaurant to the brother of a convicted Mafia leader.
On Friday a Federal judge restored the rights of the restaurant's owner, Robert Ianniello, to supervise the staff.
But under an agreement worked out with the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan, a court-appointed monitor will continue to audit Umberto's financial records to insure there is no skimming or improper diversion of money.


Suspect in 6 Brooklyn Killings Is Arrested in Georgia Murder
A 20-year-old man, sought for three years for six killings in New York, was arrested in Georgia last week for fatally wounding a man in a traffic dispute there.
The man, Richard Jameswhite, whose youthful features earned him the nickname Babyface, had told people that he started killing to avenge his brother's death and that a witch doctor's blessing made him invisible to the police, the New York City police said.


Where Have All the Phone Booths Gone?
They were the commonest of street sights.
Now, only a dozen remain in New York, and people on West End Avenue want two of them removed, saying they have become meeting places for prostitutes and lockers for the homeless.
With reports from Red Hook, Riverdale, Woodhaven and lower Manhattan.
PAGES 6-12


Rises in Mortgage Rates Nudge Buyers
THESE should be the best of times for the residential real estate world in the New York area.
Sales are on the upswing in much of the region.
Sale prices are increasing for most types of homes.
Even the long-dormant home-building industry is slowly returning to life.
But uncertainty looms over the rebounding housing market.
Rising interest rates, particularly the sharp ascent that began three months ago, have prompted buyers, sellers, brokers and builders to ponder a plethora of questions: How much will rates climb?
Will higher rates choke the long-awaited real estate recovery?
Does refinancing still make sense?


Secretaries, in the Age of Satellites
NEVER has the role of the secretary been easy.
On the one hand she (it is almost always a she) is canonized as a loyal keeper of secrets, celebrated as a behind-the-scenes fixer, mythologized as the wise and steady hand that keeps the wheels of Corporate America going moment to moment.
On the other hand, she has had to cope with images that cast her as a sex object, as a neutral button-pushers over whose head grave and important matters pass unnoticed.


'Swinging on a Star' in World Premiere
THE George Street Playhouse stage is set up in cabaret style, with 20 patrons seated at tables in front of the first row.
Even though "Swinging on a Star," a cornucopia of songs with lyrics by Johnny Burke, is no streamlined bistro entertainment, its creator, Michael Leeds, presumably has in mind a show with legs.
That's the show business way of saying it will go places.
And this show can come in all sizes, not just the glamorous George Street world-premiere production with its glittering costumes by Judy Dearing and ingenious sets by Deborah Jasien.


Refugees Flee Into Tanzania From Rwanda
The slow-moving column of refugees from Rwanda trudged into a remote area of Tanzania today, stretching across 10 miles of roads and fanning out over the hills of elephant grass.
For days, the Rwandan Army had prevented their passing.
But when the troops fled as rebel forces of the Rwandan Patriotic Front advanced, a quarter of a million Rwandans moved across a two-lane cement bridge to this northwestern Tanzanian town at the rate of more than 10,000 people an hour.


Guidelines For Fairs Draw Fire
New guidelines on multiblock street fairs are in place for a section of southwestern Queens, and so far they're only highlighting the tensions between the local community board and the Greater Woodhaven Development Corporation.
Maria Thomson, the director of the development corporation, a business group, said that she objected to the "mean-spirited, unnecessary" way the guidelines came about.


Gala in the Park


20 Years of Lunch and Dinner
Le Cirque and 1,500 of its friends celebrate; 58 East 65th Street, April 20.


Souvenir Molas
To the Editor: Your article "Panama Coming Back Onto Tourist Scene" (March 27), mentioned the San Blas Islands, the habitat of the Kuna Indians, as an interesting place to visit.
I was reminded of my visit there and some practical advice I got from a Kuna woman on souvenir purchases.
The Kuna women sew molas, colorful panels of complicated pictorial designs, which they sell to tourists.
They are usually sold unframed.
One enterprising Kuna woman displayed unframed and framed molas.
The framed were less expensive.


Edward P. Perley, Ophthalmologist, 72
Dr.
Edward P. Perley, a retired ophthalmologist who practiced in Manhattan for more than 30 years and who also was a professor at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, died on Thursday while playing golf at the Westchester Country Club in Rye.
Dr.
Perley, who lived in Rye Brook, was 72.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Tolstoy's Dress Code: A moral schema, in which the impossibly chic are hung by a thread.
In Tolstoy's fiction, clothing is a disguise that rarely succeeds.
He dresses his characters to explain them -- to tell us who they are, who they think they are and how we should feel about them.
And in the process, he overlooks nothing -- from the size of a cuff link, to the fact that a man's coat is ready- (not tailor) made.
Tolstoy finds clothing revealing in a way that other great 19th-century novelists -- Dickens, for instance -- do not.
In "David Copperfield" David merely recalls the villanous Mr.
Murdstone sitting in his dressing gown, without describing it.
But when Oblonsky awakens, in the opening pages of "Anna Karenina," his gray dressing gown lined with blue silk is a witness against him.
Tolstoy has already told us that Oblonsky is an unfaithful husband; his gold morocco slippers testify that he is a self-indulgent man.


A Troubled Emerald Empire
SPRINGTIME in New York, and the parks are alive with wonders.
A man sits by himself in a soft rain and looks outward at the lagoon in Pelham Bay Park.
A man and a woman sit on a Central Park bench and see infinity in each other's eyes.
At the Thomas Greene Playground in Brooklyn's Boerum Hill neighborhood, children play tag in the dancing sunshine.
Springtime in New York, and appearances are cruelly deceiving.
For these are days of profound trouble in the city's park system -- a scuffed-emerald empire of 479 parks with 2 million trees, 15 miles of beaches, 890 playing fields, 862 playgrounds, 1,885 handball courts, 2,000 basketball courts and a Commissioner who is simultaneously new and old.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE Dog-a-Thon in Park To Aid Cancer Research
The paths of Riverside Park, no strangers to dogs and their owners, will be a garden of canine delight today as dogs and owners by the dozens take part in the Paws Walk.
The dog-a-thon, sponsored by the American Cancer Society, will raise money for human and animal cancer research. (Pictured above, last year's event.)


New Blow to the Old Bowery . . .
The Salvation Army has announced that next month, it will close one of its biggest and oldest residences, a 10-story brick tenement it has run since 1913 at 225 Bowery.
Booth House II, which houses homeless and mentally ill people, is being closed down because of government regulations, pressures from legal representatives for the poor and growing economic difficulties that face even major charities.


MERCHANTS OF IVORY
Peter Watrous's article "Merchants of Ivory" (April 10) was very interesting to me, since I know all these young people and am familiar with their playing.
However, I believe there are at least three more who should have been mentioned: Geri Allen (a disciple of the late Herbie Nichols), and Benny Green and Geoff Keezer, both of whom got their start with the great Art Blakey and now have their own groups.
It's great to see something written about jazz in the Magazine.
Please, let's have more.
MARIAN MCPARTLAND Port Washington, L.I.


Last Stand For Phone Booths?
They once served as a genteel refuge from the city's roar, a place to make a quiet call or hide from the rain.
But the heyday of the phone booth passed long ago in New York City, where by the early 1970's, vandalism, drug dealing and homelessness made them too costly for the telephone company to maintain; Nynex says there are now only 12 left.


On Sunday; In the Office Of Mr. Beame And His Honor
RETIREMENT'S landscape of loneliness always seems to include an office.
The office is both escape and anchor, and so professionals with grandchildren, but without formal titles, can't stop reporting to them.
There is a desk, a phone, walls on which to hang photographs, a place to be alone with a very particular sort of memory.
Abraham D. Beame, immigrant, teacher, ward captain, mayor, is not without an office at 88 years of age.
Five days a week, he boards the crosstown 79th Street bus, gets a transfer and winds up at Sterling National Bank at 540 Madison Avenue.
He is there by 9:30 A.M.
There is no secretary, no set of assignments.
Only a routine.


He Had a Shrewd Eye and Lots of Saturdays
FOR MORE THAN 30 YEARS, a physicist named George W. Scott Jr. spent his Saturdays combing the countryside near Lancaster, Pa., for folk-art items small enough to carry home under one arm.
That's how, from 1947 to 1980, Mr.
Scott became a pioneer collector of Pennsylvania German antiques, assembling one of the largest private holdings of carved figures, painted boxes, pewter vessels, and boldly lettered and gloriously illustrated birth records.
At his death last year at age 82, Mr.
Scott's collection stood chockablock in his modest Tudor-style home in Lancaster.
His widow, Margaret, and their three children say Mr.
Scott had wanted the collection to be dispersed in a huge, bang-up sale in the town, near where he had bought most of his 1,300 objects at auctions and antiques shops and from the families of the original owners.


Chicago
Now that the ice in Lake Michigan has melted and the brutish wind has become a temperate breeze, Chicago is in its full glory.
The beaches will soon be open again, Brahms and the blues will waft through grateful crowds in Grant Park, the pleasure boats will set out for the lake, white toy triangles on a sheet of blue, and the water will again arc majestically from Buckingham Fountain.
Tourists naturally gravitate to the venerable museums that line the lake shore -- the Art Institute, the Field Museum -- and to the tony shops and stores on Michigan Avenue.
But beyond those must-sees lies a city of deep-dish pizza and Uzbek cuisine, creaky elevated trains and lovely drawbridges, funky post-yuppie neighborhoods, old-line mansion districts and spectacular architecture.


Weddings; Kate D. Thatcher, Nicholas Barnwell
Kate Desmond Thatcher, a real-estate officer at Continental Bank, was married yesterday to Nicholas James Barnwell, a regional vice president of Wood Logan Associates, an investment company.
Both work in Chicago.
The Rev.
Vincent T. Liddle performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Messiah in Gwynedd, Pa.
Mrs.
Barnwell, 31, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Thatcher Jr. of Gwynedd Valley, Pa.


Newark Airport And Transit Lines
Re: "Newark Airport Hones Overseas Image" (March 20):
The monorail does nothing to relieve congestion getting to the airport.
The Port Authority designed the airport so transit lines, either PATH or light rail (the Newark city subway), could not operate there and gave us this stand-alone monorail at the outrageous cost of more than $85 million a mile, much more than for a comparable light rail line.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Russian disclosures of Soviet cold war secrets misstated the crime for which Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed in 1953.
It was conspiracy to commit espionage; it was not treason.


Perfect Paella
RIO MAR + (212) 243-9015; 7 Ninth Avenue, corner of Little West 12th Street; $; American Express


Future Homemakers Meeting Draws 800
THE Future Homemakers of America, a national nonprofit organization for middle and high school students enrolled in home economics, lets others argue the modern question of what constitutes a family.
The organization, endorsed by the Office of Vocational and Adult Education of the United States Department of Education, begins where sociologists leave off -- preparing young people to live responsibly in their families and communities.
"We are the builders of homes, homes for America's future," reads the organization's creed.
"We have the clear consciousness of seeking old and precious values." Nearly 800 young people chanted those words at the closing ceremony of the yearly New York State Future Homemakers of America Leadership Meeting, held recently at the Westchester Marriott here.
The students, from communities across the state, had just concluded three days of workshops, competitions and socializing.


DID I PLAGIARIZE HIS LIFE?
I found David Leavitt's article "Did I Plagiarize His Life?" (April 3) less a defense of the author's imagination than a grand, old-fashioned ad hominem argument.
Leavitt depicts Sir Stephen Spender as irascible and uncomfortable with his own sexuality.
He then branches out to describe all of England as an increasingly homophobic country.


COLLEGE SENIORS FINDING MORE JOBS BUT MODEST PAY
With the economy strong again, graduating college seniors are finding jobs easier to get after a four-year drought.
But except for students with both solid work experience and widely sought skills, many students in the class of '94 are settling for jobs with modest salaries and no future while hoping for better work or saving for graduate school.
"It's real clear that in the 90's, people may find work but not work they're happy with," said Edgar J. Townsend, director of career services at the University of Delaware, which occupies a 1,100-acre campus of elms and Georgian brick buildings.


In Brooklyn, A Sandblasting For Stravinsky
THE RADICAL REVISION of 20th-century musical history continues apace.
In "The Russian Stravinsky," a three-day festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music beginning on Friday, the Brooklyn Philharmonic, led by Dennis Russell Davies, the Pokrovsky Ensemble and a team of musicologists and art historians will sandblast Mr. 20th Century himself, Igor Stravinsky, to reveal his native roots.
Various concerts, lectures and panel discussions will present new approaches to performance and criticism that may sweep away decades of misunderstandings -- or create a whole crop of new ones.
The period in question, to about 1923, includes Stravinsky's most popular works, "Firebird," "Petrouchka" and "The Rite of Spring," yet it is still widely misunderstood.
"Les Noces," although not played as often as the other ballets, is certainly well known both as a concert piece and a ballet.
It has had nearly as great an influence on 20th-century music as "The Rite of Spring." Composers as different as Orff, Bartok, Messiaen and Berio have imitated its distinctive scoring for pianos and percussion, and its clipped, rhythmic choral incantation -- but save for Bartok, few have known of its sources in Russian folk culture.


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Monkey Trouble  Thora Burch, Harvey Keitel, Mimi Rogers Directed by Franco Amurri PG-13 95 minutes


Business Diary: April 24-29
COMPANIES In a Changing Air-Travel Market, Delta Tries a Fresh Start It was the latest admission that the business of air travel has changed -- for good.
Back when a plane ticket was a luxury item, not a well-worn commodity like a pair of jeans, airlines used to make a lot of money.
But then came rough-and-tumble upstarts like Southwest, and travelers discovered they could save money.
Other airlines have attacked costs to some extent -- whether giving workers part ownership in return for concessions, or creating separate no-frills mini-airlines.
But last week Delta -- which has few union workers -- said, in effect, that it was starting from scratch, announcing a drastic cutback of up to 15,000 workers, 20 percent of its force.
The goal: cut costs by $2 billion a year -- to get its crucial cost for a "seat mile" way down from among the industry's highest.
"It's extraordinary, unprecedented," said one analyst, a "fundamental recognition" that market changes are permanent.


Jean-Bertrand Aristide
ON A CHILLY NIGHT IN PARIS, while the streets are full of weekend traffic and low clouds shine yellow from the city down below, Jean-Bertrand Aristide takes his place behind a lectern and absorbs the applause of thousands as though, like thunder, it is a talisman of change.
The audience rises.
He smiles.
As the sound dies down he stands, glasses shining, his gaze otherwordly, sharing the quiet blessing of a poor boy turned priest, turned president, turned exile, transcending the moment.
As Aristide begins to speak in simple French, Bernard Kouchner, the French Minister for Health and Humanitarian Assistance, smiles his own detached smile.
Then Kouchner starts chatting and passing notes to other panelists seated on the stage, there to pay homage to Abbe Pierre, an activist priest being honored at Unesco's Paris headquarters.
It is a startling act of rudeness.
Imperious, even insulting.


CRIME
Sunny, funny Kinsey Millhone takes a stroll on the dark side in Sue Grafton's intriguingly offbeat new alphabet mystery, "K" IS FOR KILLER (Holt, $22.95), when the California private eye answers a mother's appeal to resolve the mystery of her daughter's death.
"We're not like regular people anymore," says the woman, a diner waitress on the graveyard shift who describes herself as "a zombie, the living dead, maybe a little bit cracked."
Unable to resist this aching expression of survivor's grief, Kinsey turns herself into a night person in order to learn more about the victim, whose after-hours profession as a classy hooker is the first of many secrets to surface in the light of the investigation.
In an impressive piece of character building, this shady young woman gradually comes to life, a year after her literal death, as a person of unexpected depths and contradictions.


BEST SELLERS: May 1, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
2
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
3
3
2
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder, stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4
1
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
5
4
90
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
6
9
3
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
7
7
2
THE COURTSHIP OF PRINCESS LEIA, by Dave Wolverton. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) Romance and the balance of power in the "Star Wars" universe.
8
6
15
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
9
12
3
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
10
5
11
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
11
11
4
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
12
1
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart transplant operation, a television hostess's life is enriched -- and threatened.
13
10
55
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
14
8
26
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
15
1
THE TANGLE BOX, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) Romance and power plays in the Magic Kingdom of Landover.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
51
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
19
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
6
3
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
4
4
8
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
3
9
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
6
5
7
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo.
7
7
7
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
8
11
2
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
9
8
16
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
10
1
HEALING WORDS, by Larry Dossey. (HarperSanFrancisco, $22.) A physician contemplates the healing power of prayer.
11
13
89
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
12
10
30
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
13*
9
22
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
14
12
36
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
15
14
2
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
15
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
1
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
2
49
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
4
1
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 16, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AS MAX SAW IT, by Louis Begley. (Knopf, $21.) A short, powerful AIDS novel that, with Jamesian obliquity, never mentions AIDS and underscores the failure of human beings to acknowledge their responsibility to one another.
THE BIRTHDAY BOYS, by Beryl Bainbridge. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $18.95.) A lively, subversive historical novel that penetrates the stoic official heroes of Scott's Antarctic expedition of 1912 to discover the individual silly boys within.
CERTAIN TRUMPETS: The Call of Leaders, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A popular historian and journalist seeks to analyze leadership, and finds that the leader and the led must be mutually indebted and have the same goal.
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) Three previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.
E.M.
FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally punctuated by little bursts of liberation.
THE HOMELESS, by Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $17.95.) Mr.
Jencks's careful review of the large body of accumulated research on the homeless contradicts the received wisdom of both liberals and conservatives; he proposes sensible discussion and incremental remedies.
ONE ART: Letters, by Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.
PAUL REVERE'S RIDE, by David Hackett Fischer. (Oxford University, $27.50.) No rehash of Longfellow but a historian's careful account of the ride and the surrounding events, emphasizing the broad-based, communal nature of the Revolutionary movement in New England.
SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD, by Doris Betts. (Knopf, $23.) The main event in Ms.
Betts's first novel in 13 years is the death of a child; out of it is spun a deep understanding of grief, of the pungency of Southern small-town life and of the inevitable injuries reality inflicts.
SOWING THE SEEDS OF DEMOCRACY IN CHINA: Political Reform in the Deng Xiaoping Era, by Merle Goldman. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A Western expert on China's intellectual dissidents turns to the latest decade and the misfortunes of the educated democratic elite.
THE SUMMER HOUSE: A Trilogy, by Alice Thomas Ellis. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) Edgy, bright, subversive fictions about women's inner lives and experiences, each narrated by an Englishwoman whose existence is under revision.


Manager's Profile
O.
Mason Hawkins Fund: Southeastern Asset Management Value Trust, $430 million in assets.
Manager since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: Southeastern Asset Management Inc., Memphis.)


The Genocide Factor In Burundi's Upheaval
To the Editor:
What explains the current violence in Burundi?
"Specter of Hate Stalks Burundi, Too" (news article, April 26) focuses on two causes: President Melchior Ndadaye's assassination last October and the assessment by Sylvie Kinigi, who was Prime Minister under Mr.
Ndadaye and briefly head of state, that "a democratic system  [ was ]  thrust upon her country too abruptly" by the Belgians.
This perspective, however, overlooks one driving influence: genocide.


Administration Plans to Cut 'Safe City' Youth Programs
The Giuliani administration plans to eliminate most of the educational, cultural and job training programs for young people created as part of the binding agreement with Albany that has enabled New York City to hire thousands of new police officers since 1991.
An administration official said the cuts were necessary because of the failure of the city's scratch-off lottery game, whose profits had been earmarked to pay for the programs.


Shrimps in the Thai Style Help Hold the Line on Fat and Salt
NOT long ago Chinese food, especially Chinese takeout, came under fire for being too high in fat and sodium.
The Chinese restaurant community cried "foul!" They insisted, correctly, that although some dishes might deserve to be avoided by dieters and others interested in healthy eating, there were still many suitable options in Chinese restaurants.
Thai food was not subjected to the same scrutiny.
And while a number of Thai specialties are deep-fried and many come bathed in artery-clogging coconut milk, Thai is a cuisine that offers many specialties that are extremely low in fat and not outrageously high in sodium, either.


Gentle Faceoff Over Plans For the Campagna Estate
A plan of an orthodox Jewish boarding school to build classrooms, dormitory space and a prayer room on the recently landmarked Anthony Campagna Estate has drawn opposition from neighbors and is testing the limits of New York's landmarks law.
The neighbors say the proposed structure would overwhelm the landmark and is inappropriate for their neighborhood of rolling lawns and one-family homes.
They are urging the owner of the estate, the Yeshiva of the Telshe Alumni, to modify the plan to make it less intrusive.


April 24-30: Looking Out for the Pentagon; Uncle Sam Cozies Up To Computer Screen Makers
After more than a year of talking about big partnerships between Government and business, the Clinton Administration set one up last week: a $1 billion subsidy program for makers of laptop computer screens.
Most of the money will come from the Defense Department, where officials said they needed a strong display screen industry in the United States.
Lightweight flat-panel displays can be used to show maps and satellite images of battlefields.
The military is already installing them in aircraft and plans portable models for battlefield commanders.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Rookie Dies After Crash  Roland Ratzenberger, a Formula One rookie, died yesterday after a crash during the qualifying for the San Marino Grand Prix in Imola, Italy.
Organizers said the race would still start as scheduled today.
Ratzenberger was a 31-year-old Austrian with 10 years of experience in lower levels of racing.
His Simtek Ford car went off the track on an S-shaped turn and crashed against a wall.
He was flown by helicopter to a hospital in Bologna, 12 miles away, where he died.
Ayrton Senna did not drive in yesterday's qualifying but retained the pole position. (AP) TENNIS


Weddings; Amy Filvaroff, James J. Neath
Amy Filvaroff, an associate in New York at the law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter, and James John Neath, a lawyer for the Amoco Corporation in Chicago, were married last evening in Austin, Tex.
Justice Lloyd Doggett of the Texas Supreme Court officiated at the Austin Country Club.
Ms.
Filvaroff, who is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University and received her J.D. degree from the University of Texas.
She is a daughter of Joan Bailin Filvaroff of Austin and David Filvaroff of Buffalo.
Her father is a professor of law at the State University School of Law in Buffalo, of which he he was also the dean.
Her mother is a freelance writer, and the author of "The Central Texas Gardener."


The World; A Traitor, Yes, but Maybe He Has a Point
The jeremiad that Aldrich H. Ames, the convicted mole for Moscow, unleashed before the Federal judge who sentenced him to life in prison last week riveted spies and spywatchers alike.
The old hands at the Central Intelligence Agency have a word -- Fingerspitzengefuhl, German for "fingertip-tingling" -- denoting a sixth sense that something new, strange or terrible is about to happen.
When Mr.
Ames, the son of a C.I.A. officer, born into covenants of secrecy and deception, who spent all his adult life at the agency and most of the past decade as Moscow's mole, spoke his last words as a free man, a chill went down the corridors of American intelligence.


Shrimps in the Thai Style Help Hold the Line on Fat and Salt
NOT long ago Chinese food, especially Chinese takeout, came under fire for being too high in fat and sodium.
The Chinese restaurant community cried "foul!" They insisted, correctly, that although some dishes might deserve to be avoided by dieters and others interested in healthy eating, there were still many suitable options in Chinese restaurants.
Thai food was not subjected to the same scrutiny.
And while a number of Thai specialties are deep-fried and many come bathed in artery-clogging coconut milk, Thai is a cuisine that offers many specialties that are extremely low in fat and not outrageously high in sodium, either.


Scoring Points
To the Editor:
I should like to clarify a few details in Nancy Malitz's article about the American premiere by Leonard Slatkin and the St.
Louis Symphony about my performing edition of Mahler's 10th Symphony  [ "Maestro on the Move," April 10 ] .


Evening Hours; Peace, Good Will and Flowers
Parties prove that beauty and good deeds come in many forms.


Bittersweet
To the Editor: Julia Duffy Ward's article "When Departure Is Bittersweet" (Feb. 20) was written for and about me, except she left out a few things like making sure the kitchen drawers are neat, the refrigerator looks as if it was delivered on the day of the impending departure, and the very last bill is paid and the checkbook balanced.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR  A NECESSARY END  By Nick Taylor. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $15.


The Cincinnati Surprise: Johnson Not Only Survives but Also Thrives
Davey Johnson looks pretty healthy for a guy who was buried last September.
"It feels like the year after a hurricane comes through and destroys everything," Johnson said.
"Things will grow back. We were pretty decimated last year. But things are great now. Life is wonderful."


Weddings; Faith Thomson, Stuart Chandler
Faith Snow Thomson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas S. Thomson of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Stuart Bruce Chandler, a son of Bruce Chandler of Lake Forest, Ill., and Lady Adamson of London.
The Rev.
Rose Ann Olmstead, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Church of the Covenant in Boston.
Mrs.
Chandler graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is a vice president in Manhattan of the Bank of New York.
Her mother is a consultant at the GTE Corporation, the communications concern, in Stamford.


POSTINGS: Fordham's Lincoln Center Campus; A 2.2-Acre Plaza for Conversation and Daydreaming
Fordham University has turned a barren, paved plaza at its Lincoln Center campus into a verdant, landscaped, sculpture-filled expanse.
"We're welcoming conversationalists and thinkers, readers and writers, daydreamers and loungers of all sorts," said Dr.
Brian J. Byrne, Fordham's vice president for administration.
"We tried to create an elevated urban park."


Parking Imbroglio: The Roots Remain
One summer night last year, in a melee touched off by double- and triple-parked cars being towed from a section of Washington Heights, a bucket of spackling was hurled from a rooftop, killing a housing police officer.
The officer's death, in a neighborhood with a history of tension abetween residents and the police, became a high-profile issue in the mayoral campaign.
The challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, criticized the Dinkins administration's handling of the parking problems in the overcrowded neighborhood and demanded that the city crack down on "urban terrorists."


Timber!; For Larchmont's Fallen Oak, Old Ironsides Awaits
In this village, named for a tree, residents reluctantly say farewell when an old giant falls.
But few here were prepared for the fuss when a 226-year-old bur oak that loomed over the center of the village succumbed in a storm in March.
Residents called the village engineer, asking for a piece of the tree.
The local newspaper ran a story.
Then news got out that wood from the tree might be used to repair furniture on the U.S.S.
Constitution, which is in dry dock for a major overhaul at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Massachusetts.
That really set the phones ringing at Larchmont Village Hall.


The Playbook Vanishes, And Other Nets Riddles
What a great mini-series this is.
Consider that on the eve of Game 2 of the Nets three-of-five-game playoff opener, Coach Chuck Daly was dealing with three mysteries.
First, there was "The Case of the Nets' Missing Offense" Friday night.
Today, the plot thickened with "The Case of The Purloined Playbook" of P. J. Brown.
There was also "The Case of The Delayed Doctor" and the stitches that did not come in time.


Evan Burger Donaldson; Adoption Official, 60
Evan Burger Donaldson, president of the board of Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children in New York, a nonprofit adoption service, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Donaldson, who lived in Manhattan, was 60.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said her husband, William H. Donaldson.


Weddings; Dawn Herlihy Susan R. Virtue, Andrew R. Amill
Susan Ryan Virtue, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Virtue of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Andrew Richard Amill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Amill of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
Vance E. Polly performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Amill is the vice president of fine-fragrance marketing and development at Givaudan-Roure in Teaneck, N.J.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Virtue Group, custom designers of fragrances in Rye.


Inner City


All-Volunteer Military Was a Highlight of Nixon's Presidency
To the Editor:
The individuals who were asked by the media for their recollections about Richard Nixon have, as best I can tell, wholly neglected his role in ending the draft and establishing the all-volunteer armed forces, which was so highly commended for its performance in the Persian Gulf War.


Police Arrest Man And Stepdaughter In Two Robberies
A man and his 12-year-old stepdaughter were arrested yesterday in the robberies of two elderly men at public housing complexes on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, the housing police said.
Investigators say they believe that the two suspects were also responsible for other recent robberies in the area.
In those cases, they said, some of the victims were also elderly men who were robbed by a man and a girl.


A Symphony's Century Celebrated
THE New Haven Symphony's 7 P.M.
Saturday concert in Woolsey Hall is no ordinary season finale -- it's the "Gala of the Century," in recognition of the fact that the ensemble was born 100 years ago.
It is only the fourth orchestra in the United States to reach that age (the others are the Boston and Chicago Symphonies and the New York Philharmonic), and the celebrations include a guest return to the podium of Frank Brieff, who conducted the orchestra from 1952 through 1974, and a performing visit from Jessye Norman.
The soprano has chosen arias of Barber and Saint-Saens, along with the Four Last Songs of Richard Strauss.
The group's current music director, Michael Palmer, has added Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite" as a dazzling closer.
The number to call for reservations is 776-1444.
The semesters are ending, so campus concerts are crowding together in a final spring fling.
In New Haven, it's musical anchors aweigh at 3 o'clock today, as Jovial Crew sails in to the Yale Center for British Art with a program of shanties and other English folksongs.
Tuesday evening at 8, the pianist Sara Laimon closes out the Yale Faculty Artist Series in Sprague Memorial Hall, her recital devoted to works of Mozart, Chopin, Ligeti, Brahms, Debussy and Radzynski.
And at 8 P.M. on Thursday at William Harkness Hall (next door to Sprague), New Music New Haven presents works by six Yale composers -- Steve Burke, Dominic Frasca, Anthony Gatto, Jack Perla, Peter Savli and Francine Trester.
All three concerts are open to the public without charge; for more details on the folk program, call the Yale Center at 432-2800; the information number otherwise is 432-4158.


The Joy of Fresh Air Outlasts a Single Summer
For the Lanza family, the Fresh Air Fund is like a big, tall drink of ice water that never runs out.
Lucretia Lanza remembers leaving her sweltering apartment in Manhattan's Chelsea section in the late 1950's for two glorious weeks of upstate rural paradise.
She wasn't homesick, not a bit.
"I would want my kid, him or her, to go to the same family," she said.
As things turned out, her two daughters got to follow in her footsteps.


Habitats/Changing Town Houses; A Collector Adds Space for His Art
MICHAEL HALL unfurled the newly acquired, garishly colored Bessarabian rug on the stones of his backyard terrace and promptly lay down on it, beckoning to his two wire-haired dachshunds to come and frolic.
"I bought this rug Sunday at the 26th Street flea market," said Mr.
Hall, who, when not shopping at flea markets, is augmenting a multimillion dollar collection of Italian Renaissance sculpture.
"It's so gaudy, you'll either love it or you'll think it's awful."


Physicists Try to Discredit Book Asserting Atom Architects Spied
The world's largest group of physicists has opened a campaign to discredit a new book that asserts that the main architects of the nuclear era betrayed the United States by spying for Moscow.
The physicists are calling for a Federal investigation of the accusations, which they disparage as unsubstantiated and flawed by serious discrepancies.


Weddings; Martha A. Heinze, Paul W. Hansen
Martha Ann Heinze, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Heinze of Ramsey, N.J., was married yesterday to Paul Walter Hansen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Hansen of East Brunswick, N.J.
The Rev.
Boyd Butt, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony in Astwood Park in Southampton Parish, Bermuda.
Ms.
Heinze, who is 29 and is keeping her name, is a marketing manager for new business development at ADP, a data processing company in Roseland, N.J.
She graduated from Lafayette College, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Rutgers University.
Her father is a chemical engineer at Lederle Labs in Pearl River, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol Heinze, is a registered nurse at Valley Home Care in Ridgewood, N.J.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Bet You Can't Read Just One
At last, good news from the world of book publishing.
For some time now, it seems that small publishers have been folding or have been swallowed up by bigger companies.
Not to mention competition from one zillion channels or the doomsday threat of virtual reality.
But weep no more, literati, Frito-Lay is here.
Bantam's new "Reba: My Story," the long-awaited autobiography of the country singer Reba McEntire, will be promoted on 10 million bags of corn chips to be published -- uh, distributed -- in May and June.


Such a Nice Zealot
In the past, animal-rights advertisements sought to shock and shame, with images of furry creatures caught in leg-hold traps, or veal calves confined to narrow stalls.
The grim ads fired up the naturally indignant, but many found it just as easy to turn the page.
Try, though, to look away from this: Christy Turlington, her bottom bared, reclining like an odalisque on a 14-by-48-foot billboard above Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles.
The slogan?
"I'd rather go naked than wear fur."


Some Settlers in Gaza Want to Leave
Four years ago, Miri and Ami Shavit moved to this cluster of mobile homes on the dunes of the northern Gaza Strip with dreams of building a fishing village.
Now, dogged by security worries and economic troubles, they and nearly all the 17 other families at this tiny settlement say they want to move back to Israel.
As the Israeli Army begins a pullback in the Gaza Strip, Dugit has become the first settlement there whose members have collectively announced that they want to leave.


Unwarranted Criticism of Japan
To the Editor:
I must take issue with several points in your coverage of the Japanese bureaucracy.
First, the caption with the photograph of Masamichi Kono distorts what is stated in the text -- that Mr.
Kono and fellow bureaucrats did not inform bankers in advance about "an initiative for helping the banks write off bad loans to finance companies." The fact that Japanese bureaucrats are secretive about their intentions does not distinguish them from bureaucrats elsewhere.
The caption twisted Mr.
Kono's not advising the banks of his agency's intentions to imply that he "knows more about the bank crisis than the bankers." Does every bureaucracy that is secretive about its intentions know more about the industry it regulates than people in the industry?


Wall Street; A Tabloid Publisher's Unsensational Performance
INQUIRING minds may have wondered last week if the stock chart of Enquirer/ Star Group had been printed backward.
Shares of the company, which publishes The National Enquirer and Star, actually fell in the months leading into an offer to buy all the public shares on Thursday.
Then the stock did what the textbooks call for: it rose on Thursday on heavy volume on the news that Macfadden and Boston Ventures would take it private.
Macfadden, a New York publisher, and Boston Ventures, which invests in media companies, said they would pay $17.50 a share for the 18 million shares they do not already own.
Shares rose $2.75, to $17.25, on Thursday and were unchanged Friday.


Disability Applicants Crowd Offices
A VISITOR to the crowded Social Security office in Mineola on a Monday morning might imagine that there is a retirement boom in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
The timing coincides with the graying of a generation that moved to the suburbs after World War II, as well as the shrinking and relocation of corporations, particularly military contractors.
But Social Security Administration statistics indicate that the steady increase in the number of retirees is not the major cause of the bustle at branch offices.
The change stems largely from a sharp increase in people who are seeking disability benefits, according to a regional spokesman for Social Security, John Clark, and that mirrors a national trend.


When It Rains, Daring to Shine
The silver raincoats being worn this spring positively glow on dark, rainy days.
Even coats in matte gold sparkle when wet.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about medical services for the mentally ill in New York State described the status of the state's psychiatric institutions incorrectly.
Sixteen are to remain open; the five being closed are not the last.
The article also omitted New York City's role in bringing new medical services to the homes of the mentally ill.
Although the state is providing the funds, the city will coordinate some (not all) medical teams involved in the program and will issue contracts.


New York State Is Reshaping Testing System For Schools
With a system of standardized tests that dates back to the Civil War, New York State was for years considered a national model for how to administer objective, fair and accurate examinations for public school students.
But to a growing number of business leaders and educators, including some of the state's top school officials, the multiple-choice tests favored by New York and other states do little more than measure rote learning.
In requiring students to take more tests than most other states, they contend, New York has stunted the learning it seeks to promote.


Just Before They Invented the Blockbuster
THE ONLY TIME I EVER CAUSED a traffic accident, it was while trying to read a three-tiered movie marquee.
The place was Cambridge, Mass., the theater the Orson Welles, and the films were head-turning enough to wreak havoc on the roadways, at the very least.
The time was the early 1970's, a period that has come to look like an astonishingly fertile era within the realm of film.
It was a turbulent time that witnessed worlds colliding, a major changing of the guard, an enthusiastic embrace of the cinematic past and troubling harbingers of the future.
There are higher points in the history of cinema: the zenith of silent film in the 1920's; the great days of Ford, Hawks, Hitchcock, Sturges, Welles, Lubitsch and Cukor in the early 1940's; and the French New Wave in the late 1950's and early 1960's, which coincided with the most stunning phases in the careers of Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman.
But the early 1970's were immensely valuable, since they represented such a colorful crossroads.
This was a volatile period, a time of bizarre excesses and vital, unequivocal triumphs.
In its spirit of passionate upheaval, it wound up forging essential connections between old and new.


Bruins Pose Same Problems For Devils
Only 40 hours after overcoming the virtually impenetrable goaltender Dominik Hasek and the Buffalo Sabres, the National Hockey League's top defensive team, the Devils will face another monumental task: the Boston Bruins.
The Bruins, who eliminated the Montreal Canadiens, last year's winners of the Stanley Cup, at just about the same time the Devils were eliminating the Sabres, will be looking to make the Devils their next victim.


Correction
A listing of tours to Normandy published on April 17 misstated the telephone number for Academic Travel Abroad and the name of a publication sponsoring its 10-day trip from Normandy to Paris.
The number is (202) 333-3355; information is also available at (800) 556-7896.
The sponsor is MHQ: The Quarterly Journal of Military History.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MERCHANT ON IVORY
The producer Ismail Merchant will speak about his 30-year collaboration with the director James Ivory today at 3 P.M. in the Pepsico Theater at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College.


It's May, and Mini-Series Season, Again
SOMEWHERE IN CALIFORNIA, a bug escapes from a secret germ-warfare installation.
Ten days later, nearly everybody in the United States is dead.
Soon the survivors -- who at least have plenty to eat, drink, wear and drive -- are having peculiar dreams.


Hold the Neon: One More Battle On 42d Street
After a decade of lawsuits, bickering and delays that have stymied the vast plan to redevelop the south end of Times Square, another snag may come as little surprise.
And that's just what has happened three months before an August 1 deadline for an "interim" development agreement for the mammoth plan to build four office towers.


Judges, Not Artists Picked Works for Show
"The Differences Between Men and Women's Roles"  [ Art, April, 10 ]  makes an astoundingly incorrect statistical analysis.
In looking at the 63 final elections of the Juried Photography Exhibition the writer extrapolates about the rest of the participants (who submitted almost 1,000 pieces): "many . . . who see the world as safe and sane and who are ready to reassure us with appealing nature, orderly settings, contented people." The writer has every right, and is perhaps justified, to opine in this barely suppressed condescending tone as far as the final selections go.
But wouldn't it have been more logical if she ascribed these sensibilities to the judge and his chosen few, rather than to the many creators of the 940 unseen rejects?


MERCHANTS OF IVORY
It is extremely difficult to understand why jazz writers want so desperately to believe that jazz is "America's unwanted stepchild," as Peter Watrous says in the opening sentence of his article.
In 1918, the Original Dixieland Jazz Band was the highest-paid small dance band in the country.
In the 1920's, Bix Beiderbecke was the featured soloist with the most popular orchestra in the world; Duke Ellington was broadcasting nationwide regularly from America's most famous cabaret, the Cotton Club; Fletcher Henderson was the house band at the country's best-known dance hall, Roseland; King Oliver was playing at the fancy Quogue Inn.
In the 1930's and 1940's, the Benny Goodman small group recordings, featuring such giants as Teddy Wilson, Lionel Hampton, Charlie Christian, Cootie Williams and Goodman himself, sold millions of copies.
In the 1950's, Dave Brubeck was on the cover of Time.
In the 1960's Louis Armstrong was one of the most popular entertainers in the world, and Duke Ellington opened his Third Sacred Concert at Westminster Abbey.


A Critical Tour of the Empire: Battery Park to High Bridge . . .
Here is a critical look at a sampling of New York City's parks, from the vast and famous lawns of Central and Prospect Parks to a small and struggling playground in a hard patch of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Manhattan CENTRAL PARK: THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN
This 840-acre park, of almost transcendental importance to New Yorkers, is often described as the first example of a deliberately planned urban park in America.
Today, it is like an engine gathering steam, a model for the public-private partnership many hope will save the city's parks.
Lord Chatham's famous declaration that "parks are the lungs of London," might have been written for Central Park, a swath of green where some 15 million people come to breathe each year.
They come as individuals to sit on grass and benches, or to be part of any number of events, from the New York Marathon to Shakespeare in the Park.
It was just two decades ago, as New York lay mired in a fiscal straitjacket, that Central Park appeared to be dying.
Erosion was gnawing away at the park's increasingly brown skin, and floods were commonplace.
Garbage was picked up, but all other maintenance had virtually stopped.
Even the 36 famed stone arches and bridges -- none identical -- were falling apart.
In truth, while the overall Parks Department work force was cut 23 percent during the fiscal crisis, compared with an average of 13 percent in other city agencies, the deterioration of Central Park was not as serious as at other, less famous parks.
Still, Central Park was Central Park, and in 1979, Mayor Edward I. Koch named the park's most vocal advocate, Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, the first administrator of a city park.
There was no salary and no budget.
Mr.
Koch explained, "You know something about fund raising."
As it turned out, people were chomping at the bit to save the park.
In its first 10 years, the Conservancy raised more than $50 million, a pace that seems downright laggardly compared with its success so far in the 1990's: to whit, Richard Gilder, a Conservancy trustee, offered the group a $17 million gift, on the condition it raise $17 million from other donors, and that the city contribute $17 million.
The city has said yes.
This is not to say everything is perfect, although Ms.
Rogers beams with pleasure about the renovation of the long-neglected northern end of the park, Harlem Meer.
Cedar Hill, where dogs run, needs to be re-done.
Ball fields are badly compacted, and need major drainage repairs.
Meadows need to be replanted.
Paths need repair.
But the fact is that Central Park has been able to weather a cut in its maintenance staff to 91 from 138.
"What we've built here is a system that will insure there's a future for the park," Ms.
Rogers said.
RIVERSIDE PARK: PROGRESS, BIT BY BIT
Henry Hudson described this riverside ribbon of green as "very pleasant, very high and bold." Well, you can't change that.
But in recent years, the park has grown dirtier, a bit more menacing.
Homeless people make homes in bushes, and two weeks ago, a woman was attacked in the park and defended herself with an ice pick.
There has also been an insidious dialectic at work.
When Robert Moses redid the park in the 1930's, he spent far less money on the northern part than on the south.
Despite several current capital projects to perk up the north, this perception -- and some of the reality -- persists.
But even as the park's workforce has fallen from 54 to 24 over the last five years, new procedures have helped to lessen the sting.
One reform was to cut back shrubs in which people could live, an action that has saved three staff hours a day in the middle section of the park.
Other changes have included asking the various City Council members representing sections adjoining the park to allocate money from their portion of the city's capital budget for specific projects.
Other money comes from the Riverside Park Fund and -- in dribs and drabs -- from the city.
People also pay for their own projects.
For example, except for one summer attendant, the tennis courts at 95th Street are now totally maintained and operated by the Riverside Clay Tennis Association.
The 91st Street playground is similar.
Parents raised $120,000 and Councilwoman Ronnie Eldridge threw in $70,000.
That was enough to hire a landscape architect and begin the job.
The first step was to enlarge the pits around the dying pin oaks.
Then, the inner part of the playground -- whimsical hippopotamus statues that spray water -- was installed.
Other phases will be done as more money is raised.
The other day, Diane Englander, a business consultant who lives at 90th Street and Riverside Drive, was at the playground with her son.
"It's getting nicer," she said of the park she loves.
"There are more flowers, more trees, more improvements to the playground." HIGH BRIDGE PARK:  A PERENNIAL PROBLEM
High on the cliffs overlooking the Harlem River and the Bronx, High Bridge Park has long been an example of the trials of maintaining a park that is tremendously important to its neighborhood but a long way, physically and economically, from City Hall.
In the mid-80's, Mr.
Stern had ordered a huge cleanup of the park.
Dozens of abandoned cars, hundreds of tires, refrigerators, several dead dogs and a human body were found amid the tangled brush.
On a rainy day five years later, at his last public ceremony in the Koch administration, he returned to announce a $1.2 million restoration of the park's landmark, High Bridge Tower, originally used to equalize pressure in the Croton Aqueduct.
An arsonist's blaze had wrecked much of it.
A homeless man died in the fire.
Today, despite a much-needed lift from three very active Little Leagues, whose participants regularly scrub graffiti and clean litter, it has become more and more difficult to keep up.
Debris cast down the steep hill includes old stoves and refrigerators, furniture, any manner of automobile parts and sometimes whole cars.
"A lot of people seem not to be in tune with recycling here," said Milton Rivera, the park's supervisor.
"To them, recycling is dumping."
Attendance, particularly when the fine pool is open, is up sharply, but the park's staff has slipped from 24 to 12 over the last four years.
Major pedestrian gates must be locked so people don't drive their cars into the park; people must walk in smaller entrances, a bit out of the way.
But the big problem is safety, in a park that continues to fight a bitter war of attrition with drugs.
It seems somehow fitting that one of the six playgrounds is named for a police officer, Michael J. Buczek, killed nearby in 1988.
So it was that Mr.
Stern returned last week to the park within blocks of his boyhood home.
He remembered a spring on the side of a cliff.
He led a visitor up the steep hill, and, sure enough, pure water still trickled from the earth.
But litter was everywhere.
He saw clothing and other evidence of a homeless person living in the base of the refurbished -- and locked -- tower.
"We need a massive cleaning effort, a full-scale assault," Mr.
Stern said to Mr.
Rivera, who ordered his workers to begin work immediately, to uproot hundreds of tires from the vines and weeds.
They were joined by dozens scores of reinforcements from other parks.
"He's doing as well as he could," thw Commissioner said.
"Maybe he could do 10 percent more, but this needs 1,000 percent." BATTERY PARK: 'A FORLORN WAY STATION'
Battery Park, the first green space in a city cluttered almost from the time the first Dutch settlers arrived in 1625, should be one of the plums of the city.
It is more like a shriveled raisin at Manhattan's southern tip.
Some benches are broken, all need repainting.
Where grass should be, there is dirt and litter.
A sign with a map and guide is so smeared with graffiti it is unreadable.
There are potholes on the asphalt where people line up for boats to the Statue of Liberty.
"Battery Park is marred by a flawed design, inadequate maintenance and neglected landmarks," wrote a group of concerned citizens in the process of forming a Battery Park Conservancy.
The park, they concluded, is "a forlorn way station." Warrie Price, who is heading the initial efforts to organize the Conservancy, said most of the 375,000 people who work within walking distance of Battery Park -- and the 14,000 predominately new residents who live nearby -- avoid the park because of its dreary appearance.
For the 2.5 million passing through to visit Ellis Island and the statue, she says it is an even less pleasant wait.
The Conservancy's first step has been to prepare an architectural plan for redoing the park.
It would refurbish the green space, totally rebuild the promenade and perhaps combine the monuments in a "Heroes Walk."
Ms.
Price said financing for the $30 million effort seems possible, at least in increments.
The National Park Service, which owns Castle Clinton, is interested in replacing the roof -- lost to Robert Moses's never-built bridge to Brooklyn -- and turning the old fort into a new visitor center.
Some $2 million in Federal money has been promised to rebuild the seawall.
A business improvement district being formed for the downtown area is intensely interested in the project.
There is her nascent conservancy.
Ms.
Price foresees shade trees over visitors waiting for the boats.
She delights over such artistic touches as the dolphins at the base of the elegant lights that have been designed.
"It's in the birthing stage," she said.
The Bronx PELHAM BAY PARK: BIG SPACES, BIG NEEDS
Pelham Bay Park is the city's largest park, and one of the richest in resources.
Within its 2,764 acres lie the elegant Bartow-Pell Mansion and Revolutionary War historic sites, two 18-hole golf courses and -- the centerpiece -- Orchard Beach, called "The Riviera of New York" after its completion a half-century ago.
It is also a park in need of help.
"I have never seen the park in as bad a condition as it is now," said Marc Hohenstein, a sales representative who heads an enthusiastic but poor volunteer group called Friends of Pelham Bay Park.
The administrator, Linda Dockeray, takes some issue with such a negative view, pointing to a number of ways in which the park is doing more with less.
But she readily concedes the park has deteriorated since she grew up a quarter century ago within walking distance of the park.
"It just takes so long to get something done," she said.
Ms.
Dockeray shows a visitor areas her 28-worker crew has not been able to get to -- broken benches to eroded trails.
Debris from the storm of December 1992 has not been picked up.
The Bronx Victory Column, a favored place for wedding pictures, is crumbling.
But it is Orchard Beach where the wear and tear most shows.
This 1.1-mile engineering feat -- built mainly on landfill -- has a beach of white sand, two picnic areas and a 45-acre parking lot.
On weekend days, more than 32,000 people congregate to catch some rays, eat some hot dogs and dance to Latin music -- though this year plans call for other kinds of music to be added.
The beach has not undergone basic improvements since opening in 1936.
It needs more sand, and new bathrooms and recreation area that should have been finished by now are just getting underway because of problems with the first contractor.
This will be followed by a $3 million first-stage refurbishing of the basic colonnade rising over the bath houses and refreshment stands.
But the bathhouse, which Ms.
Dockeray closed due to lack of staffing immediately upon taking her position in 1991, will remain closed.
Brooklyn PROSPECT PARK:  DEFINITELY NOT SECOND FIDDLE
For better than a decade, once-dreary Prospect Park has been on a roll.
The Prospect Park Alliance, far from being a demure country cousin to the Central Park Conservancy, has boldly seized on flamboyant, joyous strategies to return the park to the status defined by Robert Moses, "the immediate crown jewel of Brooklyn." Among scores of other projects, the Alliance lovingly restored a turn-of-the-century carousel, and began a Halloween walk through the picturesque ravine that little children love to dread.
Both the Grand Army Plaza and Willink entrances are undergoing grand million-dollar restorations.
The Lincoln Road Playground is being completely rebuilt.
The refurbished zoo reopened last year.
The benefits to Park Slope and Windsor Terrace brownstone owners, among them higher property values, have been much remarked upon.
But at least as important is what the park has come to mean to the poorer residents of neighborhoods like Crown Heights, Flatbush and Bedford Stuyvesant.
"Prospect Park plays a unique role for the the poor," said David R. Jones, president of the Community Service Society and an Alliance board member for many years.
"The utilization has just been going up by leaps and bounds. You just see enormous outpourings of people who create little spaces for themselves."
They barbecue in a traditional style (now including Japanese and Korean variations, of course) that has become such a Prospect Park ritual that it has become unthinkable on the part of park bureaucrats to stop it.
People play softball, soccer, volleyball, fish and dance to boom boxes on hot afternoons.
On Sundays, African and Caribbean drummers gather in an eclectic symphony of pure rhythm.
As the Rollerbladers glide by, as picnickers parade toward the Long Meadow, which has been called the finest landscaped garden in America, something else is happening.
It is deep and scary and ongoing.
"We haven't had people managing our forests for the longest time," said Tupper W. Thomas, the administrator.
"We keep postponing all the things we can't postpone."
The old virgin trees are largely gone.
Their descendants -- the oaks, maples, tulip trees, which tried to carry on -- are being supplanted by mulberries and other newcomers.
Erosion is intensifying.
"To take on something like this is just impossible with city money," Ms.
Thomas said.
Accordingly, the Alliance has made the forests its priority.
In case you needed to ask, a Woodlands Ball is planned.
MACON PLAYGROUND:  A PEOPLE'S PLAYGROUND
This little playground in Bedford-Stuyvesant seems like a terrible place.
Equipment has been broken or stolen, crack vials are visible in the dust and adults relax with beers and wine.
A bathroom has been locked after becoming a haven for drugs and sex.
It is sad to think the happily playing children have nowhere else to go.
But there is a gathering ray of hope on the horizon.
Some neighborhood men have banded together to help the bedraggled playground at Tompkins Avenue and Macon Street.
"This is a classic New York City playground," said Julius Spiegel, the Brooklyn Parks Commissioner, pointing to the handball and basketball courts, the checkers tables and seesaws.
"But kids shouldn't have to play in glass."
In 1988, a group of men in the neighborhood got together and decided to reclaim the park.
They called themselves Black Men Who Give a Damn.
"For kids in the neighborhood, that's the focal point of their summer," explained James Harris Jr., an insurance company employee who lives across the street from the park and started the ball rolling.
"It was time we men took matters in our own hands. If we have to live there, we wanted to make sure there was a place we wanted to live in."
Mr.
Harris and his compatriots first received Parks Department permission effectively to take over the park, though basic garbage pickup and maintenance remains with the agency.
They then mobilized the neighborhood for a full cleaning, and have periodically returned to scrub grafitti.
They began to lock the park at night, and during days worked to exclude drug users and others they considered bad influences.
"We did things the police can't," Mr.
Harris said.
They also began a basketball tournament geared specifically for boys and girls who aren't athletically gifted, as well as an annual block party for everyone in the neighborhood.
They raise money with "oldies but goodies" parties and other means.
"We started as simple volunteers to the park," Mr.
Harris said.
"What we're doing is buying stock in our children. When we get old who's going to put out the checkers for us?" Queens FLUSHING MEADOWS-CORONA PARK: STRUGGLING PHOENIX
Once these 1,255 acres on Flushing Bay were a vast dumping ground for ashes from the burning of garbage.
In "The Great Gatsby," F. Scott Fitzgerald called it "a fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and hills and grotesque gardens."
Then came two World's Fairs, and after the second in 1964, the park Robert Moses had pushed for three decades finally began to take shape.
Today, what was once an ash pile is athletic fields, landscaped meadows, lakes, fountains, playgrounds, zoo, museums and stadiums.
But Flushing Meadows is caught in severe problems just as its dream of restoring its monuments and museums moves toward completion.
It is scruffy, even dirty in some parts.
The staff struggles to keep up.
Popular play areas have been worn grassless, tailgaters from Shea Stadium in the park have seemingly never learned how to throw away an empty can, and many benches need to be refurbished.
Arguably, this is also the city's most cosmopolitan park in what is statistically the most cosmopolitan borough.
It is possible for 86 languages to be spoken there on a busy weekend afternoon.
Summertimes are one ethnic festival after another: the Colombian festival draws 300,000; the Ecuadorian, 100,000, the Korean, 100,000.
There are Muslim prayer services and a dragon boat festival.
"People who don't have their own backyard use this as their own backyard," said Estelle Cooper, the park administrator.
"They have somewhere to go."
Harold Sanchez began as a volunteer in the park and is now sports coordinator and field inspector.
"I don't fool anybody and nobody fools me," he said by way of introduction.
Mr.
Sanchez solved one of the park's biggest problems.
Soccer leagues had become violently anarchic, with officials shaking down teams to the tune of more than $40,000 for the right to use fields the city supplies free.
And there was another problem on the six soccer fields, where 17 leagues, some with as many as 20 teams, sometimes fitfully shared space.
"People were shooting each other," he said.
Mr.
Sanchez two years ago brought the teams into the regular organized leagues of New York State, providing insurance for players and spectators and opening up tournaments with teams elsewhere.
The new leagues would not put up with the shakedown artists and self-styled landlords.
"Harold is an unsung hero of the Parks Department," said Arne Abramowitz, Mrs.
Cooper's predecessor.
For her part, the new administrator is scrambling to make up for a halving of her staff to 47.
That means only four maintenance people are available on any given day.
The money the long-time Republican loyalist is able to gather from party contributors helps, but is not enough, she says.
She makes her case for more city funds with typical Queens combativeness.
"We're being cut so desperately and we get less money than Manhattan does anyway," she said.
DOUGLAS MARTIN IF YOU WANT TO HELP
All over the city, parks rely on volunteers and private money to stay alive.
Here are some numbers to call if you want to help. *
To volunteer in city parks, call Sara Levine, the Parks Department's director of volunteers at (212) 360-1441/2.
*
To become involved as a contributor or in other ways, call Elizabeth Carmona at the Parks Council, (212) 838-9410, ext. 230.
*
To help at specific parks:  Central Park Conservancy (212) 315-0385 Riverside Park Fund (212) 870-3070 Randalls Island Sports Foundation (212) 830-7715 Prospect Park Alliance (718) 965-8951 Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Corporation  (718) 760-6565 Friends of Forest Park (718) 235-0815 Black Men Who Care, Macon Playground in Bedford-Stuyvesant (718) 467-4808.
Friends of Van Cortlandt Park (718) 430-1895 Greenbelt Foundation (718) 667-2165


Beyond Picnics: Come Out and Play!
No need to go away to camp to play outdoor sports, here are list of activities that can be played outdoors in the city parks.
Tennis
The Parks Department has over 500 public tennis courts around the city.
To find out a tennis court nearby call (212) 360-8133 or for tennis lessons at the City Parks Foundation's Central Park Tennis Center call (212) 280-0201.


All-Volunteer Military Was a Highlight of Nixon's Presidency; 'Morally Bankrupt' Age
To the Editor:
Perhaps my disgust at the unending effort to revise Nixonian history is due to my most singular memory of the man: While I was being beaten up by police and Secret Service agents for peacefully protesting the Vietnam slaughter at a Nixon re-election rally in 1972 at Nassau Coliseum, Mr.
Nixon turned to his faithful supporters and proclaimed that "The age of permissiveness is over."


For Kay Boyle, Nothing Succeeded Like Excess
KAY BOYLE Author of Herself.
By Joan Mellen.
Illustrated. 670 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Fiat Looks Beyond the Bad Old Days
FIAT S.p.A., Italy's largest private company, is beginning to approach its businesses as if guided by the adage that the prospect of the gallows can do wonders to focus the mind.
The company is overhauling itself.
It is in the midst of a $24 billion program to bring out 18 new models in the next two years.
It is shedding some businesses.
It is streamlining and strengthening its farm-equipment unit.
It is bidding to supply high-speed trains in the United States.
And it has changed the balance of power on its board in return for new investment.


A 'Little Voice' With Big Ideas
A BOOZY, HARRIDAN MOTHER HAS A reclusive teen-age daughter possessed of an unusual skill.
Shy to the point of psychosis, the child comes alive as a musical mimic: Garland, Piaf, Billie Holiday -- she can do each one with unerring accuracy.
Wan and withdrawn, the adolescent Little Voice, as she is known because she is barely audible when she speaks, is one of the faceless working class of northern England.
But put on her late father's records, and L. V., as she calls herself, is transformed.
After a sleazy manager latches on to her, L. V. has a shot at stardom.
She, in turn, must find the strength to break away, leaving him and the established singers' styles behind.
In "The Rise and Fall of Little Voice," opening tonight at the Neil Simon Theater, the author Jim Cartwright's point is clear: only in discarding the voices of others will L. V. find her own.


The Information Future: Out of Control (And it's a good thing, too.)
Here I am, early one winter evening, on the telephone with an elderly man in his home somewhere in Manhattan.
I don't know his name; he doesn't know mine.
I am frantically begging him to leave his handset off the hook.
My Chinese is even worse than his English -- it's hopeless.
I have opened a new outpost in the electronic landscape, a company called the Pipeline, offering everyday access to the Internet, the blooming network of computer networks -- a.k.a., Information Superhighway.
Our customers are arriving home from work, switching off the news, turning their backs on spouses, turning on their home computers and dialing -- trying to dial -- into our gateway.


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Guarding Tess  Shirley MacLaine, Nicolas Cage Directed by Hugh Wilson PG-13 98 minutes


A Plan Dedicated to Revival
Four decades ago, Red Hook was a bustling port community where jobs were plentiful and most people worked in nearby factories.
Then most of the maritime-based jobs sailed away, and more than half the residents left.
Now residents and community leaders have drafted a broad new development plan they hope will bring jobs and people back to the area.


Weddings; Elizabeth A. Greenberg, Alan S. Cohen
Elizabeth Ann Greenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Greenberg of New York, was married last night to Alan Seth Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Cohen of Suffern, N.Y.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman and Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Cohen, 29, is a lawyer for the New York City Environmental Control Board.
She graduated from New York University and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the senior tax partner in Graubard, Mollen, Horwitz, Pomeranz &amp; Shapiro, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Marilyn Greenberg, owns and runs Luisant, a cosmetics business in New York.


Where Chelsea Meets the Village
CAFFE BONDI


Local Tax Districts 'Out of Control'
The recent Q &amp; A ("Helping Government Run Efficiently") with Dr.
Henry A. Coleman, director of the Center for Government Services at Rutgers, offers an insight into how local taxing districts have been able to run out of control.
Either Dr.
Coleman is naively optimistic about the caliber of "public servants" out there, or his position brings him into contact with only the good ones.
Officials who routinely ignore sunshine laws and wrest decision-making power from the people do not typically go to the Center for Government Services for their approval.
They have their own well-paid "advisers" rubber-stamping their whims.


The World; All Aboard for the Chunnel of Love-Hate
The earth will not actually move when Queen Elizabeth II and President Francois Mitterrand preside at ceremonies on Friday to officially open the Channel Tunnel.
But for a lot of people in Britain and France, it will feel that way.
Burrowed into the bedrock beneath the gray water of the English Channel, the 23.6-mile-long tube creates the first land link between Britain and the Continent since the last Ice Age.
Within a few months, once glitches can be worked out, regularly scheduled, high-speed passenger trains will be rushing travelers through this underground passage in just 35 minutes, coast to coast.


Kyoto as It Was
To the Editor: I am writing to thank James Sterngold for his superb article "Kyoto as It Used to Be" (May 30, 1993).
My husband and I went to Kyoto this January.
It was not our first trip and we were hoping to recapture the "old Japan" that is so lacking in Tokyo and central Kyoto.
We followed Mr.
Sterngold's information and were delighted.
We stayed in the Hotel Rantei, which is absolutely something out of a dream.
We spent four days exploring Arashiyama, including a Bunraku demonstration at the charming Kyoto Japanese Folk Dolls Museum.
One day it snowed and the bamboo groves, hills and temples were exquisite.
Although we were among the very few Westerners in Arashiyama, everyone was very friendly and made us feel welcome.


Commercial Property/The Race for High-Tech Media Space; Communicators Opt for Manhattan
TELECOMMUTING, video conferencing, computer networking, mobile fax machines, all are frequently invoked reasons for why the office of the future need not be an office at all.
Yet the same communications companies whose magazines and television shows are trumpeting the death of offices are gobbling up Manhattan office space as though it were on fire sale.
"There's just been an explosion of space acquisition by communications companies in New York," said Mitchell Konsker, executive managing director of the real estate firm Galbreath Riverbank.


Basic Care Suffers Under Medicaid in New York
Medicaid in New York State covers artificial insemination, unlimited physical therapy, and bone marrow transplants that can cost as much as $180,000.
But it pays only $7 for a routine office visit and reimburses for chest X-rays at a rate set in 1966.
Health care workers say the caprices of the system, which pays for vasectomy reversals but not throat cultures in most private clinics, discourage poor people from getting checkups but encourage spending on expensive medical procedures that even the most comprehensive private insurance plans don't cover.


Efforts Grow to Stem Smoking in County
EACH day, as lunch bells ring in public schools like Scarsdale High School and Roosevelt High in Yonkers, more and more students hurry not to the cafeteria but to the nearest designated smoking area -- those out-of-the-way corners conceded to the estimated one in four students craving nicotine.
"We don't like to trumpet the fact," said Richard Monaco, a Yonkers Board of Education spokesman, "but, yes, we have a place for smokers."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PROTEST  FOR RUSHDIE  Essays by Arab and Muslim Writers in Defense of Free Speech.
Braziller, cloth, $27.50; paper, $14.95.


The Biker-Bar Scene (Vroom!)
It's spring.
Time to dust off the motorcycle, change the oil and, well, do what bikers do.
Once you've put on your Harley sweatshirt and wandered into the balmy night, where to go for fun?
There is the Harley-Davidson Cafe, where any motorcycle memorabilia not on the walls can surely be found in the gift shop.
Of course, there won't be any other bikers there, but is it all about community?


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Atomic Secrets
A recently declassified memorandum suggests that in 1947 the Government classified information on radiation experiments because it feared the public's reaction.
The memorandum, dated April 17, 1947, was released by the Federation of American Scientists.
It was sent from O. G. Haywood Jr., Colonel, Corps of Engineers, to the attention of "Dr. Fidler" at the United States Atomic Energy Commission.
It reads: "It is desired that no document be released which refers to experiments with humans and might have adverse effect on public opinion or result in legal suits." It goes on to say that further work in this area had been prohibited, and that three such documents were set for declassification but should be reclassified "secret."


U.N. Says North Korea Refuses to Allow Nuclear Inspections
North Korea has refused to allow the International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct tests of spent fuel that could clear up a mystery surrounding the nation's nuclear weapons program, an agency official said today.
North Korea had indicated that it would begin replacing the fuel rods in its biggest nuclear reactor next week and had invited the inspectors to observe the process.
But the atomic energy agency, a branch of the United Nations, had also been seeking assurances that it could take measurements of the spent fuel, which could indicate whether North Korea has diverted any for reprocessing for its weapons program.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; The Sound of One Hand Shopping
There is a Zen Buddhist notion that at first a mountain is just a mountain.
Then, as one progresses in understanding and insight, it takes on other guises and meanings until, in the end, the mountain is just a mountain again.
The same might be said of Faith Popcorn's Trendpacks, two of which are shown above.
They are collections of items that her company, Brain Reserve, puts together and provides to businesses, along with consulting, as a key to trends in the marketplace.
At first they seem like boxes of doodads.
Then, they seem like the key to the Zeitgeist.
Finally, you see that they really are just boxes of doodads.


Mayor's Severance Plan Is Affecting Many of System's Younger Workers
Faced with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's program offering severance payments, thousands of municipal workers have been considering whether to leave their jobs and take the lump-sum payments.
Some made the decision easily, while others say they agonized over what to do.
Under the severance program, aimed at helping to close a $2.3 billion budget gap in the next fiscal year, workers who agree to give up their jobs can receive $3,500 to $15,000 based on length of service.
On Friday the Mayor extended the deadline to the middle of next week in hopes of reaching the target of 7,600 workers; about 7,000 had taken the offer already.


In the Region/Connecticut; Should a School Pay Taxes on Faculty Housing?
IN the latest development in a case being watched closely by private schools and local governments around the state, the Town of Windsor has appealed a State Superior Court ruling exempting 25 faculty houses on the Loomis Chaffee School campus from town taxes.
The appeal, filed April 22 in the Appellate Court in Hartford, argues that the houses are not used for educational purposes, as the school successfully contended.


A New Force For Order Amid the Bars
After years of complaints from neighbors about rowdy patrons, five Upper East Side bar owners have banded together to pay for security officers to patrol surrounding blocks on Friday and Saturday nights.
Sponsors of the program hope it will serve as a model for other residential neighborhoods across the city that suffer disturbances outside popular nightclubs and bars.


Thousands in Brooklyn Mourn Fellow Officer Killed in Chase
To muffled drums and the pipers' wail of "Amazing Grace," Police Officer Jose Perez, killed in the line of duty Wednesday when two police vehicles collided while chasing the same suspects, received full inspector's honors yesterday during Mass at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
A hush, etched by the songs of birds, hovered over four blocks of Fifth Avenue at midmorning as 4,000 officers from four states stood stock-still and saluted when the hearse glided to the curb before the Romanesque-style basilica.
A limousine preceding the hearse was laden with bouquets and wreaths, one bearing the fallen officer's badge number, 19910.


Finding Real-World Focus For Debate on Homeless
To the Editor:
In his April 24 Soapbox essay, "Finding Common Ground," Robert M. Hayes says he wants the public debate over the homeless to take on "a real-world focus." Now?
After he single-handedly forced this city to the brink of destruction on the homeless issue and then turned tail and ran off to Maine?


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BRIDGEPORT LOOKS BACK
Whenever the snow piles up in Bridgeport, the oldtimers are inclined to remember their former Socialist Mayor, Jasper McLevy, who reigned from 1933 to 1957 and was known to be somewhat tight-fisted when it came to nonessentials like snow removal.
"God put it there," quoth the Mayor, "let God take it away."


The Preakness: More Than a Race
Like the Kentucky Derby, which has grown from a Saturday afternoon pastime to a two-week festival in Louisville, Ky., the Preakness Stakes, the second of horse racing's Triple Crown events, is now a full-blown celebration in Baltimore.
The race on May 21 at Pimlico race track will be preceded by eight days of activities, including hot-air ballooning, street dancing, arts and crafts exhibits, a country music concert, a celebrity golf tournament, a laser light show and a children's festival.


Restaurant List Grows
THE Long Island restaurant scene is having a spring resurgence.
New restaurants are opening almost as quickly as the season's blossoms.
Starr Boggs, one of the Island's best-known chefs, is opening yet another restaurant, and a heavyweight Montauk kitchen commander is presiding over a completely changed operation.


Bough Houses
Building a home is always a personal affair.
But to lodge it 60 feet up in the creaking embrace of an elm or an oak calls for a special intimacy with, and faith in, both nature and human ingenuity.
So discovered Peter Nelson when he set out to chronicle his own exploits, and those of other tree house builders, in "Treehouses," to be published this month by Houghton Mifflin.
Several of the book's selections are reproduced here, each, in their own way, a wondrous example of the nesting instinct.


Olympic Officials Try to Cool Dispute About Homosexuality
Olympic officials here have been quietly working to broker a truce between conservative Cobb County commissioners and homosexuals in a dispute threatening to disrupt Olympic volleyball competition in 1996.
In August, the commissioners of the county, which comprises suburbs northwest of Atlanta, declared in a resolution that the "life style advocated by the gay community" was "incompatible with the standards to which this community subscribes."


Data Bank/May 1, 1994
Data Bank/May 1, 1994
Consumer Confidence
April
March
Feb.
1985 = 100
91.7
86.7
79.9
Existing-Home Sales
March
Feb.
Jan.
Monthly percent change
5.7
-9.6
-2.3
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
11.1
3.9
-21.6
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.6
1.8
-0.8
New Orders for Durable Goods
Monthly percent change
0.4
-1.9
4.3
Gross Domestic Product
I Q'94
IV Q'93
III Q'93
1987 dollars, percent change
2.6
7.0
2.9
Weekly Jobless Claims
April 15
April 9
April 2
In thousands
333
364
350
30-Year Treasury Bonds
April 29
April 22
April 15
Yield in percent
7.30
7.15
7.32


Mother Courage In Milk
There's a saying Joan Rivers is partial to (she calls it a Russian proverb, but the Jewish grandmothers who've used it for generations would never credit a Cossack) that goes like this: If you walked into a room and saw everyone's troubles hanging on a wall, you'd head straight to your own.
"All that happened to me," she says, "was my husband committed suicide, my daughter didn't talk to me for two years, and I was broke."


Richter, the Thinking Man's Ranger
Mike Richter's masked goalie helmet displays a drawing of the Statue of Liberty, the beacon that beckons immigrants to the United States, an ironic decoration in that Richter is one of few Rangers not born in another country.
Although he lives in Manhattan, he has never visited the lady in the harbor.
"I'm from Philadelphia," Richter said, "and I still haven't seen the Liberty Bell, either."


P.L.O. Meets With Rivals On Self-Rule
As the planned transfer of power to Palestinians here draws near, local P.L.O. leaders have been meeting with their main political opponents, members of the militant Islamic movement Hamas, in an effort to insure a transition that is free of factional strife.
Officials of Al Fatah, the mainstream group in the Palestine Liberation Organization, say the contacts have recently intensified because of expectations of an imminent Israeli pullback and the start of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Sports of The Times; Anderson Will Take The Blame
THE slim man was standing outside the visitors' dressing room Friday night, with the name "Molloy" written across his white sweater.
He was Jack Curran, who has been coaching basketball at Archbishop Molloy High since 1957.
One of his old players was in the steam box that passes for a locker room in Madison Square Garden.
Jack Curran was waiting to let Kenny Anderson know he was there, because the best of them do not stop being coaches on the day a player runs out of eligibility.


Shrinking Steeple
To the Editor: "Montreal When It Shivers" by Susan Spano (Frugal Traveler, March 13) speaks of the place that was my home in the 20's.
While my parents house-hunted we were billeted at a hotel on the Bon secours Market and I often visited L'Eglise Notre-Dame du Bonsecours, known as the Sailors' Church.


Evening Hours; African Roots
Batoto Yetu spreads joy through dance.


Weddings; Karen F. Saurino, Andrew T. Fife
Karen Frances Saurino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benedict H. Saurino of Ward Hill, S.I., was married yesterday evening to Andrew Thomas Fife, a son of Martin and Barbara Fife of New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Fife, 30, is a human resources specialist with American International Group, an insurance company in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.


'Eternal Sullenness'
To the Editor:
My response to Lorraine Ali's essay "Kurt Cobain Screamed Out Our Angst"  [ April 17 ]  was this: I can tell you where I was when John Lennon died, and I can tell you where I was when Kurt Cobain died.
Believe me, Lennon's death was a tragedy, whereas Cobain's death was a sad, self-inflicted premature ending.


Weddings; Natalie J. Kaplan, William B. Gorlin
Natalie Joy Kaplan, the daughter of Terrie and Alan Kaplan of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to William Barrie Gorlin, a son of Marjorie Gilbert of Purchase, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard Gorlin of New York.
Rabbi Avi Magid will officiate at the Lake Isle Country Club in Eastchester, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is an occupational therapist at Primary Children's Hospital in Salt Lake City.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is an account representative for the Martin Group, a beauty-products merchandising company in Martin, N.J.
Her mother is the general manager of Prudential Treefrog Realty in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


The Nation; Good New Jobs, Same Old Salaries
Each month the Labor Department announces the creation of tens of thousands of new jobs.
And the announcements are greeted skeptically.
They are mostly part-time jobs or temporary day work, the skepticism goes.
Or they are low-wage jobs in fast-food restaurants and in health care.
All of this was true.
But lately the mix has got much richer.
Now, a lot of the new jobs are higher status, with better pay and often with benefits.
These happy statistics, which are just now showing up clearly on government ledgers, give the Clinton Administration something to crow about.
For many thousands of skilled people who sought work but could not find suitable jobs, opportunities are opening up.
But for the nation as a whole, the standard of living is not likely to rise anytime soon.


Science in the Laboratory of the Imagination
To test the brain's power to detect the most elusive of patterns, psychologists give people strings of binary numbers and ask them to predict which digit -- one or zero -- will be next in line.
Almost instinctively, the subjects come up with rules to explain the sequences.
Two zeroes are followed by three ones, three zeroes by two ones. . . .
And when the rules break down, they revise them.
Then they revise the revisions, and the revisions of the revisions.
Little do they know that the digits are actually being generated at random by the electronic equivalent of flipping a coin.
So strong is this hunger for pattern that we see it even when it isn't there.
The canals of Mars, the man in the moon -- scientists have learned how easily the brain can be fooled by its own shadow.
In the last two weeks, two announcements have made front-page news: the discovery of a planetary system 1,500 light-years away, and strong evidence (it's not yet called a discovery) of a long-predicted particle called the top quark.
In both cases, the discoveries were made by analyzing patterns of data so subtle that part of the challenge was to guard against the possibility of self-delusion, of seeing pictures in the clouds.


Editorial Notebook; Notes From a Funeral
On Tuesday, the day before President Nixon's funeral, a reporter who covered him years ago took leave of Yorba Linda and journeyed southward to San Clemente, where Mr.
Nixon had vacationed during the good times and repaired his shattered psyche during the post-Watergate bad times.
La Casa Pacifica, Mr.
Nixon's Spanish-style retreat, is now in private hands.
What was once the Western White House is now simply the grandest dwelling in a walled and gated development called Cypress Shores, and its owner does not welcome snoopers like me.
The visitor is definitely welcome, however, at La Casa Romantica, a downtown villa that once belonged to Ole Hanson, the Wisconsin Swede who founded San Clemente in 1925.
The villa houses two tiny rooms belonging to the San Clemente Historical Society -- the Ole Hanson Room and the Richard Nixon Room.
They are lovingly tended by Dorothy Fuller, the society's president, and Betty Weatherholtz, who once worked as a waitress at a local eatery and who recalls people in the Nixon entourage by numbers on the menu.
Frank Gannon, a Nixon speechwriter, was No. 4 -- "eggs over easy with toast"; David Eisenhower was No. 7 -- "scrambled with bacon."


First Time In Playoffs And Sharks Stunning
Sharks 3, Red Wings 2
Jamie Baker's luck kept the San Jose Sharks the darlings of the National Hockey League last night.
It also left the Detroit rookie goaltender Chris Osgood devastated.


Weddings; Ruthann Tormey, Sean M. Martin
Ruthann Cardiff Tormey, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Tormey Sr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Sean Michael Martin, a son of Catherine J. Martin of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Gerald F. Martin Sr.
The Rev.
Bryan Dalton performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ambrose in Deerfield Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Martin was until recently the director of graduate services at Keiser College in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
She graduated from Guilford College and received a master's degree in education from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.


Weddings; Jennifer Stewart, Keith Szarabajka
Jennifer M. Stewart, the daughter of John G. Stewart of Rumson, N.J., and the late Helen Markel, was married yesterday to Keith Szarabajka, a son of Jackie and Edward W. Szarabajka of Chicago.
The Rev.
Lawrence Dunn, a nondenominational chaplain at the University of California at Los Angeles, performed the ceremony in Toluca Lake, Calif., at the home of Arlene and Joe Mantegna, friends of the couple.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College.
Her father, who is retired, was a staff assistant in the special projects and marketing department at The New York Times.
Her mother was an editor at McCall's magazine in New York.
Ms.
Stewart's grandfather the late Lester Markel was Sunday editor of The Times from 1923 until 1964.
He created separate magazine and book review sections as well as the Travel, Arts and Leisure and Week in Review sections.


F.Y.I.
Bird's-Eye View of Rats Q. A friend told me that owl boxes had been installed in Central Park a few years ago to help control the rat population, which surprised me.
I once heard that when the Parks Department is asked about bringing in owls to eat the rats, they always say no way, because they think the owls would also try to prey on small dogs.
I'm confused and worried.
A.
No birds are going to swoop down on your terrier.
There are indeed owls in Central Park that have migrated there naturally, and though they likely swoop down from time to time for a rodent snack, the Parks Department has not put up owl boxes, little nooks designed to attract owls for nesting, in years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-20  U.S.
PONDERS RWANDA ACTION  The Clinton Administration was discussing whether to help African countries organize some kind of intervention to stop the killing in Rwanda as rebels prevented thousands of refugees from leaving. 1  FOR SOUTH AFRICA, PRAGMATISM  Nelson Mandela, South Africa's president-in-waiting, is above all else a practical man who does not allow his feelings to distract him.
For a half century, his goal has been to end white rule. 1


Guinier and Madison
To the Editor:
Yes, Barry R. Gross (letter, April 22), I've reread the Federalist paper No. 10 today and find that Lani Guinier's ideas accord well with James Madison's prescription for preventing a majority from overwhelming the rights of the minority.


Giuliani Pledges to Investigate Man's Death in Police Custody
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani promised an investigation yesterday into the death of a Staten Island man in police custody, and he moved to calm tensions in the face of assertions that the man was beaten to death.
Mr.
Giuliani went to Staten Island Borough Hall to meet with the man's relatives and pleaded for patience.
A preliminary autopsy report did not establish the cause of the death of the 22-year-old man, identified as Ernest Sayon, the Medical Examiner's Office said.


Department Of Omission
To the Editor:
Alex Witchel's article on "Beauty and the Beast" mentioned nearly everyone connected with the production -- composer, lyricists, actors, director, producers, studio executives, designers, technicians, theater owners, general managers -- but omitted the author of the musical book.
Her name is Linda Woolverton.
PETER STONE  New York The writer is president of the Dramatists Guild.


An Updated Guide
What's lighter than a calculator and fits easily into wallet or pocket?
The latest Ruesch International Foreign Currency Guide, a slender, information-packed pamphlet.
In addition to advice on tipping in various countries, the one-page guide lists time zones, currency import-export restrictions and conversion rates as of March 1, 1994, for 24 countries, from Australia to Switzerand.


Weddings; Lynn D. Rosen, Theodore Karkus
Lynn Debra Rosen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Rosen of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., was married last evening to Theodore William Karkus, the son of Carolyn Bauer of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
Harvey Karkus of New York.
Rabbi Joel Zion performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Cause for Celebrations in Brooklyn


Teachers Ready to Receive Environmental Training
WITH Earth Day recently past, it's not surprising that environmental issues and concerns remain in many people's thoughts.
But when the celebrations and special events have ended, it is also not surprising that environmental awareness tends to recede.
To insure that environmental concerns are observed on more than one day a year, the Environmental Partnership has begun the Teacher's Institute for Sustainable Development, which will be held on the campus of Sarah Lawrence this August.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Whale of a Horse
OLD Brookville may be home to the world's largest horse.
At least the largest Belgian horse.
But how to prove it?
Weighing a horse the size of Mike, a Belgian who arrived at the Red Barn boarding and training stables in December, takes some doing.
"He was weighed about a year ago," the Red Barn manager, Bob Lechner, said.
At a truck stop.
"You weigh the truck or trailer first, empty. Then you weigh the trailer with Mike in it. Subtract the difference and you have the weight of the horse."


An Italian Hand With French Fare
IN Westport, the proprietors of Sol e Luna, a successful Italian restaurant, have created a French place, Brasserie St.-Germain, in a freestanding red brick building that has seen more than its share of restaurants in years past.
Not only is the two-tier dining room appealing -- if austere, with bare wood floors, beige walls, and table tops that simulate wine cases -- but much of the food evokes the brasserie spirit.
The same spirit (and food) can be found in a second room (to the left of the entry), where there are a few tables and display cases of pastries and take-out items. (The room is open from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M. for coffee and pastry service.)


Veterans Under an Atomic Cloud
ALL Edmund Burke wants is the facts, he says.
Mr.
Burke, an Air Force veteran who lives in Norwalk, has lost a lung and part of his windpipe to cancer.
The disease, he says, resulted from his exposure to high doses of radiation in 1957 during Operation Miami Moon, a series of Air Force radiation-sampling missions supporting British nuclear-weapons tests in the South Pacific.
Mr.
Burke, 59, is no longer able to work.
But the United States Department of Veterans Affairs denied the disability claim he filed four years ago, on the ground that the nuclear tests were conducted by the British rather than the United States.
The veterans agency also said it doubted that Mr.
Burke's cancer was caused by what it called low doses of radiation to which he was exposed.


Political Notes; Campaigner to His Foe: Leave Politics Out of This
City Councilman Thomas K. Duane of Manhattan has yet to formally declare his challenge to Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, but already their Democratic primary is shaping up as the kind of fight that only the West Side could love.
Mr.
Duane has sent a letter to supporters accusing the Congressman of that ultimate liberal sin: talking from both sides of his mouth.
Mr.
Duane's complaint: in the year-end Congressional newsletter sent at taxpayer expense to constituents in Manhattan -- where the Eighth District snakes from the Battery to Grant's Tomb along the Hudson River -- Mr.
Nadler touted his support for abortion rights and gay men and lesbians in the military.
But in his letter to constituents in Brooklyn -- where the heart of the district is the Orthodox Jewish enclave of Borough Park -- Mr.
Nadler employed softer passages opposing hate crimes against homosexuals and supporting money to fight AIDS.


The World; Mr. Clinton Will See You, But He Won't Meet You
Helmut Kohl got lunch at a Georgetown restaurant.
Salman Rushdie qualified only for a hallway hello.
And the Dalai Lama of Tibet rated no more than a Presidential "drop by."
What's the difference?
For those who analyze the comings and goings of White House visitors, a world of subtext lurks between the fine gradations on the scale of protocol.
But where do they draw the line?


IN SHORT: FICTION
BRITISH SHORT STORIES  FINE FEATHERS  And Other Stories.
By E. F. Benson.
Selected by Jack Adrian.
Oxford University, $23.


A Film Festival Celebrates Street Life
IS street life synonymous with urban decline?
The 33 entries in a film and video festival called "Streetlife: Exposing the Naked City" serve to "challenge that notion," says Eric T. John, the festival director.
The two-day event at New York University School of Law will be sponsored by City Lore, a nonprofit organization.
A panel discussion is scheduled for Friday on issues raised by the films.
The films will be shown the next day.
Produced by independent film makers, the films are in categories from hip-hop culture to street politics.


'A Fun Deal' in Fresh Air
Arnold, who is 8, lives with his sister Joy, 7, and his cousin, Tabitha, also 7, in Rockaway Point, Queens.
Last summer Joy and Tabitha spent two weeks in New Hampshire and Arnold spent two weeks in Massachusetts, thanks to the Fresh Air Fund.
They all had a swell time.
Just why they had a swell time is a bit hard to determine: like most small children, they are unskilled at the art of the interview.
But Tabitha talks about playing hide-and-seek with her host family's three children, riding a mountain bike and swimming "on hot days." On the whole, she concludes, "I had a fun deal." Arnold also speaks of riding a bike, playing with toys and "going for ice cream and to the park" with his hosts' two children and their uncle.


Wanted: A Fortune Teller for 33d Street; Garden's President Revels in Playoffs While Considering His Future
Bob Gutkowski sits at the brink of fulfilling his executive dream but at the edge of a corporate precipice.
The president of Madison Square Garden can envision the Knicks and the Rangers, who each face playoff opponents today, fulfilling the promise of their regular seasons by winning championships.
"It's the first time since I've been here that both franchises are so strong," said Gutkowski, who joined the Garden as the president of the MSG Network in 1985.
"It enhances the excitement."


Weddings; Alan Silverstone and Janice Glaser
Janice Ellen Glaser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Glaser of Silver Spring, Md., is to be married today to Alan Barry Silverstone, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Silverstone of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargel will perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride is the owner of International Business Link, a business development concern in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
Her mother, Eileen Glaser, and father are retired hoteliers.


Terry Greenberg, Kenneth Starr
Terry Ellen Greenberg, the director of client services at Austin Knight Advertising, was married last evening to Kenneth Lloyd Starr, a senior training specialist at the American International Group, the insurance and financial services company.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl officiated at the Mansion in White Plains.
Mrs.
Starr, 35, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is the daughter of Betty L. Greenberg of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Frederic G. Greenberg.
Her father was a senior partner in Clairence Rainess, an accounting firm formerly in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of Ancell's World of Interiors, a home furnishings store in White Plains.


Fighting Dragons, Writing Musicals
IN HER SHINY BROWN BOB, LONG WHEAT skirt, sand-colored sweater, white socks, loafers and perfect posture, Polly Pen could be Lewis Carroll's Alice grown up.
The Victorian quality doesn't stop there.
Ms.
Pen's latest music-theater piece, "Christina Alberta's Father," is based on an H. G. Wells novel that begins near the turn of the century in England.
An earlier work, "Goblin Market," was a musical adaptation of Christina Rossetti's poem of the same name that won Ms.
Pen and her co-author, Peggy Harmon, much critical praise in 1985.
This time, Ms.
Pen, who is also an actress, is on her own: book, music and lyrics are all hers for the story of an independently minded young woman and her visionary father, Albert Preemby, that opens on Wednesday Off Broadway at the Vineyard Theater, which commissioned it.
Andre Ernotte, who directed "Goblin Market" for the Vineyard, is the director.


Method And Madness; Our Cousins' Keepers
I go out of my way to avoid treading on ants since each is a member of an ancient and intricate society.
I hesitate to brush aside a spider's web, knowing the craft that has gone into its weaving.
But a cow is just a cow: it exists because someone wants to eat it, just as chinchillas are raised to become fur coats and white rats are bred to run mazes.
Given the distinction between wild and domestic, it's hard not to be irked by the animal rights movement, which seems to rate animals by their size and furriness rather than their role in nature.
In the movement's eyes, all fur is equally wrong, whether it comes from wild animals caught cruelly in leg-hold traps or minks raised luxuriously on farms.
Apart from the current series of ads that picture unattired young women protesting they'd rather go naked than wear fur, it's hard to see much that is attractive emerging from this absolutism.


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Major League II  Charlie Sheen, Tom Berenger, Corbin Bernsen Directed by David S. Ward PG 105 minutes


The Executive Computer; On the Battlefield of the Chips, a Test of Brand Loyalty
THINK of it as the Chiquita banana label for computer chips.
Despite having a near monopoly, the Intel Corporation has spent the last few years and several million dollars on an advertising campaign aimed at its customers' customers, persuading them to specify PC's with genuine Intel chips on board.
The "Intel Inside" logo is now ubiquitous in computing magazines, and, plastered atop Intel's headquarters in Santa Clara, Calif., a sign to air travelers that they are indeed about to land in Silicon Valley.


The Last Word on Harvard
To the Editor:
Regarding your chronicling of the hard times that have befallen some of my Harvard contemporaries and the letters responding to it ("The Humbling of the Harvard Man," March 6; Letters, April 3), I should point out that not all of us avoid reality.
Upon arriving for my 25th reunion, many classmates told me I should not have written in the class of 1960 report that I was "unemployed." Rather, they insisted, I should have stated that I was a consultant.


BOMBS AWAY!
Imagine my surprise when I saw silver listed up there, with such really big hitters as cadmium, mercury, asbestos, PCB's and plutonium, as a hazardous material, especially since I was eating a grapefruit with a silver-plated spoon ("Bombs Away!" April 3)!
High silver-metal intake causes a blue-gray skin condition, argyria or argyrosis, without any other toxic manifestations.
Silver salts, like argyrol, are commonly used to kill microorganisms.
Only the soluble compound silver nitrate is cited as a potential poison: when swallowed it can produce gastroenteritis and, in a large enough dose, it can be fatal.
Can silver hold a candle to other materials used in these weapons?


Interface; A Recital Hall on Wheels
DRIVING my friend's new Ford, I bumped right into virtual reality.
No, I didn't hit anything -- except a button on the radio.
And suddenly I had a cathedral inside the car.
All right, let's back up a bit.
The cathedral was imaginary, but the button was real.
It activated the D.S.P. (digital signal processing) -- the latest frill in car stereo, which creates illusory acoustic environments within the vehicle.
The cathedral is one of the options.
Others include a concert hall, an opera house, a nightclub and a stadium.
An acoustic semblance of all these venues can be slipped inside that Ford at a single touch.


Two Bullies
To the Sports Editor:
Everyone seems to think that Jim Everett is owed a sincere apology by Jim Rome for the ESPN
talk-show host goading him into turning over a table by calling him "Chris Evert." What about Chris Evert?
She is the one who has been profoundly insulted here.


If and When; From the Pall of Sarajevo to the Shore of Who Knows Where
If Somalia, why not Bosnia?
If Bosnia, why not Rwanda?
Or the Sudan?
Or Haiti?
Or Afghanistan?
Five years after the grand retreat of Communism, the list of plausible candidates for military intervention grows ever longer.
Yet neither President Clinton nor other Western leaders have articulated a clear standard for distinguishing among victims of brutality and aggression.


April 24-30; Japan's New Prime Minister


Weddings; Mary J. Rotanz, John A. Thornton
Mary Jeanne Rotanz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Rotanz of Watchung, N.J., was married yesterday to John Aubrey Thornton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Thornton of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Bergen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan.
The bride, 32, is an advertising sales regional manager for Inc. magazine in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.


Evening Hours; The Met Honors A Generous Friend
A tribute to Richard H. Jenrette, the chairman of the Equitable Companies, for aiding historic preservation, April 21.


Texas Bets That Horses Will Outrun Income Tax
Texas has more horses than any other state, and Texans have long prided themselves for fearlessly facing down big odds.
So it has been something of a historical oddity that ever since state lawmakers banned wagering in 1937, there has been no big-league horse racing anywhere in Texas.
All that changed in a big way this weekend with the opening here of the Sam Houston Race Park, an $84 million state-of-the-art extravaganza that represents Texas's foray into big-time racing and gambling.


BCG Is Wrong Vaccine for Tuberculosis
To the Editor:
I agree with Dr.
Ezra Greenspan (letter, April 17) that we sorely need a vaccine for tuberculosis, but unfortunately that vaccine is not BCG.
If we were to follow his advice and vaccinate "all our children immediately," we would be insuring an unparalleled public health disaster that would inevitably compound and magnify the current epidemic of TB.


Not-Too-Fancy Carpets Can Be Shampooed With Machines
SPRING is a traditional time to clean carpets and rugs.
They need frequent minor cleaning the year-round, but also benefit from deep cleaning annually or every 18 months.
Leave the care of antique, hand-knotted and other fragile rugs to experts.
Most people can maintain and deep-clean wool and synthetic carpeting.
At least once a week, sweep or vacuum rugs and carpets to prevent dirt from becoming embedded.
Use a power-brush or beater-brush attachment.
They have rollers to sweep and comb the carpet.


Air Force Academy Zooms In on Sex Cases
Over the last year, as the Navy has reeled under the Tailhook scandal, the Air Force Academy here has been facing up to its own sexual harassment crisis.
But the reaction, and the results, could hardly be more different.
Since February 1993, when a female freshman at the Air Force Academy here told the campus authorities that several young men had sexually assaulted her outside the cadet gymnasium, a dozen other women have stepped forward to lodge complaints ranging from date rape to fondling.


Vote Count Starts Ever So Slowly in South Africa
With considerable early confusion and no certain results, the people of South Africa watched expectantly today as the vote counting began in their first fully democratic elections.
The results, which will take days to tally, are expected to bring the election of Nelson Mandela, the former political prisoner of the white regime, as the nation's first black president.


Drop Dead, Lewis Carroll: History's Rejection Slips
Writers (alive, dead and imaginary) were the entertainment at the Authors Guild Foundation benefit this spring, as five novelists and playwrights read rejection slips their distinguished predecessors or make-believe contemporaries might have received.
Here are excerpts.
Garrison Keillor  Dear Henry:
I tried to write to you out at the pond but the letter came back marked "No Such Address." Did you sublet?
Anyway, I hope this reaches you at your mom's house.


SURFACING
FASHION  Jute shoelaces: Oatmeal is a fashionable color this spring, and shoe designers like Kenneth Cole are playing off this back-to-nature trend by lacing shoes with twine.
COMMUNICATIONS  Call Return: Social neurotics are reveling in the latest telephone function, activated by pressing * 69, which allows you to call back the last person who called your number, whether the call was completed or not.


The Art of Being There
Robert Irwin belongs to that small corps of artists, scientists and philosophers who aspire to change the way we see the world.
His subjects are time and the experience of perception.
His materials are light, sound, scrim, string, dirt and space -- what he calls the incidental phenomena of the everyday.
Like the work of many of his contemporaries in the late 1950's, Mr.
Irwin's early canvases were gestural and abstract, though they rapidly evolved, by the early 1960's, into minimal paintings of subtle optical effect.
It was not until the early 1970's, having grown discontented with the material limitations of painting, that he changed his course.
Forswearing canvas and frame, studio and the gallery system, Mr.
Irwin retreated to the desert, where he began to conceive of the ephemeral, site-specific works that would drive his imagination for the next two decades.
Now the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles has mounted a traveling exhibition of Mr.
Irwin's art, for which it has produced an ambitious catalogue, ROBERT IRWIN (Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles/Rizzoli, paper, $40).
The entire project is not without a certain irony, however.
After all, as the journalist Lawrence Weschler points out in his evocative essay, Mr.
Irwin's art is all about the experience of being there, of seeing the work in situ, which is impossible given the secondary nature of photographs.
Indeed, because of the ineffable quality of Mr.
Irwin's art, it is hardly surprising that the book's photographs tell the reader little about the essence of the artist's vision.
Happily, however, the seven supporting essays more than compensate.
With one exception -- a droning, jargon-filled piece by the painter Jeremy Gilbert-Rolfe -- all are well written and brimming with insight, offering an invaluable record of this visionary artist's evolution.
ANDREA BARNET


Streetscapes/137 Riverside Drive (The Clarendon); Hearst's Opulent Quintuplex
THE corroding copper mansard on top of the building at 86th Street and Riverside Drive has long been a curiosity.
Now a co-op shareholder is sprucing up the 100-foot-long space into what will surely be one of the show apartments of New York.
But even completed, the new apartment will only be a small fraction of what it was in its original incarnation: the largest apartment in New York City, William Randolph Hearst's custom-built quintuplex.


The Guardians of the Vista: Riverdale Nature Preservancy
The Riverdale Nature Preservancy, a community group that has thrown its weight against a Jewish school's plan to expand a landmark mansion, has a long history of leaning its considerable heft against any project that would radically alter the Hudson River slope -- the wooded hillside of rock outcroppings and residences along old carriage paths that wind down to the river's edge.
The slope has been the special concern of the Preservancy since its not-for-profit predecessor, the Riverdale Community Planning Association, lobbied successfully in 1954 to have the area zoned so that its vistas across the Hudson to the Palisades would not be blocked.
From Spuyten Duyvil north to the city line, the zoning requires that residences be terraced, with apartment buildings atop the hill, garden apartments at the next level and private homes below.


Oldest Profession, Nicest Neighborhood
Reports of the arrests last week of two San Diego Padre players for soliciting a prostitute conjured up an unsurprising picture of the trade: streetwalkers, men cruising by, whispered negotiations over price.
But there's another, quieter version of the business, along the lines of the Mayflower Madam and Heidi Fleiss of Hollywood.
Experts say the majority of prostitutes aren't on the street; instead, they're hidden away in houses and apartments.
And, the experts say, they often favor the proper-looking town houses and doorman buildings on the East Side.


A Battle Lost, a Bridge Won
After two years of community opposition to plans to build a new psychiatric center at 165th Street just west of Riverside Drive, the ground has been cleared and construction is well under way.
But the battle was not for naught, say the center's defeated opponents as they wait for their consolation prize: a $2 million footbridge connecting Washington Heights to Fort Washington Park, a verdant, virtually unused 146-acre strip tucked away along the Hudson River under the George Washington Bridge.


SUNDAY, May 1, 1994; Bicycles Hit New Low
Low-rider automobiles, those elaborately customized pavement-hugging cars, have given rise to a two-wheeled descendant -- low-rider bicycles.
The bikes have been on the fringes of the car scene since the 1970's, many of them created by people who couldn't afford four wheels.
But lately the bicycles have been starring at their own shows.
Most are home-built by Chicano teen-agers in California, Texas, New Mexico and Colorado, as are the elaborately customized cars.
But lately the phenomenon has attracted some California skateboarders and surfers, who have also begun to favor the low bikes.


Wages of Treason: Detritus of a Traitor to Be Sold
There's a faded homburg hat and a silver cocktail shaker, a battered cigarette box and piles of books and papers -- citations from Soviet intelligence officials, an exchange of correspondence with a young field agent under cover in London, even the typed draft of a speech delivered inside K.G.B. headquarters 17 years ago.
Gathered for cataloguing inside Sotheby's here, these are the surviving personal effects of Harold Adrian Russell (Kim) Philby, arguably Britain's most infamous traitor.
As a high-ranking British intelligence officer, he spent the better part of two decades passing the West's most closely held secrets to the K.G.B, before fleeing to Moscow in 1963 just as he was about to be uncovered.


Talking Fiddleheads
Fiddlehead ferns epitomize vernal ephemera.
Coiled as they are like tiny watch springs, fiddleheads are a sign: edible when tight and young, they become, when fully unfurled, unfit for human consumption.
In this way, the loosening of the frond is tantamount to the tick of a clock.
The forager, with sights set on eating, races against the fiddlehead's unpredictable agenda.
Ferns thrive in the privacy of remote, marshy woodlands.
They are solitary, quiet and delicate, which may explain their paradoxical allure.
The flavor of a fiddlehead fern, you see, is the opposite of a shrinking violet's -- when young and tight, it has grassy and herbaceous tones, while at the same time the raw, searing impact of a barely cooked artichoke and the meaty reassurance of a hardy green bean.


Student Press Is Hamstrung, Report Says
High school newspapers around the country have lost financial support while school administrators increasingly censor their contents, according to a report presented here at the annual convention of the nation's newspaper publishers.
The report, by the Freedom Forum, an international journalism foundation, found that financial and editorial restrictions on high school newspapers have tightened since a similar study 20 years ago.
Even that study found widespread censorship and blandness.


Bradford Hu, Yuko Kuriyama
Bradford Hu, 30, and Yuko Kuriyama, 29, met in 1989 at Morgan Stanley in New York, where they are both investment bankers.
They were cordial colleagues until about two years ago, when they happened to have lunch together one day.
"I never saw her in anything other than a professional light," Mr.
Hu said.
"Then, the clouds parted."
As it turns out, they had a lot in common.
They are both diplomats' children who grew up all over the world: each of them can sleep through bad turbulence on airplanes and can speak multiple languages.


Yankees Walk Their Way To Victory
Jimmy Key was not pitching like himself for three innings, and Miguel Jimenez was pitching like a nifty rookie intent on humbling his hometown team.
It looked strange and it looked embarrassing for the Yankees.
But looks can be deceiving in the third inning.
They definitely were today.
Key gave up one run after a troubling first inning and continued to dominate in the month of April.
Jimenez, like so many erratic pitchers the Yankees have opposed on this trip, failed to throw strikes and saw his chances vanish.


Weddings; Stacy B. Simon, Steven I. Wolfe
Stacy Beth Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard E. Simon of New Rochelle, N.Y., is to be married today to Steven Ira Wolfe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Wolfe of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner is to officiate at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 27, is a broker at L. B. Kaye International Realty in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a real estate investor in New York.


Tastes Swing Back To Flavors of Naples
AMERICANS' love affair with Italian food began with the sunny tastes of the south, and the Bay of Naples in particular -- spaghetti with rich, red tomato sauce, linguine with clams, thick-crusted pizza with oregano.
Now, tiring of radicchio and carpaccio, many Italian-food eaters on both sides of the Atlantic are admitting to nostalgia for the flavors of the fertile slopes of Vesuvius.
Fortunately, travelers to the Naples area today can have it both ways -- robust ingredients handled in a sophisticated modern way.
If you stay away from bus groups and mandolin players, the restaurant scene is pretty good.
During a couple of brief trips last month to Naples and the Sorrento Peninsula, I tried a few of many wonderful places to eat and, just for fun, picked the ones where I would send the Clintons, were I an advisor, when they attend the meeting of the seven largest industrialized countries in Naples this coming July.
La Sacrestia
We'd first gone to top-rated La Sacrestia a few years ago and been enchanted.
We'd been enchanted by the view of the bay, the whimsical medieval-ecclesiastical decor (the name means sacristy) and lace doilies, and the food.
But this time many dishes listed on the menu were not available, and our waiter recited some unlisted dishes that were ex-trendy and banal (fillet with green peppercorns, for example).
The quality of the food, as well as the variety, had fallen a bit too.


The World; South Africans Take A Draught of Democracy
The four days of voting had just ended in this rural outpost and the election volunteers were sensing that the sweet labor of democracy must never end.
So they manned brooms at the schoolhouse polling place and began sweeping out the red dust tramped onto the premises by the voters.
The sweepers were reversing the swirl of all those once-powerless black South Africans who had converged so determinedly from the surrounding farm hills to roil the earth, red as dried blood, into a gritty bond with the liberation balloting.
"I wanted this," Edwin Nyatlo, a local schoolteacher, said fiercely of how well the multiracial voting went in South Africa's great moment of turning.
He was proud of the election team he led on a circuit-riding polling bus to some of the humbler towns here up country.
He was proud as they swept the grit back out onto the byways of a hated place once called Labowa -- one of the Potemkin townships created by the white oligarchy of apartheid to ghettoize the nation's black majority.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
BRIGHTON BEACH At first glance, it seems that the immigrant peddlers selling illegal medicines on Brighton Beach Avenue have gone.
But a closer look, the police say, reveals that the trade is thriving.


Exhibit Commemorates '69 Moon Landing
The Apollo XVI capsule that went to the moon and the quarantine trailer from which Apollo XI astronauts spoke to President Richard M. Nixon after the landing are two of the displays in a new exhibition covering the history of the 17 Apollo space missions at the U.S.
Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Ala.
The exhibition, which commemorates the 25th anniversary of the first manned moon landing on July 20, 1994, is to open May 7 and runs through the end of November.
Among the NASA items on display are a 363-foot-long Saturn-V rocket, the kind used in the moon launching; models of the lunar landing module and lunar rover, and emergency gear carried by the astronauts like sea dye markers and radio beacons.
The landing is also placed in its historical context with photo displays of Woodstock, Chappaquiddick and the first Big Mac.


NEW TYPE SIZE
Thank you, thank you for sharing with your readers the reaction to the new format.
I am delighted that you have decided to enlarge the print, and also that I was not the only one who struggled with the smaller type.
Rapidly approaching my 45th birthday, I was certain that my trouble with reading the new print was a function of age -- physically, in terms of eyesight, and emotionally, in terms of accepting change.
Aging may still be a problem, but now, at least, not when it comes to the Magazine.


. . . and the New Poor Dream of Escape
The Bowery has traditionally been a sanctuary for derelicts with futures as bleak as the nights they roam.
Now the area is filled with the poor of a different kind: recent Chinese immigrants with dreams of making it rich in America.
One block west of the Bowery, in an Elizabeth Street tenement, Liu Pen, a 19-year-old recent immigrant from Fujian, China, shares a one-bedroom apartment with nine others like him.
What he calls home is more like a shrunken army barracks.
Five bunk beds line the walls, jammed in tight.
The rent is $700 a month.
Each tenant pays $70.


A Stormy Port, Peaceful Today
STEPPING out of a station taxi onto the cobblestones of La Rochelle's Vieux Port, we want to exclaim, like the gushing American tourist in the film "Summertime" arriving in the Piazza San Marco, "Don't change a thing!" On our left the water glints in a harborful of tidy yachts and untidy fishing boats: behind us is a panorama of old russet-roofed houses; in front of us are two massive, ancient towers, one on each side of a narrow channel leading to the outer harbor and the Bay of Biscay.
As my husband, Max, and I stand among our suitcases and stare, a little boat putt-putts slowly home between these towers, with an oilskinned man in the bow loading lobsters into a tub.
The name on its stern is Nenuphar (water lily).
When we order poached grondin, a toothy pink sea monster, in the seafood restaurant Bistro Andre -- it is bad form in La Rochelle to serve any fish with its head cut off -- the waiter asks us eagerly, "Have you seen the new fishing port?" Of course not.
What Americans want to see the new anything in a town that so obviously begs the visitor to immerse himself in the Old World?


Weddings; Leona McGeady and Daniel Yin
Leona Harrison McGeady, a nurse, was married in Boston yesterday to Daniel Tei-Hwa Yin, an investment executive.
Both work in Boston.
The Rev.
Michael F. Groden performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Cecilia's Church.
Mrs.
Yin, 30, works in the burn/trauma unit of Brigham and Women's Hospital.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard X. McGeady of Westport, Conn.


Journal; An Inspector Calls
Everyone loves a thriller, and Broadway got a sensational one last week, with the arrival of Stephen Daldry's stunning production of "An Inspector Calls." Yet the most suspenseful drama unfolding around Times Square right now may be offstage, where real-life inspectors are infiltrating the shadowy Damon Runyonesque underworld of ticket scalping.
At stake is not only consumer confidence in the Broadway theater but also an all-cash criminal economy generating millions of untaxed dollars in the heart of Rudolph Giuliani's budget-crunched New York.
The star of this production is the politically ambitious G. Oliver Koppell, who is filling out Robert Abrams's term as New York State Attorney General and is up for election this fall.
Last month Mr.
Koppell began filing suits against flagrant out-of-state brokers who scalp Madison Square Garden events like the Big East basketball tournament and Barbra Streisand concerts.
Next thing he knew, Mr.
Koppell says, "everyone from parking attendants to partners in Wall Street law firms" was cheering him on to widen his inquiry.
Then "a number of people came forward as informants."


Weddings; Lisa A. Sheeler, John F. Duffy
Lisa Ann Sheeler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Sheeler of Norwood, N.J., was married yesterday to John Francis Duffy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Duffy of Bayside, Queens.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Ms.
Sheeler, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant vice president at Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark Inc., an investment management firm in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from Boston University.


About Women and Men and Trust
MEET Ata, victim of agoraphobia, overarticulateness, multiple allergies and other stresses.
And Bo, a professional intruder in the night who suffers from kinetic hysteria.
Now admit Ata and Bo to the American Theater's gallery of wily odd couplings.
"Women shouldn't shoot each other. Men shoot each other. Women relate," Ata protests when Bo comes at her with a gun.
"I have more problems than I should demographically have," Ata adds, shut in her pricey but bare apartment -- except for the litter of pizza boxes and Dr.
Pepper cans.


Vatican Ponders Church's Role in Africa
Some 300 African bishops have traveled to Rome to participate in an unusual synod that seeks to set Africa's 95 million Catholics on course for Christianity's third millennium.
What they have brought with them, though, is not so much the good news that the Roman Catholic Church wants them to spread back home, but rather their concerns about the conflicts between the continent's values and outsiders' faith.


Covert Business Surprises New Landlord
When Jeffrey P. Burack's real-estate company bought 412 East 88th Street in December, he thought he was simply getting a five-story apartment building in a nice Upper East Side neighborhood.
"It was my first big venture owning a building," he said.
But the novice landlord quickly learned that in the bargain he had also unherited an unexpected business: other tenants told him that Larry and Tiffany Chow were using two apartments for the Tender Passion 54 sex parlor, which advertised in Chinese newspapers.


Vote for Ashburn
To the Sports Editor:
Pete Cava and Paul Sandin made a most compelling case for the enshrinement of Gil Hodges in the Hall of Fame in "Hodges, Once a Met, Always a Dodger, Should be in Hall" (The Times, April 10).
But I think there is a more deserving candidate for immediate induction: Richie Ashburn.


Unwarranted Criticism of Japan
To the Editor:
How many times must we be treated to the standard jeremiad about the brilliant but evil Japanese bureaucrats ("The Men Who Really Run Fortress Japan," April 10)?
That these men "do not fit the stereotype that an American might have of a bureaucrat" suggests that the country does not have a very realistic understanding of how modern government works.
Americans apparently are mired in an attitude of throw the rascals out and with them the civil servants they appointed.
After all, this attitude reasons, we can always get another set to do these "simple" tasks.


Like Your Mom Said: Beware Sweet 'Serial' Ads
Cops and Robbersons  Chevy Chase, Jack Palance, Dianne Wiest Directed by Michael Ritchie PG 95 minutes


Weddings; Ellen B. Ball, Bruce Haimowitz
Ellen Beth Ball and Bruce Raymond Haimowitz, computer software engineers, are to be married today.
Rabbi Emily Lipof is to officiate at Temple Ohabei Shalom in Brookline, Mass.
The bride works in Waltham, Mass., for the International Business Machines Corporation.
She graduated from Rutgers University, from which she also received a master's degree in electrical engineering.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Ball of Wellington, Fla.


Be Patient. Plants Need Time to Recover.
ONE of the hollies looks rather strange this spring.
It is green at the bottom where the snow protected it, but it appears to be quite dead at the top.
The upper parts of the holly are mere sticks, shorn of leaves, poking up into the air.
This particular holly, Nellie R. Stevens, has been in place for three years.
It was doing quite well, until this winter.
Then truth had it out.


Weddings; Mindy Weichselbaum, Michael Meade
Mindy Jana Weichselbaum, a daughter of Lori-Ann and Franklyn Weichselbaum of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Michael Spencer Meade, a son of Arlene and Kermit Meade of Pine Brook, N.J.
Rabbi Jerrold M. Levy performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Meade, 26, is a member of the New York Bar.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is the treasurer and chief financial officer of the Boca Raton Capital Corporation, a venture capital company in Boca Raton.


Editors' Note
An article on page 38 of The Times Magazine today about Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, identifies Lawrence A. Pezzullo as head of the Haiti Working Group at the State Department.
On Tuesday, after the magazine went to press, the Clinton Administration forced Mr.
Pezzullo to step down.


Vonnegut Musical Plays Library in Chappaqua
IN a world where next to nothing comes for free," here's Eliot Rosewater, king of philanthropists and saints on earth, do-gooder extraordinaire and just a gee-whiz kid who wants to save people, hates shallowness and wishes the Government would "divide things equally among the newborn." He will hand a poet $50,000 with the proviso: "Go write truth."
The book world won't forget Eliot, a true hero of "God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater, or Pearls Before Swine," the 1965 novel in which Kurt Vonnegut misanthropically embraces the human race.
But the theater world knows little of "God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater," the musical, a one-month Off Broadway commercial casualty of 1979 following a promising 12-performance showcase run in a nonprofit Off Off Broadway theater.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SOUTHERN NOVEL  TUSCALOOSA By W. Glasgow Phillips. Morrow, $20.


Just Your Garden-Variety Chaos; Quick-Change Crews Juggle Rings, Hoops and Skates
If it's Sunday, that must be a basketball court.
No, a hockey rink.
No, wait.
Aren't those big hay-chomping, champion-distance-spitters over there the circus elephants?
It has been a confusing weekend at Madison Square Garden, what with two basketball games, a hockey game and four circus shows in little more than 48 hours.


Small Airlines Expand Into Routes Others Shed
As some of the country's largest airlines shed unprofitable routes and shrink capacity, smaller carriers continue to expand.
Southwest Airlines (800) 435-9792, for example, is planning to expand in the West and Northwest this summer following its acquisition late last year of Morris Air, a Salt Lake City-based start-up that modeled itself after Southwest.
New service beginning in June includes routes from the San Francisco area to Seattle, Spokane and Portland, as well as Santa Ana in Orange County, Calif.


Letters Signed by First Ladies Supply Insights Into the Past
IN a large room filled with contemporary paintings, tall ceramic vases and whimsical sculptures, a photograph of Hillary Rodham Clinton is prominently displayed.
Her blond hair loosely pulled back, she appears serene but purposeful in this portrait, which sits on a table at the entrance to Dolly Maass's living room here.
For 44 years, Mrs.
Maass has collected letters from First Ladies, but she has yet to acquire one from Mrs.
Clinton.
Mrs.
Maass, 71, does own letters from Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter, Pat Nixon, Nancy Reagan and Barbara Bush in a collection that includes 320 letters from the wives of 39 Presidents.
She began to acquire letters in the 1950's because her father, Richard M. Lederer Sr., a banker and gentleman farmer in Scarsdale and Pleasantville, was an avid collector of bank checks signed by Presidents and signers of the Declaration of Independence, and her husband, Richard, was "up to his neck" in collecting historical documents and books.


Echoes From the Past
To the Editor:
Having seen Anna Deavere Smith perform her "Fires in the Mirror," I don't question Vincent Canby's favorable review of her new work, "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992"  [ "A Riveting 'Twilight,' " April 3 ] .
But Mr.
Canby acknowledges that "only one other interviewer (Studs Terkel) has ever managed to record" the "spontaneous testimony" of ordinary people "in this depth," and thereby neglects Terkel's teacher, Danilo Dolci.


Nine Is Enough
To the Sports Editor:
If the Masters organizing committee thinks that one more sponsor and 12 more minutes of commercials per hour is not the way to go, then rather than attacking the committee for not showing the front nine, Anderson should be praising its sense of maintaining the integrity of the telecast.
The committee is right.
There is nothing more exciting than the last nine holes of the Masters.
DEMETRIOS G. XISTRIS  Larchmont, N.Y.


On Vacation With Pets
"It's not for everyone," said Eileen Barish of her new book, "Vacationing With Your Pet!" But for those, like Ms.
Barish, who enjoy traveling with their dogs or cats, her 410-page book lists more than 10,000 pet-friendy lodgings in the United States.
In fact, 25 percent of all hotels, motels, inns and bed and breakfasts allow pets, according to Ms.
Barish, who travels regularly with Rosie and Maxwell, her two 60-pound golden retrievers.
And while some pet-friendly pads are predictable -- notably most branches of large chains, like Journey's End, Holiday Inn and Days Inn -- others are less so, like the Ritz Carlton in Boston and the Jefferson in Washington.
Traveling with pets is no different than traveling with young children, Ms.
Barish said, "Except some bed and breakfasts accept pets more readily than children." Books cost $14.95, plus $3.75 shipping.
To order, call (800) 496-2665 or write Pet-Friendly Publications, Post Office Box 8459, Scottsdale, Ariz. 85252.
TERRY TRUCCO


Game's Most Overlooked Superstar Proves His Grit Yet Again
Who, among current players, will be going all the way to Cooperstown?
Dave Winfield? Kirby Puckett? Cal Ripken? Roger Clemens? Tony Gwynn? Wade Boggs?


Joseph C. Fitzpatrick, Art Teacher, 85
Joseph C. Fitzpatrick, an art teacher whose students included Andy Warhol and Philip Pearlstein, died on Friday at the Elk Haven Nursing Home in St.
Marys, Pa.
He was 85 and lived in Pittsburgh.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said a friend, Marlene Harris.


James J. Kriegsmann; Theatrical Photographer, 85
James J. Kriegsmann, a theatrical photographer in New York for 60 years, died on Friday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 85.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife of 50 years, Eugenie.


He Who Once Rebuilt New Haven
IN the 50's and 60's, when many older American cities were crumbling, Mayor Dick Lee of New Haven knew what to do.
During eight consecutive two-year terms from 1953 to 1969, he established a national reputation as a visionary of urban renewal, with a Midas touch to back it up.
He was the man who could go down to Washington, on a first-name basis with John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson, and return with thick bundles of Federal money for projects he had dreamed up for New Haven, mostly involving tearing down old buildings and getting someone in the private sector to put up new ones.
He supervised the building of two new public high schools and a dozen elementary schools and was an early proponent of putting up cluster housing that low-income families could buy rather than rent.


Be Patient. Plants Need Time to Recover.
ONE of the hollies looks rather strange this spring.
It is green at the bottom where the snow protected it, but it appears to be quite dead at the top.
The upper parts of the holly are mere sticks, shorn of leaves, poking up into the air.
This particular holly, Nellie R. Stevens, has been in place for three years.
It was doing quite well, until this winter.
Then truth had it out.


High Schools Mandating Community Service for Graduation
COMMUNITY service, performed without pay, is becoming increasingly familiar to high school students.
Schools are encouraging students to include service as part of their school experience.
Several Long Island districts have recently mandated service as a graduation requirement.
Others have added courses that include service in the curriculum.
Although there is no argument over youth involvement, the question of whether to mandate service for high school students has encountered mixed responses.


Herbalife International Inc.(HERB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Whitney Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For newspaper publishers, an unmistakable voice.
THE chairmanships of industry trade associations usually go to those who, because of age or disposition, can convincingly carry the role of benign statesman.
That is the case in the newspaper industry, too.
And so it was, here the other day, that Charles T. Brumback, the newly elected chairman of the national newspaper publishers' group, chose his words carefully, seemingly trying to strike just the right posture.


Giant Industries Inc.(GI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


And on the Seventh Day, Rangers Roar and Rout Capitals
Picking up almost where they left off after a week of rest, the Rangers opened the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs last night with a convincing 6-3 victory over the Washington Capitals at Madison Square Garden.
Brian Noonan had two goals for the Rangers, and the others were scored by Stephane Matteau, Brian Leetch, Greg Gilbert and Mark Messier.
The Capitals showed much more effort than the Islanders did when the Rangers swept them in four consecutive games late last month in the first round.


Grupo Mexicano de Desarollo (GMD.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Old National Bancorp (OLDB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bulls' Strategy: Keep the Pressure on Price
Bulls 105, Cavaliers 96
The Chicago Bulls are ganging up on the undermanned Cleveland Cavaliers and their best remaining offensive weapon -- Mark Price.
Rotating in fresh players and sending defenders from all angles, Chicago once again shut down the sharp-shooting point guard and posted a 105-96 victory yesterday.
The Bulls lead, 2-0, in the three-of-five-game Eastern Conference playoff series.


Conseco Inc.(CNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Threat to Welfare Reform
President Clinton pledged to turn welfare into a system that puts parents to work rather than one that sends them checks.
But Congressional resistance to taxes is driving him to cut his proposal by almost half.
What is left still makes sense.
But the bill the White House is preparing to send to Congress later this month will not transform the culture of welfare anytime soon, let alone "end welfare as we know it."
Even Mr.
Clinton's shaven initiative will hit opposition in Congress, especially from conservaties who will fight to lop off even more items.
But Mr.
Clinton has already bent too far; any more concessions threaten to turn welfare reform into welfare folly.


Victims Use Photos to Identify Silver-Gun Carjacking Suspect
The Silver Gun Carjacker, a fugitive wanted in eight recent armed robberies of elderly and frail Queens residents who were accosted or attacked after being followed home from banks, has acquired an identity -- and with it, a history of similar crimes dating back nearly 10 years.
The 27-year-old suspect, Gerald Jerome, was identified by robbery victims from a bank-camera photograph and by Queens robbery detectives, who matched the bank's picture with photos in his criminal record.
He remains at large after failing to appear in a Brooklyn court on an unrelated charge last week.


Reform Spelling and Take Away History
To the Editor:
Edward Rondthaler of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., has devoted much of his life to a campaign "to clear up the whims of spelling by adopting a more phonetic version of English" (news article, April 23).
There are no spelling bees in other countries, Mr.
Rondthaler observes, because they aren't needed.


Review/Music; Mariss Jansons Colors the Philharmonic
Mariss Jansons's visit to the New York Philharmonic on Friday night helped make a program, on paper prosaic, into something of real interest.
Mr.
Jansons, a Latvian conductor, has been edging from the confines of the former Soviet Union for the past 15 years, first in Oslo and more recently with the St.
Petersburg and London Philharmonics.
Last week's concerts of Rossini, Rachmaninoff and Sibelius at Avery Fisher Hall represented his debut with the New York players.
In St.
Petersburg, Mr.
Jansons deals with a specific kind of music making: string-heavy, robust and darkly colored.
The New York Philharmonic is a virtuoso chameleon, willing to take on whatever appearance a talented and strong-minded leader asks it to.


Fisher Scientific Int'l (FSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


All Under One Roof: Stores and Education
Just down the escalator from Sunglass Hut International, sandwiched between Sox Etc. and the Wooden Bird, in a rotunda called East Broadway, there is a school taking root in the biggest shopping mall in America.
For several weeks, William Born, a Minneapolis high school senior, has been commuting here to the Mall of America for a course in mall management studies.
"I was expecting a mall school to be a real peon situation," he said, during a break in an afternoon lecture on how to start a mall copy business.
"I've been surprised there's a whole new field out here."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TOUGHENING RULES FOR GRADUATING
Starting this fall, every New York City high school student will be required to take advanced science and mathematics courses to graduate, while less challenging classes in those subjects will be eliminated, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced.
Educators said the change might be the most ambitious upgrading of academic standards ever undertaken by a major school system.
The initiative will affect more than 250,000 students, said Askia Davis, senior assistant to the Chancellor.
A1.


Vigoro Corp.(VGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Two Maxwell Pension Groups Sue Goldman Over Funds
Two pension funds for employees of companies controlled by Robert Maxwell have filed suits in a New York court seeking to recover money from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which handled several transactions for Mr.
Maxwell in the months before his death in November 1991.
According to complaints filed on Friday in New York State Supreme Court, Goldman, Sachs handled the sale on April 26, 1991, of 25 million shares of the Maxwell Communication Corporation owned by the pension funds and worth about $94 million to two Swiss companies controlled by Mr.
Maxwell.


Royal Ballet at the Met
The Royal Ballet of Britain is to perform a two-week season, from July 6 to 19, at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Highlights of the two weeks are to include Sir Kenneth MacMillan's last ballet, "The Judas Tree," and a new production of "The Sleeping Beauty" staged by Anthony Dowell, the director of the company, with sets by Maria Bjornson, who designed the Broadway production of "The Phantom of the Opera." The Royal Ballet is also to present Sir Frederick Ashton's "Dream," MacMillan's "Mayerling" and David Bintley's "Tombeaux." Tickets are $20 to $75 and will go on sale at the box office on May 22.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Univar Corp.(UVX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Israelis Say P.L.O. Isn't Ready for Governing
As Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization pressed to wrap up their negotiations by Wednesday, Israeli leaders said today that the Palestinians were not prepared to assume authority in the areas targeted for the start of their self-rule: the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
The criticism was rejected by an adviser to Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and it apparently had no effect on the commitment by both sides to end months of negotiating and finally sign a self-rule agreement on Wednesday in Cairo.


Superior Industries Int'l(SUP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cubans Have Their Place in the Sun


For Nets, Light Dim At End Of Tunnel
After all the things that have gone wrong for the Nets, it looked as if something was finally going to go right for them yesterday when the Knicks' Patrick Ewing picked up his second technical foul after an encounter with Derrick Coleman and was ejected with 5 minutes 21 seconds left in the first half.
Instead, the incident only served to fire up the fans in Madison Square Garden and inspire the Knicks, who went on to a 90-81 victory and a 2-0 lead in their opening-round playoff series.


National Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yafia Journal; A Sad Tangle of Love, Grief and Israeli Taboos
This is a story of two families thrust unexpectedly together and forced to navigate deep religious and ethnic divides.
It is about anger and fear, mistrust and resentment, abiding conflict and sudden death.


The Going Gets Tough And So Does Oakley
From the moment Patrick Ewing hit the runway and administered a furious kick to a metal gate, from the time the crowd was stirred into a frenzied rage, the playoff world the Knicks and Nets had known was inalterably changed.
It was not so much a basketball floor anymore, as much as it was a gladiator's court.
It was not a place for mouthing trash, for menacing stares, for In Your Face and Out of My Way.
The game was now about who could be ferocious without the fuss.
It was about who was tough, really tough, not Jim Rome tough.


An Early Warning Haunts Prudential
As Government investigators and lawyers continue to unravel the fraud scandal at Prudential Securities, a question keeps arising: Did senior executives ignore warnings 14 years ago about potential high-level corruption in the firm's partnership division, which is now at the heart of the biggest retail brokerage scandal in history?
The warnings came from a small group of midlevel executives at the firm, then known as Bache &amp; Company, who passed along information indicating that the head of their division, James J. Darr, may have accepted improper payments from clients while working for another firm.
An internal investigation at Bache cleared Mr.
Darr of wrongdoing, and the careers of several of his accusers quickly collapsed.


It's Round 2, So Why That Empty Feeling?
At the end of his first season as coach of the New Jersey Devils, Jacques Lemaire may have experienced his most powerful reminder that he was a long way from the corner of St.
Catherine and Atwater in Montreal.
His team had just barely survived a taut, memorable seven-game series with the Buffalo Sabres.
The Devils, having advanced beyond the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs for the first time in six years, were opening the Eastern conference semifinal series against Boston at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Close Race To Succeed A Senator From Ohio
Joel Hyatt, who is running to replace his father-in-law, Howard M. Metzenbaum, in the Senate, worked his way through a shopping center, shaking hands in the final days before Tuesday's primary election.
The Democratic entrepreneur, who founded a national chain of low-cost legal clinics, repeatedly introduced himself, but he is so well known from his years promoting Hyatt Legal Services on television that most people seem to know him already.


RPM Inc.(RPOW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


AirTouch Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Long Effect Is Seen From Truck Strike
Although the recently suspended strike by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters disrupted commerce for about three weeks, trucking executives and transportation experts said its effects were likely to last for years.
"Many of the shippers who shifted over are finding that the replacement companies are doing better work for them," said Steve Lewins, a transportation industry analyst for Gruntal &amp; Company in New York.
"I expect at least 10,000 teamsters will lose their jobs."


Dance in Review
'Symphonie Concertante' and 'Sinfonietta'  American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House


12 Serbs Dead In Two Fights With the U.N.
The Bosnian Serb authorities said today that nine Serbian soldiers were killed and four wounded on Friday in a clash with United Nations peacekeeping forces near the northern town of Tuzla.
A United Nations military spokesman in Sarajevo, Comdr.
Eric Chaperon, said a Nordic battalion with the peacekeeping force fired 72 shells at Bosnian Serb positions after coming under Serbian artillery, mortar and tank fire late Friday.
The shells were fired from the battalion's German-made Leopard tanks after a Serbian missile landed within a few feet of one tank, Commander Chaperon said.
There were no casualties among the United Nations soldiers.


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
A Rival for the N.F.L.?
CBS, which recently lost the right to broadcast National Football League games, is now exploring the possibility of taking part in a new football league that would begin play in the fall of 1995.
SportsMonday, C9.
Rich, Uneasy Foundations
The nation's foundations have never been in better financial health, but their visible well-being has stirred uneasiness as they prepare for the annual conference of the Council on Foundations opening today.
Page B1.
Learning at the Mall
Joining mall libraries, mall churches and mall police substations is yet another of the mall's ever-growing offerings: mall school.
Page B8.
Progress on Mideast Peace
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, in Syria, reported progress toward a pact with Israel.
Page A3.
Knicks Win the Hard Way
Patrick Ewing was ejected, but the Knicks took a 2-games-to-0 playoff lead over the Nets.
SportsMonday, C1.


N.R.A. Lobbied Hard To Keep Pigeon Shoot
To the Editor:
"The N.R.A.'s Indecent Attack" (editorial, April 26) explores the backroom political tactics of the National Rifle Association.
I recently witnessed these tactics firsthand, when the N.R.A. and other pro-hunting lobbyist groups gunned down legislation supported by a majority of Pennsylvania state representatives to outlaw the cruel practice of holding live pigeon-shooting contests.


Callaway Golf (ELY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aquila Gas Pipeline Corp.(AQP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Books of The Times; Novelist's Work and Death, Appraised by His Son
Shade of the Raintree  The Life and Death of Ross Lockridge Jr., Author of 'Raintree County'  By Larry Lockridge  Illustrated. 499 pages.
Viking. $27.95.


Less Strategic Now, Grenada Is to Lose American Embassy
Little more than a decade after the United States invaded Grenada, ousting a left-wing Government that Ronald Reagan said was turning the tiny Caribbean island into an outpost of Fidel Castro's Cuba, the Clinton Administration plans to close its Embassy there to save money.
With the end of the cold war, the Administration has decided that the island, which recently resumed diplomatic relations with Cuba, is of little strategic importance.


Fed Wants Us to Think It Fights Inflation; A Genuine Recovery?
To the Editor:
Your April 22 business section carries a brief article that gives added credence to the aphorism "there are lies, damn lies and statistics." Unless you can pierce the nuances to the raw figures, statistics can be dangerous to your economic health.


Critic's Notebook; Happily Ever After With AIDS
Last night's movie "A Place for Annie," a "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation on ABC, was about a pediatrics nurse adopting an H.I.V.-positive infant.
Or at least it seemed to be until its final moments, when prime-time sentimentality bordered perilously close on cruel hoax.
Lovely performances by Sissy Spacek, Mary-Louise Parker, Joan Plowright and S. Epatha Merkerson weren't quite enough to disguise serious shortcomings.
Written by the mother-and-daughter team of Cathleen Young and Lee Guthrie -- the sister and mother, respectively, of the actress Sean Young -- the story was inspired, ABC said, by the experience of an actual pediatrics nurse.
So it's sort of a docudrama, but let's not get into the more egregious failings of the form, things like putting the words of one Menendez brother into the mouth of the other.
The dishonesty and unsettling signals buried in "A Place for Annie" were more subtle.


Baltimore Bancorp (BBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Krystal Co. (KRYS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Bankers Life Holding Corp.(BLH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Libbey Inc.(LBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co. (CAS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CBS May Help Launch A Rival Football League
CBS has held discussions with a group claiming to represent a consortium of major advertisers about the possibility of launching a new Sunday afternoon professional football league in the fall of 1995, senior CBS executives said yesterday.
The CBS executives, including Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group, emphasized that the talks are still in preliminary stages.
But they acknowledged serious interest in the potential new league, which would be backed, its organizers have told CBS, by corporations like Federal Express, Anheuser-Busch and the Walt Disney Company.


An unusual agency switch raises questions about the fate of Miller Brewing's flagship account.
THE MILLER BREWING COMPANY has ended an unusual one-two review of an account by withdrawing an important new brand, Lite Ice, from Leo Burnett U.S.A. and awarding it to Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., which lost the brewer's flagship beer, Miller Lite, to Burnett in 1991.
The decision, announced on Friday, was significant beyond the billings involved, estimated at $30 million to $45 million, or the odd twin reviews.
It also raised speculation about the fate of the Miller Lite account, which, with $100 million in billings, ranked among the largest account shifts ever when it unexpectedly departed Backer Spielvogel for Burnett.


Stein Mart Inc.(SMRT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Market Place; Some hybrid drug companies are trying to have it both ways.
INVESTORS are familiar with giant brand-name drug companies like Merck, and are learning about the generic companies like Mylan that sell lower-priced versions of brand-name drugs.
But some analysts are more interested in the group of drug companies that sell both brand-name and generic drugs.
Merck is becoming such a company; it has moved quickly into the generic-drug business and could become a leading maker of these less-expensive drugs.


For Cubs, Home Is Where Losses Are
Rockies 6, Cubs 2
The Chicago Cubs dropped to 0-10 at Wrigley Field this season, matching the longest home losing streak in team history, when they fell by 6-2 yesterday to Howard Johnson and the Colorado Rockies.


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advocat Inc., Brentwood, Tenn., an initial public offering of 4.75 million common shares, four million in U.S.
Natwest.


Pritzker Prize Goes to French Architect for the First Time
Christian de Portzamparc, architect of the City of Music conservatory in Paris and a number of apartment buildings there, has been awarded the Pritzker Architecture Prize for 1994, it was announced today by the Hyatt Foundation, sponsors of the award.
Mr.
Portzamparc, who is 49 and lives in Paris, is the first French architect to receive the Pritzker Prize, widely considered architecture's most prestigious.
Born in Morocco in 1944, he is also the first Pritzker laureate of the generation that grew up after World War II.


Valcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
As Government investigators and lawyers unravel the fraud scandal at Prudential Securities, a question arises: Did senior executives ignore warnings 14 years ago about potential high-level corruption in the firm's partnership division, which is now at the heart of the biggest retail brokerage scandal in history?  [ Page D1. ]
Cigarettes labeled low in tar and nicotine may produce more of those substances than was thought, F.T.C. officials say.
Evidence indicates that the measurements carried out by tobacco company laboratories under F.T.C. supervision bear little relationship to how much nicotine and tar smokers inhale.  [ A1. ]


Viking Office Products Inc.(VKNG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mole's Case Complicates C.I.A.'s Quest for a Role
Reeling from the treachery of one of its own, the Central Intelligence Agency is also fighting a rear-guard action against adversaries in the United States Government.
As it begins to ask itself why it took nine years to unearth a mole for Moscow, Aldrich H. Ames, and to assess the damage from the worst spy scandal in its history, the agency is coming in for criticism of a kind not heard since Watergate-era investigations in Congress showed that the C.I.A. had spied on American citizens and plotted to kill foreign leaders.


Foolishness, From A to Z
This week House members will decide whether to turn Capitol Hill into a carnival.
They will decide whether the "A to Z" spending-cut plan, which a majority of them support, should come to the floor for a vote.
Under the bill, the House would engage in a 56-hour orgy of votes on any amendments proposed by individual members that would lower the deficit by cutting spending (no tax hikes allowed).
Its sponsors say the bill would allow individual members to get a public vote on pork-barrel projects that sneak their way into law as part of massive appropriations bills and which the leadership thereafter insulates from review.
Amendments would be debated for up to an hour and then voted on.
But once the 56 hours are up, the bill calls for voting each remaining amendment up or down without debate.


On Screen, An Artist Of Dance
"Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film" paid tribute to Merce Cunningham on Tuesday night in a program of film and conversation presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center at the Walter Reade Theater.
The inspired brainchild of Joanna Ney, the society's publicity director, the "Capturing Choreography" series began with spirited examinations of the careers of the Hollywood choreographers Herbert Ross, Jack Cole and Michael Kidd.
The program devoted to Mr.
Cunningham, followed by a weeklong festival of films and videos by and about the modern dance choreographer, was less a party than an intimate and unexpectedly poignant Socratic dialogue.
Mr.
Cunningham, who turned 75 this month, has played an important role in the shaping of American dance.
And the screenings are offering a glancing look at the history of the arts in 20th-century America, given Mr.
Cunningham's work with artists like John Cage, Jasper Johns, Nam June Paik, Robert Rauschenberg and Andy Warhol.
But the magic of Tuesday's program was the way both commentary and films got to the heart of the extraordinary output of a lifetime.


Fritz Cos. (FRTZ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of the Times; Garden Fans Get Into It
IT is best to let sleeping dogs lie.
If you awaken them, they start baring their teeth and baying at the moon.
I am referring here not to the New York Knickerbockers, but to their patrons in Madison Square Garden, who respond to injustice with typical New York paranoia and venom and menace.
New York aggression was in full evidence yesterday when the two home teams of the Garden, the Knicks and the Rangers, played home playoff games, although not exactly at the same time.
The Knickerbockers, with the help of some outraged decibels from 19,763 self-appointed referees, defeated the New Jersey Nets, 90-81, before the Rangers went out on the ice and beat the Washington Capitals, 6-3, in just your normal $2 million gross night.


Commonwealth Energy System (CES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Ditch Runs Through It
The Federal Government spent $30 million in the 1960's to turn central Florida's meandering Kissimmee River into a drainage ditch.
It will now cost $372 million to let it meander again and to compensate farming interests and property owners whose land will be submerged.
But the damage to Florida's wetlands, all the way down to the precious Everglades, has been even costlier.
The Kissimmee -- or C-38, as the ditch is designated by the Army Corps of Engineers -- flows south from Lake Kissimmee (near Orlando) into Lake Okeechobee, a huge expanse that feeds the Everglades.
The river originally wandered for 103 miles across thousands of acres of wetlands, but heavy flooding led to local pressure for straightening it into a 56-mile canal.
That stopped the flooding all right, but it deadened the river's nutrients and contributed to the deterioration of Okeechobee and the Everglades.


Christopher Gets Syrian Response to Israeli Peace Plan
After meeting with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that peace talks between Syria and Israel had reached a "new, more substantive phase" and that Mr.
Assad had presented new ideas in response to Israel's recent peace plan.
Mr.
Christopher declined to describe the details of the Syrian response.
But American officials appeared pleased that Mr.
Assad had paid serious attention to the Israeli proposal, which Mr.
Christopher presented to him in seven hours of talks this weekend.


CHRONICLE
Nonnie Moore may be leaving the world of fashion, but other people are becoming more entrenched in it.


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Onbancorp (ONBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Instrument Systems (ISY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Union Planters Corp.(UPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A British Mini-Series With Many Lives
"Prime Suspect," a television program that began as a writer's off-the-cuff invention at a lunch in London, has become an international success story that has reached into three other media -- four if you count T-shirts.
The British mini-series, about a determined, brilliant but brittle detective chief inspector named Jane Tennison, is now in the middle of its third set of episodes as part of the PBS "Mystery" series.
It has also been adapted for books and videos and may still be turned into a Hollywood film.


Golden Poultry Co.  (CHIK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


BOK Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Leggett &amp; Platt Inc.(LEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Ballet; Elevated Passion and Sexual Repression
Couples rarely promise to live happily ever after in James Kudelka's ballets.
They do, however, dance up a storm, working out their tensions in the kind of passionate virtuosity that defines "Cruel World," the dazzling Kudelka premiere that American Ballet Theater presented on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
It is a near-perfect ballet and a total triumph for Mr.
Kudelka, a 38-year-old Canadian who has oddly not received wide acceptance in New York until now.
Although he is the best classical choreographer to come out of the 1980's, it is as if he has needed the seal of approval from an internationally ranked company like Ballet Theater and a roaring ovation in a 4,000-seat house like the Met to confirm his fierce originality.


Review/Country; Carnegie Festival: Bluegrass and Rockabilly Finale
As the Carnegie Hall Folk Festival sailed to a smooth conclusion this weekend on a wave of country and bluegrass music, it left hanging some intriguing questions about where commercialism ends and purity begins in American music.
"A Country Hoot" on Saturday night, the series' final concert in the main hall, was headed by Ricky Skaggs, the Kentucky-born country star who with Emmylou Harris pioneered the music's new-traditionalist movement in the 1980's.
At the height of the boom, Mr.
Skaggs released four albums of bluegrass-flavored country-pop that each sold more than half a million copies.


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lear Seating Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Atlantis Group (AGH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dance in Review
Karen Bamonte Dance Works/Amphora  Bessie Schonberg Theater


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Construction Spending March Tuesday Leading Economic Indicators March Wednesday Auto Sales April Factory Orders March Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Employment April Consumer Borrowing March


Topics of The Times; Theatre Verite
Once upon a time in Greenwich Village there was a production of "Dracula" that featured a bat flying out over the audience.
Never mind that it was made of papier-mache; never mind that it was tethered to a wire.
When that thing swooped, the audience ducked.
The audience ducked, too, during the far grander Broadway production of "Phantom of the Opera." O.K., so the descending chandelier did come to a rather conspicuously grinding halt.
Even so, it provided a scary moment or two.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11 A.N.C. AHEAD IN SOUTH AFRICA
The African National Congress estimated from early returns that it had won a solid victory, while the National Party of the current President appeared to have secured its future as the second party.
A1


Work Release Limit Punishes Inmates Twice
To the Editor:
In an election-year effort to show toughness on crime, New York State legislators have limited prisoners' access to work release.
While work release can use reform, this action levies additional punishment on prisoners who most deserve a break.


Boston Edison Co. (BSE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mood Remains Uneasy After a Death on Staten Island


Donald Harden, 92, British Authority On Ancient Glass
Donald B. Harden, a British archeologist who was an authority on ancient glass, died on April 13.
He was 92 and lived in London.
Dr.
Harden, whose doctorate was from the University of Michigan, was acting director of the Museum of London from 1965 to 1970.
He was assistant keeper and then keeper in the department of antiquities at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, England, from 1929 to 1956, and director of the London Museum from 1956 to 1965.


Acme Metals (ACME,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Air Express International Corp.(AEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scientific-Atlanta Inc.(SFA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Resentment Zone; Officials' Courtship of Yankees Stirs Anger in the Bronx
Ted Davidson, public-housing resident, and George M. Steinbrenner 3d, public-stadium resident: two peas in a pod.
Both have been in the South Bronx a long time and are wary of the neighborhood.
Both threaten to leave.
"I'd move to Jersey," Mr.
Davidson says, though he probably never will.
And maybe his neighbor, Mr.
Steinbrenner, six long blocks away, never will, either.


Today's Rabbit Exhibits: Hundley Homers Nos. 7 and 8
Todd Hundley does not have an explanation.
Maybe the ball is juiced.
Maybe the pitching is poor.
Maybe it's simple -- maybe the hitters are bigger and stronger this season than they have been in the past.
The Mets and Dodgers combined for 13 home runs in the three-game series that concluded yesterday at Shea Stadium.
Three of those home runs came from Hundley, including two yesterday afternoon.
And though 3 home runs and 10 total runs were not enough for the Mets to defeat the Dodgers on Saturday, 7 runs -- all produced by homers -- carried New York to a 7-4 victory over Los Angeles yesterday.


Legislators Toss Insults, But Can't Pass a Budget
It is frequently said that one reason the State Legislature is late in adopting a state budget -- it is now a month overdue -- is that no one has been hurt by the delay.
The Legislature has kept the wheels of government greased, and state colleges, prisons and health-care services continue to operate as usual.
But the impasse has begun to cause some people pain, and their numbers are growing.
School boards are preparing to ask voters to approve local property tax increases because they do not know how much state aid they will receive.
Mayors are in the same bind as they present budget proposals to municipal councils.
And scores of nonprofit organizations that depend on state grants are seeking bank loans to cover payrolls.


Rio Algom Ltd.(ROM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nevada Power Co.(NVP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Two Views Of Police Presence In Clifton
Willie Barrett and Roger Collins live in the same neighborhood, on different worlds.
Mr.
Barrett lives in a neat, two-story house on Park Hill Avenue in Clifton, Staten Island, on a street where the drug dealers have run down the neighborhood to the point he no longer feels safe.
He wants a strong police presence in his neighborhood, to reclaim it.


Ewing Tries to Sort Out Confusion
It was the first time Patrick Ewing had ever been ejected from a playoff game.
The Knicks could have folded.
Instead, they bonded.
"We've been a resilient team all year," said Coach Pat Riley after the Knicks' emotional 90-81 victory over the Nets on Sunday in Game 2 of their playoff series.
"It was one of the most harrowing games, even though we had a big lead, that I've ever experienced.


Reporter's Notebook; For a Victim's Sister, Rifkin's Trial Is Part of a Troubled Journey
The trial of Joel Rifkin on the first of several charges of murdering young women has offered grisly testimony and sharp disagreement between the defense and prosecution over Mr.
Rifkin's mental state, along with an unexpected look at how the defendant hoped to profit from his notoriety.
The proceedings, which began April 11 with jury selection, have moved quickly, but it has been a long, troubled journey for Margarita Gonzales, whose 23-year-old sister, Jenny Soto, was among Joel Rifkin's admitted victims.
Ms.
Gonzales, who lives with her mother in Brooklyn, has attended nearly every court proceeding since Mr.
Rifkin made his 12-page confession on June 28.


Review/Theater; A Tiny Voice in a Nasty World Sings for a Savior
The young waif they call Little Voice in the boisterous British drama "The Rise and Fall of Little Voice" is one of life's odder victims.
Terminally shy, her ghostly white face as close to a blank page as a face can get, she speaks in barely audible birdlike peeps.
Alone in her bedroom, however, with the door closed and the abusive world far from sight, she does mesmerizing imitations of all the pop female vocalists her dead father once worshiped.
The tiny, apologetic voice suddenly comes alive with the blasting power of Shirley Bassey, takes on the dramatic tremolo of Judy Garland or vibrates with the plaintive nasality of Edith Piaf defiantly proclaiming that, "non," she regrets "rien de rien." Her imitations are so accurate that, hearing them, people can't believe their ears.


Westpoint Stevens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Joslyn Corp.(JOSL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"The easy way out is the road to nowhere. If achievement in our schools is to improve, we must raise our expectations for students and staff. Our school system will fail in its obligation to this community unless we equalize educational opportunity and raise standards in all of our schools." -- RAMON C. CORTINES, New York City Schools Chancellor.  [ A1:5. ]


Cragin Financial (CRGN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mayflower Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL CHERTOFF , who spent four years as the United States Attorney for New Jersey, has rejoined his former law firm as a partner.
Mr.
Chertoff joined the firm of Latham &amp; Watkins effective yesterday, the firm announced.
Mr.
Chertoff will head the firm's national white-collar enforcement and internal investigations practice, PHILIP E. COVIELLO , managing partner of the firm's New York office, said in a statement.
The firm expects to open an office in Newark this year, he said.


Gibson And Tigers Pound McDowell
Tigers 8, White Sox 5
Kirk Gibson hit a three-run homer out of Tiger Stadium yesterday to lead the Tigers past the Chicago White Sox and their struggling ace, Jack McDowell, 8-5.


Fort Wayne National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nac Re Corp.(NREC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Protecting Prey of Humans Sets 2 Against a Vast World
Flying low over the still-frozen rivers that drain the Alaska interior, Alan Crane sometimes thinks about the odds.
He is one guy in a tiny airplane trying to patrol almost everything that snorts, honks or flaps in an area the size of Texas.
As the senior agent for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in a land often called the American Serengeti, Mr.
Crane says it is a rare day when somebody on the ground is glad to see him.
People point guns at his plane and sometimes sabotage it by putting sugar in the fuel tank.


Abroad at Home; Politics Of Hate
At her press conference last month Hillary Rodham Clinton turned aside a question about the politics of personal destruction.
"I can't really help it," she said, "if some people get up every day wanting to destroy."
The way Mrs.
Clinton put it reflected the pain that she and the President have surely felt at the level of personal attack leveled at them in recent months.
Whitewater is only part of it.
Below the mainstream press there is a flow of poison directed at the President and his wife: in the comments of talk-show bigots, in extreme-right magazines and newsletters.


Bio-Rad Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bay View Capital Corp.(BVFS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ribbons of Tradition Wrapped Around the May Pole


Topics of The Times; Skating without Screaming
It is an all too common cry from runaway skaters in Central Park: "Help! I can't stop!" But assistance is only a scream away, thanks to the Central Park Skate Patrol.
The nonprofit volunteer group, which is sponsored by the International In-Line Skating Association, the New York Road Skaters Association and Blades, Board and Skate Shops, is in its third season.
For those who want to learn how to slow down or stop with in-line skates (commonly known by the trademark Rollerblade), the patrol gives free lessons on weekends, from 12:30 to 5:30 P.M., at the East and West 72d Street entrances to Central Park.


Allied Products (ADP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Companies Resist Rules On Driving
The Federal Government is trying to control the way people travel to work, seeking to reduce pollution, congestion and energy use by limiting the number driving alone in cars.
But to reduce the solitary nature of confinement behind the wheel, the Government is relying on employers, and the employers are screaming about it.
Soon, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and seven other states will require big employers to take such steps as reporting to the Government on how their workers get to work from home, and filing plans for reducing the number who drive alone, by inducing them to switch to car pools or public transportation.
If the companies fail they can be liable for tens of thousands of dollars in fines per day.


Dance in Review
Andrew Marcus  Dia Center for the Arts


Singapore Gives Details Of a Caning
With the growing likelihood that an American teen-ager living in Singapore is about to be caned here for vandalism, the Government today made public its first official account of how the punishment would be carried out.
The description of a caning, complete with a diagram showing a man tied down by his hands and ankles as he is flogged, was published today in The Straits Times, a Government-affiliated newspaper, and appeared to be an effort to convince its public that the punishment is not as brutal as news accounts have suggested.


Accounts
*
Sutton Place Gourmet, Bethesda, Md., to Abramson Ehrlich Manes, Washington, to handle the specialty food retail chain's account, previously at Gura La Bar &amp; Associates, Bethesda.
Billings were not disclosed.


Short-Term Treasury Bills To Be Offered This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.85 percent, and on a six-month bill, 4.28 percent.


NUI Corp.(NUI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Rich Becker, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 29.
Recalled Brett Merriman, pitcher, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.


Bankers Trust Faces Review Of Credit Rating by S.&amp; P.
In another piece of largely symbolic bad news for the Bankers Trust New York Corporation, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said Friday that it was considering lowering the bank's credit rating from the lofty level of AA.
The announcement amounted to recognition that Bankers Trust's business resembles that of a Wall Street securities firm more than that of a traditional bank and that its earnings have become more volatile as it has increased its currency and bond trading.


American Heritage Life Investment Corp.(AHL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ayrton Senna Dies After Crash; Peerless Racing King Was 34
Ayrton Senna, a Brazilian whose laser-like focus on driving race cars made him a three-time Formula One world champion, died yesterday after a crash during the San Marino Grand Prix in Imola, Italy.
Senna, 34 years old, died of multiple skull fractures in a hospital in Bologna, Italy, hours after his race car veered off the Ferrari Autodrome at almost 200 miles an hour and struck a concrete wall almost head on.
The cause of the accident was not immediately known.


Foundations Are Finding Wealth Is a Problem, Too
The nation's foundations are discovering prosperity has its perils.
As a group, their financial health has never been better.
Their ranks keep growing: 35,765 foundations in 1993, with 11,000 of them created since 1980.
A bullish stock market raised their combined assets to an all-time high of $177 billion last year.


Polaris Industries Partners L.P.(SNO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Japanese Assail U.S. On Trade
The Clinton Administration's decision last week to give the new Government of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata time to get settled before applying pressure on trade issues has been received here with a palpable sense of relief.
But if the United States thought the bureaucrats who manage Japan's trade policy would also ease up, they will have to think again.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry publicly issued a blistering attack today on a recent Clinton Administration report assessing what the American report calls an array of unfair trading practices by Japan.


A's Finally Find a Team They Can Beat: Yankees
Beaten and battered for two weeks as they played silly and sloppy baseball, the Athletics had a memorable day for the right reasons today.
Bobby Witt was right.
But Melido Perez's day was fraught with wrongs, the primary one being that he lost to the sputtering A's, 8-1.
Since Perez could not duplicate what 12 pitchers before him had done and since Witt was surprisingly precise and extremely effective, the Yankees did not sweep three games from Oakland and the A's happily fell two setbacks shy of tying their club record of 14 straight defeats.


Tootsie Roll Industries(TR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Telus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trying to Improve a Threatened Bird's Precarious Existence


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Graf Suffers Her First Loss of 1994  Arantxa Sanchez Vicario handed Steffi Graf her first loss of the year with a 4-6, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (8-6) victory in the final of the Citizen Cup in Hamburg, Germany.
Graf came into the match with a 32-0 record, and since her loss to the second-ranked Sanchez Vicario in last year's Hamburg final, the German had lost only one other WTA Tour match, to Conchita Martinez in November.
"I'm disappointed beyond measure at the way I lost the match," Graf said afterward.
"I just can't allow myself to give away a match like that." Sanchez Vicario fought off a match point at 5-2 in the second set, then ran off three straight games as Graf made several forehand errors.
In the third-set tie breaker, Graf fought back from a 6-3 deficit, saving three match points, before Sanchez Vicario's overhead ended the match after 3 hours 3 minutes. (AP)


Rains and Disease Ravage Refugees Fleeing Rwanda
Barely two days after a harrowing and exhausting escape from Rwanda, the more than a quarter-million refugees who arrived here were soaked by heavy rains, adding to the miseries of their makeshift lives with little shelter or food.
Some had umbrellas to hide under, and a few strung out plastic tarpaulins or thatched together grass huts.
But in this wide-open land, most just weathered the downpours with nothing.


Union Urging Viewers to Boycott NBC's Shows
Hoping to hit NBC where it hurts -- in the important "sweep" ratings period -- a union representing technical employees and news writers is urging viewers to tune out the network's programs over the next four weeks.
The union, the National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians, bought newspaper advertisements last Wednesday in USA Today and last Friday in The New York Times.
The ads assert that NBC, in its latest contract offer to the union, is seeking to increase the amount of work done by temporary employees, reducing the work for full-time employees who are union members.


A Saddened Sport Loses a Giant With Death of Senna
To better understand the wretched place that May 1, 1994, will occupy in motor racing history, go back to April 7, 1968.
That was the day Jim Clark, the Scotsman who was a two-time world champion and the 1965 Indianapolis 500 winner, slid off the track in Hockenheim, Germany, and died when his Lotus crashed into a stand of trees.
It is pointless to argue whether that loss was greater than the one that occurred on the seventh lap of the San Marino Grand Prix yesterday, when Ayrton Senna's Williams-Renault flew off the Ferrari Autodrome circuit and into a concrete wall at almost 200 miles an hour.
What matters is that in both cases, one of the giants of motor racing's postwar era was killed.


Bratton Says Drug Sweeps Are to Continue on S.I.
With the mood still uneasy around a Staten Island housing complex where a man died in police custody during a narcotics sweep Friday night, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that police officers would not abandon their "assertive" stance against drug dealing near the complex.
Mr.
Bratton said it was essential for the police to work "within the law," but he added that the incident highlighted a traditional difficulty for officers: maintaining a rigorous stance against drug dealers while not alienating the community in which the dealers work and live.


Diagnostek Inc.(DXK,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Rossin to Open Marketing Shop
Jack E. Rossin, president and chief executive of Rossin Greenberg Seronick of Boston, is leaving the agency he founded more than 11 years ago, effective immediately, to open Jack Rossin Strategic Marketing in Newton, Mass.
"I want to be where the action is and help design marketing strategies," Mr.
Rossin, 47, who will head the new company as president, said on Friday.


U.S. Says U.N. Officers in Balkans Lack the Will to Block Serbs
The Clinton Administration has accused the top United Nations civilian and military officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina of failing to support a more aggressive policy toward the Serbs even though the policy has been backed by the Security Council, NATO and Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
In a letter to Mr.
Boutros-Ghali on Saturday, Madeleine K. Albright, the United States chief delegate, protested "in the strongest possible terms" comments attributed to senior United Nations military and civilian officials in Sarajevo that questioned the wisdom of President Clinton's support for air strikes against the Serbs.
The officials said such attacks might prolong the war.


Fed Wants Us to Think It Fights Inflation
To the Editor:
The notion that the Federal Reserve raises interest rates to control inflation has been repeated so often, with the Fed's encouragement, that it has come to be accepted as an economic truth.
Raising interest rates may deter inflation slightly given the presence of certain economic circumstances, but that is a possible effect of Fed policy rather than its purpose.


Correction
A picture caption on Saturday with an article about an Israeli-Palestinian economic agreement misidentified Avraham Shohat in some editions.
He is the Israeli Finance Minister, not the Foreign Minister.


Jason Inc.(JASN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


MAJOR FLAW CITED IN CIGARETTE DATA
Smokers of cigarettes labeled low in tar and nicotine may be getting more of those substances than they think, Federal Trade Commission officials and experts in smoking now agree.
And they attribute the problem to testing that has not kept up with the changes in cigarette design over the last 20 years.
Since 1971, when the results of the tests were first printed in cigarette advertising and on packaging, cigarettes labeled low in tar and nicotine have taken over the market, now accounting for 60 percent of the cigarettes sold in this country.


Eastern Utilities Associates (EUA,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


In Singapore, Rules of Game Are Clear
To the Editor:
I am writing to comment on the much-covered story of Michael Fay and his caning sentence in Singapore.


Ionics (ION,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rwandans Stream Into Tanzania


Russia's Arms Makers Try Change
Inside the gates of a complex where the Soviet Union once developed cold war weapons like cruise missiles and spy satellites, Gerbert A. Yefremov is waging a different kind of battle.
With arms orders having all but disappeared, Mr.
Yefremov is trying to reorient the enterprise toward conquering the markets for earth-imaging satellites, solar-power cells, food-preservation equipment, water-purification systems, tinted glass, sailboats -- virtually any commercial product its scientists and engineers can design and produce with their considerable technical skill.


Bridge
Although the Cavendish Club is but a memory, the name rises like a phoenix each May.
The 11th Cavendish Teams will be played Thursday and Friday at the Honors club, 42 East 74th Street, and the 20th Cavendish Pairs will be played Saturday and Sunday at Loews Summit Hotel, 569 Lexington Avenue at 51st Street.
There will be five pairs crossing the Atlantic to take part: Piotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki of Poland; Tomas Magnusson and T. G. Eliasson of Sweden; Ed Hoogenkamp and Louk Verhees of the Netherlands, and Eliakim Shaufel and Pinhas Romik, Shalom Zeligman and David Birman, all of Israel.


World Economies


Grancare Inc.(GC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Marine Midland Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ambac Inc.(ABK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Even Without Ewing, the Knicks Are Safe at Home
Believing that Patrick Ewing had been wrongfully ejected from a crucial playoff game, the Knicks unleashed their fury on the Nets.
Charles Oakley took the emotional lead, scoring a game-high 25 points and grabbing a career playoff-high 24 rebounds, playing as if his career depended on a victory.
New York's defensive effort reached another plateau of passion.
And the capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden provided the adrenaline, raising the decibel level to deafening heights.


Patents; A way to disinfect drinking water without the risk of chlorine's potentially harmful side effects.
CHLORINE, widely used in developed countries to disinfect drinking water, is a mixed blessing.
It efficiently and cheaply cleanses water of disease-carrying microbes, but the byproducts have long been suspected as carcinogens and agents of environmental damage.
Now the inventors of a water purifying system designed for NASA's long space missions say their technology can be used in remote areas on Earth to make drinking water safe without chlorine.


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light (PPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Palmer Tube Mills (PTMLY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Steinhauer's Richest Prize
Sherri Steinhauer birdied two of the last four holes today to hold off a charging Kelly Robbins and win the $1.2 million Sprint Championship, the richest prize in women's golf, at Indigo Lakes Resort.
Steinhauer, 31, from Madison, Wis., scored her second career victory by making two critical putts when the heat was on.
Leading Robbins, who had a tap-in putt for birdie, by a stroke at the 15th hole, Steinhauer drained a 20-footer for birdie.
She followed that with an 18-footer for birdie at the 16th hole and then parred in for a round of 70, a 72-hole total of 15-under-par 273 and a one-stroke victory over Robbins, who closed with 68.


Microsoft Review Narrowed to Three
The Microsoft Corporation has narrowed a review to select its first agency for a proposed worldwide image account to three shops from six.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $40 million.


Dance in Review
Laura Pawel Dance Company  Context Hall 28 Avenue A (between Second and Third Streets) East Village


U.S. Journalists Killed in Bosnia
Two American journalists were killed and another was slightly wounded today when they drove over a mine about eight miles north of Mostar, after having strayed off the main road from Mostar to Sarajevo, United Nations officials said.
The officials identified the dead as Francis Tomasic of Spin magazine, which is devoted to popular music and culture, and Brian Brenton of Magnolia News, a weekly based in Seattle.
The wounded journalist was identified as the novelist William T. Vollmann, who was on assignment for Spin.


Ward Gets the Big Snub But Not Without Issue
Sometimes things happen in the National Football League that make one wonder whether N.F.L. stands for National Farce League.
How can Charlie Ward of Florida State, a Heisman Trophy winner who guided his team to a national college championship, not merit consideration in any of the seven rounds of the draft by any of the owners and general managers of the 28 N.F.L. teams?
It is almost unfathomable.


Russian Aid Is Put at Risk Over New Taxes on Loans
Several billion dollars in critical foreign assistance to the Russian oil sector is at risk because the Russian Government has refused to exempt the loans from its new taxes, Russian and Western officials say.
Despite several appeals from the World Bank, the Government has yet to issue assurances that what it calls a value-added tax on loans provided by the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will not be assessed.


Allegheny Ludlum Corp.(ALS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


May Day in Moscow: Remembrance of Soviet Past
If you closed your eyes near Red Square today you might have heard the ghosts of May Days past echoing off the Kremlin walls.
There were bands and banners and the sharp sounds of Communists denouncing the West.
There was fire and brimstone and the promise of revolution.
There were pictures of Stalin and speeches -- now mournful -- about the glories of Soviet history.


Belden Inc.(BWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bankers Trust Gets Support
In a surprising show of support for the Bankers Trust New York Corporation, one of its executives was elected chairwoman of the leading trade organization for the providers of the rapidly growing yet controversial financial products known as derivatives.
The decision by the International Swap and Derivatives Association to appoint Gay H. Evans, a Bankers Trust managing director, is significant because Bankers Trust has recently been criticized by two corporate customers -- Procter &amp; Gamble and Gibson Greetings Inc. -- for selling derivatives that led to large losses.
Both have said they are considering legal action against the bank.


Child Abuse
The reported instances of child abuse and neglect in the region increased last year, after having declined since the start of the decade.
State officials and child welfare advocates cannot say exactly why, but they cite several factors: the continuing problem of substance abuse, stricter reporting, and increased attention in the past year to violence and its effects on young people.
Child welfare agencies say they are trying to become less reactive and offer more support services for at-risk families before trouble sets in.
The Federal budget for fiscal 1994, ending Sept. 30, allocates $60 million to the states for Family Preservation and Support, the first installment of a five-year, $5 billion initiative.


GP Financial Corp.(GNPT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Midwest Resources Inc.(MWR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mexican Seriously Challenging Long-Ruling Party
Dusty winds whipped hundreds of yellow campaign banners as local politicos worked up the crowd.
Finally the presidential candidate, the man with the magic name, spoke.
His flat voice and deadpan face deflated the crowd, and even the standard applause line -- "Viva Mexico!" -- was so stiff that admiring campesinos hardly realized when Cuauhtemoc Cardenas had finished his speech.
But his style has not undercut the serious challenge Mr.
Cardenas is mounting to 65 years of single-party rule in Mexico.


Essay; Saddam Redux?
From diplomats in the Quai d'Orsay to powerplayers in the Kremlin to forgetful editorialists in the U.S., the drumbeat has begun: why not end "intrusive inspections" and do oil business with Saddam?
In the aftermath of our accidental helicopter shootdown over the Iraqi portion of Kurdistan, President Clinton has been steadfast.
"It is our duty to continue the mission," he told the families of those who died protecting millions of Kurds from Saddam's interrupted genocide, ". . . to save the lives of innocent people."


Betz Laboratories Inc.(BLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Maxicare Health Plans Inc.(MAXI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Hail and farewell: This is how ART COOPER , editor in chief of GQ magazine, announced to his staff that NONNIE MOORE , the fashion director and a revered figure on Seventh Avenue, would be leaving.
"Late last week Nonnie Moore came into my office, and while she spilled her coffee on my incredibly expensive Persian carpet, told me she intended to retire this summer to spend full time painting the abstract pictures which resemble my Persian carpet with coffee stains," he wrote in an E-mail message.


Sports of The Times; Hockey's Hunter And the Hunted
MAYBE the Stanley Cup should be renamed the Sanity Cup.
Too often during its almost meaningless regular season the National Hockey League is the planet of the goons.
But in the playoffs, where penalties can be much more costly, sanity usually prevails.
Even the most inflammable personalties try to hold their temper.
Some brush fires developed in the Rangers' 6-3 victory over the Washington Capitals at Madison Square Garden last night in the opener of their Eastern Conference semifinal.
But they were quickly stamped out.


A Poet's Values: It's the Words Over the Man
Yusef Komunyakaa, who won the Pulitzer Prize for poetry three weeks ago, is still receiving congratulations from acquaintances as he walks the hallways and quadrangles of the Indiana University campus here.
People seem surprised to see him, as if he had been in hiding, calling out to him "Hey! Man of the hour!" and the like.
You would know he was a shy man just from the way he acknowledges his well-wishers, an embarrassed-seeming bow of the head, an abbreviated wave of the hand.
And indeed, in the pantheon of poet stereotypes -- the vitriolic, passionate drunkard is one; the wry, acerbic loner another -- Mr.
Komunyakaa, a professor of English, is more the dreamy intellectual, a Wordsworthian type whose worldly, philosophic mind might be stirred by something as homely and personal as a walk in a field of daffodils.
Still, there's a way he gives off the sense of a cauldron, bubbling beneath the surface.
He's not happy talking about himself.
A Distinctly Southern Voice
"I'm happier talking about the process of writing, yes," he said.
He's a dark-skinned man, with a broad nose and a dusting of salt-gray in his hair.
His voice is a quiet country rumble, distinctly Southern, with a Cajunish tinge that betrays a childhood spent in Bogalusa, La.
"Skeered," he'll say for scared; "paw-em" is how says the word poem.


Westcoast Energy (WE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kaneb Services Inc.(KAB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dividend Meetings


Roy A. Foulke, 97, Wall Street Analyst
Roy A. Foulke, a Wall Street executive and analyst who created a system of rating the quality of companies, died on Thursday in Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mr.
Foulke, who lived in Bronxville, was 97.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Roy A. Jr.


Videotape Is Said to Show Police Abuse
A videotape made public yesterday apparently shows police officers punching a handcuffed man, then throwing him against a car.
The woman who made the tape said the incident took place last month in nearly the same place on Staten Island where local residents contend a man was fatally beaten by police on Friday.
John Murphy Jr., the lawyer for the family of the dead man, Ernest Sayon, said he believes some officers were involved in both incidents outside the Park Hill Apartments, in Clifton.


Goulds Pumps Inc.(GULD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Metropolitan Financial Corp.(MFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Midtown Food Vendors Can Comply With Law
To the Editor:
"Fair Food Vending in Midtown" (editorial, April 22) misses important elements regarding New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to enforce rules affecting where food vendors can locate.


Iowa-Illinois Gas &amp; Electric Co. (IWG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MANDELA'S PARTY GRASPS FIRM LEAD IN EARLY RESULTS
The African National Congress estimated from early returns Sunday night that it had won a solid victory in the election for South Africa's first post-apartheid Parliament, but conceded that it would not win the lopsided majority that would give Nelson Mandela a free hand in writing a new constitution.
The broadest smile, in fact, belonged to President F. W. de Klerk, whose National Party appeared to have crowded aside all other opposition parties and picked up a fraction of the black vote to secure its future as the second party in a two-party system.


Paul J. Baisley, 67, State Supreme Court Justice
Justice Paul J. Baisley of New York State Supreme Court, who made an important ruling in 1990 in litigation involving the protection of the Long Island Pine Barrens, died on Saturday at Huntington Hospital.
He was 67 and a longtime resident of Huntington, L.I.
He died after a brief illness, said his daughter Lisa.


Controlling the Cops; Accomplices To Perjury
As I read about the disbelief expressed by some prosecutors at the Mollen Commission's recent assertion that police perjury is "widespread" in New York City, I thought of Claude Rains's classic response, in "Casablanca," on being told there was gambling in Rick's place: "I'm shocked -- shocked!"
For anyone who has practiced criminal law in the state or Federal courts, the disclosures about rampant police perjury cannot possibly come as a surprise.
"Testilying" -- as the police call it -- has long been an open secret among prosecutors, defense lawyers and judges.


Review/Music; 2 Players, With Instruments And Machines, Improvising
The main characteristic of a series of duets played by Anthony Braxton and Richard Teitelbaum at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday night was a calm prettiness.
Mr.
Braxton, who plays a handful of reed instruments, used a pure sound to spread gorgeous melodies over the music.
Mr.
Teitelbaum worked with a keyboard synthesizer, sampler and an interactive computer to produce all sorts of counterpoint, from noise to the reproduction of other musical instruments.
The gentleness of it all, which never sank into a New Age sogginess, gave the music its identity.
The two opened with an improvised piece that had Mr.
Braxton moving from instrument to instrument; his solos on alto saxophone shuffled along, jamming notes in a rigid pattern.
Mr.
Teitelbaum had his machines follow Mr.
Braxton, harmonizing his lines or offering an almost symphonic background.
The distortion of a rock guitar showed up for a minute only to sail away into a dreamy section that sounded as if it was produced by a synthesizer.
And Mr.
Teitelbaum mimicked the sound of bells, as if the wind was quietly ringing a set of chimes.


Johnstown America Industries In.(JAII,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New York City To Stiffen Rules For Graduating
Starting this fall, every New York City high school student will be required to take advanced science and mathematics courses to graduate, while less challenging classes in those subjects will be eliminated, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday.
Educators said the change might be the most ambitious upgrading of academic standards ever undertaken by a major school system.
The courses being eliminated are the ones now taken by most of the city's 250,000 high school students.
In the 1992-93 school year, only 16 percent of the juniors and seniors were enrolled in the advanced math courses that will now be standard, and only 24 percent took advanced science courses.


Fidelity National Financial Inc.(FNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton's Call for Pacific Harmony Meets a Chorus of Criticism From Asians
When President Clinton first described his vision of a new "Pacific community" last summer, in which the United States would engage Asia more vigorously and creatively than at any time since World War II, most of the region's leaders embraced the idea as a long-overdue shift from what they saw as Washington's Eurocentric view of the world.
But in recent months the enthusiastic talk of harmony, which reached a crescendo when Mr.
Clinton gathered Asian leaders at a first-ever summit meeting in Seattle, has quickly given way to a broad chorus of criticism.
On topics as diverse as trade policy with Japan, human rights and the possible caning of an American teen-ager in Singapore, leaders from Canberra to Tokyo are voicing similar critiques.
They say Washington has been arrogant, that the "community" it envisions is built in America's image rather than in Asia's, and that it is chiefly interested in imposing its own rules.
Driven by Three Goals
Many of the criticisms are self- interested, and some come from countries that insist the region needs a stabilizing American military presence, but reject Washington's political influence.
But a result is that many Administration policies have been subtly undercut by some of its closest Asian allies.


Tracor Inc.(TTRR) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Earle Palmer Brown Spins Off Agency
Earle Palmer Brown has, as expected, spun off an independent agency from its New York office, initially to serve its important Weight Watchers International account with billings estimated at $25 million.
The new shop, called Doig, Elliott, Schur, is headed by John Doig, 45, Tim Elliott, 45, and Jeff Schur, 47.
The three, who previously worked together at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, have all held senior positions at Earle Palmer.


Teamsters President's Real-Estate Deals Are Questioned
A panel that oversees the teamsters' union is examining the business records of Ron Carey, the union's president, to determine how he financed hundreds of thousands of dollars in real-estate investments in three states and why his estranged wife's signature was forged on several notarized documents, investigators say.
Mr.
Carey, who portrayed himself in 1991 as a modest-living, frugal candidate from a New York City local when he was elected to head the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, was involved in the purchase and sale of seven homes and condominiums from 1979 to 1992 in New York, Florida and Arizona.
The largest acquisition was a $341,000 house in the Florida Keys in April 1992, four months after he was elected to the $150,000-a-year position as head of the 1.4 million-member union.


Talisman Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Holy Bull, Brocco on the Same Track
It was cold and dark and wet this morning, but the backstretch at Churchill Downs bustled with star horses and trainers as Derby Week dawned, and all eyes followed the newest arrival, Holy Bull, who took his first steps on the surface where he will run as the favorite in the Kentucky Derby.
The husky gray colt took a gallop of a mile and a half under his regular exercise rider, Bobby Perna, who said: "I think he likes it. He's raced over five different race tracks, and it doesn't seem to matter. Surfaces don't seem to affect him."


By the Dawn's Early Candlelight, Greek Easter Arrives


Review/Music; Folk-Rock (and Sincerity) Straight Out of the 60's
For some time, Peter Himmelman has been stranded between generations.
He has been making albums since 1980, first with the Sussman Lawrence band and, since 1986, under his own name.
Mr.
Himmelman, who brought his band to Irving Plaza on Thursday night, is too young for a direct connection to his 1960's favorites -- Bob Dylan, Leonard Cohen, the Band, Van Morrison -- and not fresh-faced enough for the latest wave of 1960's revivalism from bands like Counting Crows.
Yet over the years, he has gathered a cult following with forthright songs that are sometimes painfully earnest.
True to folk-rock precedent, he has little use for irony in his songs.
But onstage, he lightens things up by wisecracking and clowning when he's not singing.
Mr.
Himmelman's sixth solo album, "Skin" (550 Music/Epic), is a song cycle about death and rebirth; its conclusion is "If I had only believed in love/I could have been set free." He began his show by performing the cycle from start to finish, with not a word to the audience; after leaving the stage for a few moments, he returned to banter and play older songs, stretching the set to nearly two and a half hours.


Crestbrook Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Shaper of Magazines Retires
Marshall Loeb, one of the most visible and influential editors in the magazine industry during his 38-year tenure at Time Inc., is to retire as managing editor of Fortune magazine after eight years in the job, the magazine will announce today.
Mr.
Loeb will turn 65, the mandatory retirement age for Time Inc.'s managing editors, at the end of the month.
He will become Fortune's editor at large and write a new column for the magazine.


Following the Piping Plover
On a recent Sunday morning, Larry Penny and two photographers patrolled a wind-swept beach here, searching for piping plovers and whistling to attract them.
Spotting a slight shimmer on the sand about 50 yards away, Mr.
Penny whipped out his binoculars.
"Over there," he yelled, as two round little birds scurried away, their sandy-colored feathers vanishing into the shoreline.


Judge Endorses V.M.I. Plan on Excluding Women
Cheers rang through the barracks this weekend after a Federal judge ruled that Virginia Military Institute may continue excluding women if it finances a leadership school at a nearby women's college.
"This was our last stand," said Lieut.
Christopher M. McClung, 22, a senior, echoing sentiments expressed by other cadets, many of whom pointed to V.M.I.'s long history of being single-sex.
"The equal-rights people want V.M.I. as a trophy."


Devils Don't Exert Themselves and That Leads to a Loss
The Devils played passively in the early going against the Boston Bruins today, and it cost them.
By the time New Jersey scored a goal at 13 minutes 22 seconds of the first period, Boston had two.
That margin never changed.
The 2-1 defeat in the opener of their Eastern Conference semifinal series confirmed for the Devils the notion that Boston's goalie, Jon Casey, and the Bruins in general were going to be just as difficult as Buffalo's Dominik Hasek and the Sabres were in the first-round Stanley Cup playoff series, which went the full seven games.


Leo Burnett Gets Ameritech Business
The Ameritech Corporation, the Midwest regional Baby Bell telephone company based in Chicago, said yesterday that it had selected Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago to handle the consolidated media buying portion of its account, with billings estimated at $90 million to $100 million.
The assignment had been divided between Tatham Euro RSCG and Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, both of Chicago.


USlico Corp.(USC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bruno's Inc.(BRNO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 9


Big Changes to Be Announced for Key Minicomputer Line
I.B.M. plans to announce today the most significant changes in its AS-400 minicomputer product line since the machine's introduction in 1988, according to industry executives.
They say the new computers and improved software represent an ambitious effort by the International Business Machines Corporation to try to prolong the life and profitability of its big minicomputer business at a time when many corporate customers are shifting to work stations and personal computers.


Coastal Healthcare Group Inc.(CGRP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  92d Street Y
Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg was the soloist and nominal conductor of an all-Bach program with the New York Chamber Symphony on Saturday evening.
She seemed to have an easy time of the conducting chores, which amounted to little more than setting the tempos in slow movements, giving the downbeats in quick ones.
She may have exerted herself more forcefully in the rehearsals; even without visual cues, her extreme dynamic shifts and flexible tempos were mirrored by the ensemble.


United Illuminating Co.(UIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Columbia/HCA HealthcareCorp.(COL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shark Run Continues as Late Goal Beats Leafs
Sharks 3, Maple Leafs 2
The San Jose Sharks continued their surprising run in the National Hockey League playoffs last night with a 3-2 victory over the Maple Leafs in Toronto on Johan Garpenlov's goal with 2 minutes 16 seconds remaining.


Indictment of Crown Hts. Figure Is Sought
The DeKalb County District Attorney's office here has decided to seek an indictment on aggravated assault charges against Lemrick Nelson Jr., who was acquitted in the stabbing of a Hasidic student, Yankel Rosenbaum, during racial clashes in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn in 1991.
Mr.
Nelson, 18, has been living in the small city of Clarkston, just outside Atlanta, and attending a suburban high school since late 1992.
He was charged earlier this year with slashing at a fellow student with a razor during a fight.
The student, who was not seriously injured in the Jan. 14 incident, swore out a warrant against Mr.
Nelson, leading to his arrest.


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sunbeam-Oster Co.(SOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Desjardins Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Steel Technologies Inc.(STTX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Patterns
D &amp; G's New Focus
Stefano Gabbana was wearing burnt orange suede tennis shoes and torn-hemmed jeans, and Domenico Dolce had a baseball cap pulled low over his eyes.


First Lady Urged Dismissals At Travel Office, Study Says
A senior White House official said Hillary Rodham Clinton urged him last year to replace members of the travel office with "our people," Congressional investigators reported today.
The report by the General Accounting Office, a nonpartisan investigative arm of Congress, goes significantly beyond a White House review last July of the dismissal of all seven employees of the travel office on May 19.
The new account depicts Mrs.
Clinton as playing a more active role in the dismissals after the White House accused the workers of mismanagement.


Repap Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Was the Election Fair? Voting Chief Is Satisfied
Judge Johann Kriegler casually uses the word "breakdown" to describe the election he is running.
He concedes that many ballots never left the warehouse, that polling places failed to open, that ballot boxes were stuffed "to a significant degree," that voting places often had no impartial monitors and that some election officials were partisan, if not crooked.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Richard D. Kolodner; An Amazing Leap From Yeast Genes To Human Cancer
DR.
RICHARD D. KOLODNER leaned back in his chair and said he was as surprised as anyone that he has emerged as a leader in the scientific race to capture the genes that cause colon cancer.
His surprise is not just false modesty.
For one thing, his lab at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute here is tiny, yet twice in the last year, he has emerged neck and neck with the much larger and better known laboratory of Bert Vogelstein at Johns Hopkins University, in races that ended in dead heats.
For another, Dr.
Kolodner's original research goal was not to understand human cancer at all but to work out an arcane detail about gene repairs in bacteria and yeast.


New York Agrees to Build Prison's Kitchen in Bronx
Under pressure from a court order and state lawmakers, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to add $128 million to New York City's capital budget to build a giant kitchen in the Bronx that would prepare food for prisoners on Rikers Island, mayoral aides said yesterday.
The new expenditure is part of nearly $500 million in budget additions and restorations that Mr.
Giuliani will announce today in his proposed $18.8 billion capital spending plan for the next four years, the officials said.
The new projects will not affect the city's debt payments, senior aides said, because of savings from bond refinancings.


Norplant Is Getting Few Takers At School
Now that the rancorous debate over offering the contraceptive Norplant in school clinics has died down, Latia Garner is looking forward to completing the 11th grade without again becoming pregnant.
Ms.
Garner, 17, is one of a handful of young women who have had the birth control device implanted in her arm since January 1993 by doctors at the Laurence T. Paquin School in Baltimore.


Moore's Role Changes, Maybe for the Better
It didn't seem long ago when Rob Moore was the young receiver with promise on the Jets' roster.
When he looked at Ryan Yarborough and Orlando Parker -- two rookies taken in the draft -- flying around the field today at the Jets' minicamp, he realized the torch had been passed.
It is a strange situation for Moore.
He was the only receiver here who started and played a significant amount of time last season.
With Al Toon and Chris Burkett both retired, Moore, who will turn 26 on Sept. 27, has become the elder statesman of the Jets' receiving corps.


Making Ends Meet in Paramus


Oklamoma Gas &amp; Electric (OGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
I stand here before you filled with deep pride and joy.
Pride in the ordinary, humble people of this country -- you have shown such a calm,  patient determination to  reclaim this country as your own.
And joy that we can loudly proclaim from the rooftops: free at last! -- NELSON MANDELA  [ A1:6. ] Mr.
Mandela has walked a long road, and now stands at the top of the hill.
As he  contemplates the next hill, I hold out my hand to Mr.
Mandela in friendship and  in cooperation. -- F. W. DE KLERK  [ A1:6. ]


On the Diamond, Something Is Going, Going, On!
Seven years later, the mystery remains unsolved.
"There's no rhyme or reason to it that we've ever been able to identify," said Scott Smith, the Rawlings executive designated to tell the world no, the baseball has not been "juiced up." He uttered that refrain throughout the 1987 season, and has resurrected it again this season in fielding what has probably been a Rawlings record for the number of telephone calls in any April.


Bluegrass Music: The Derby Horses Tune Up at Churchill Downs
At 8:20 A.M., Charlie Whittingham strode out of Barn 41 on the backstretch at Churchill Downs and called, "He's coming out!" to clear a path through the crowd.
And there, in full racing regalia, Strodes Creek stepped onto the dirt path and fell into line as the parade of colts marched to the track for a rare all-star dress rehearsal five days before the Kentucky Derby.


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc.(RYAN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 30


Wellman Inc.(WLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; Why Mathis Produced A Proper Call
SURE, talk is cheap, but it has its price.
Patrick Ewing talked too much and paid when he was ejected in the second quarter of the Knicks-Nets playoff game Sunday.
I don't mean the second technical foul, which came about after a swift whistle by the referee, Mike Mathis, when Derrick Coleman shoved Ewing, who fell backward to the floor.
On that one, Ewing was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Patrick Ewing, however, should not have put himself in a position to be thrown out for a second technical, which calls for automatic expulsion.
The first technical was called in the first quarter when Ewing got into an in-your-face coffee klatch with Benoit Benjamin.
Benoit Benjamin!


Maybe Nets Are Slaves of New York
Just before practice ended today, a few Nets officials complained privately that the Knicks were trying to juggle the shoot-around times before Game 3 Wednesday night, acting as if Byrne Meadowlands Arena were New York's home arena.
By contrast, those officials said the Nets were forced to shoot around only one hour before Game 2 on Friday at Madison Square Garden.
Now, as the series shifts to New Jersey, the Knicks, who lead the three-of-five-game series, 2-0, were acting as if they owned the Meadowlands .


Singapore Overlooks Vandal Law Proviso
To the Editor:
With regard to the sentence of caning imposed by a Singapore court on the American Michael Fay after his conviction for vandalism:
My attention was drawn to a recent amendment to the Probation of Offenders Act, Chapter 252 of the 1985 Revised Edition of the Statutes of Singapore, empowering a trial court to mitigate on conviction the severity of the Punishment of Vandalism Act in certain circumstances.


A Joy Born in Pain Dances in the Street
An eruption of joy swept the vast black ghettos of South Africa tonight as Nelson Mandela claimed his presidential victory with a bit of boogie dancing on television that was instantly imitated by street throngs across the land.
Even the pool players dropped their cue sticks and poured out of the Lethabong barroom here in this landmark black township.
They strutted and weaved with a spontaneous mass gathering that danced through the darkness enveloping their shanty hovels, singing: "We have have washed this land clean of apartheid."


Norcen Energy Resources Ltd.(NCN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devils Could Really Use This Housewarming Gift: Fans
For hockey franchises, the playoffs are the main source of profit during a season.
A lack of sellout crowds in the playoffs means a deep cut in profits.
John McMullen, the owner and chairman of the Devils, is deeply disappointed and partly perplexed over his team's poor home attendance in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
But he is not looking for greener pastures away from the New Jersey Meadowlands.


Horror in Rwanda, Shame in the U.N.
Even in a century inured to carnage, the killings in Rwanda evoke a special horror.
Machetes are the common weapon in massacres that began with the April 6 death of the Rwandan President in a still-mysterious air crash.
The killings are selective: highest on the target list are Rwandans known to be educated or to favor human rights; possession of eyeglasses can be fatal.
Thus to rampaging gangs of ethnic butchers who have claimed as many as 250,000 lives, a diploma is a death certificate.
Compounding the horror is the threat of pestilence and famine in Kigali, the Rwandan capital, as mutilated bodies clog the Kagera River, flowing into neighboring Tanzania at the rate of 25 bodies every hour.


P.L.O. Pact With Israel Appears Set
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators, meeting in Cairo to ready the self-rule agreement for Gaza and Jericho for its signing on Wednesday, said today that they had settled most issues and would meet the deadline.
"As we approach these last hours," said the chief P.L.O. negotiator, Nabil Shaath, "I feel more comfortable that we are at the gates of a major achievement for our people and for all people in this part of the world."


A Woman Making Movies For Men
Gale Anne Hurd said with a wry laugh, "My films do not aspire to Shakespeare."
Far from it.
But this 38-year-old producer makes movies that are, by Hollywood standards, more welcome than anything by Shakespeare.
Her films make piles of money.


Market Place; The S.E.C. is welcoming foreign stocks, but will they come?
ARTHUR LEVITT JR. and members of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which he heads, have been telling companies around the world that the commission is not the rigid regulator it was in the past.
This means that the S.E.C. is anxious to make it easier for foreign companies to list and trade on American exchanges and sell stock here.
"Clearly, the competitive pressure from international markets has increased," Mr.
Levitt said in a recent interview.
"This is an initiative to bring more foreign companies to the foremost marketplace in the world."


At Least 23 South Africans Die In Resurgence of Political Strife
After a brief respite during last week's balloting, violence returned to Natal Province, with at least 23 people reported killed since voting ended on Friday.
Some of the killings were believed to be politically motivated, part of the decade-long rivalry between the Inkatha Freedom Party, whose Zulu leadership is based in Natal, and the African National Congress, which claimed victory tonight.


White House Not Ruling Out Force in Haiti
President Clinton's national security advisers say they are reconsidering whether to use force to oust Haiti's military leaders, a threat that could satisfy mounting pressure from members of Congress and toughen the additional sanctions that the United Nations is expected to impose on Haiti this week.
A senior adviser to the President said today that no decision had been made about whether the United States would seek to remove the military government headed by Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras in order to restore the democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, or how to do that.
It is unclear whether there has been a change of heart by Administration officials who all but rejected the military option as recently as a few weeks ago.


Mirage Resorts Inc.(MIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Newmont Mining Corp.(NEM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


N.B.A. Socks It to Brawlers
The National Basketball Association disciplined 15 members of the Miami Heat and the Atlanta Hawks for their roles during a bench-clearing brawl last Saturday.
The most severe penalty, a three-game suspension and $15,000 fine, was assessed against Keith Askins of the Heat for leaving the bench and slugging Douglas Edwards after the brawl began in the third quarter.
Edwards was suspended for two games and fined $10,000 for punching Askins in retaliation.
Grant Long, who was ruled to have initiated the incident by striking Atlanta's Duane Ferrell in the neck, was suspended for one game and fined $10,000.
All three suspensions are without pay and begin tonight.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Renewed marketing efforts for the South African Krugerrand will play down the political.
THE arrival of democracy to South Africa also means the return to America of South Africa's most familiar product, the Krugerrand.
But the renewed marketing efforts for the gold coins are deliberately playing down the political in favor of the rational and the emotional.
An ambitious campaign for Krugerrands -- employing advertising, direct marketing, promotion and public relations -- just now beginning is the first in this country since 1985, when the importing of new coins was prohibited as part of the sanctions against the longtime apartheid policies of South Africa's former Government.
Yet the print ads and test TV commercials spurn the issues surrounding the coins' comeback, eschewing upbeat photographs of Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk in favor of a focus on the value of gold and its appropriateness as a gift.


President's High Court Search Narrows to 3 or 4
President Clinton and his senior aides narrowed the search for a Supreme Court nominee today to three or four candidates after a long meeting, Government officials said.
While they would not discuss who was on the final list, the officials said that each person generally represented what they viewed as a distinct political category, like Hispanic, woman or white man.
They said the President planned to mull over the list on Wednesday and might select a finalist by the end of the week.
At that point, the person would be invited to Washington for interviews with senior White House officials, but perhaps not Mr.
Clinton.


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israel Land Development Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Judge Rejects Mistrial for Rifkin Despite Complaint of Jury Bias
Joel Rifkin's lawyer moved unsuccessfully today for a mistrial, arguing that a photograph and an article in Newsday on Saturday could prejudice the jury in Mr.
Rifkin's murder trial.
Before denying the motion, Judge Ira H. Wexner of Nassau County Court called the jury members into the courtroom one by one and asked if they had seen the article or photograph.


Classical Music in Review
Canticum Novum Singers New York Virtuoso Singers  Alice Tully Hall
Bach was two church musicians: one a dynamo of practicality grinding out great music for next Sunday's service; the other the composer of the B-minor Mass.
If much of his life was spent meeting relentless deadlines from the liturgical marketplace, we also discover Bach the thoughtful surveyor of the past.


Drug Issues Help to Drive Stocks Higher
Strength in economically sensitive stocks, along with a big rally in drug issues, added up to a solid advance yesterday for the general stock market.
Despite early weakness, the market moved upward for the second consecutive day.
And it was only the third time in the last month that stock prices gained while bond prices declined.
With prices lower, the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond rose to 7.33 percent, from 7.30 percent on Friday.


Arab Museums Try to Preserve a Purpose
The world of diplomacy is suffused with genteel language that hides, just beneath the surface, roiling passions.
Especially, it would seem, in the Arab world, where the passions sometimes break defiantly through the surface.
But if one knows the context, one can discover impassioned meanings in even the politest of formulations.
Or so it seemed here last week, when some 80 museum directors and related government officials from 18 Arab countries gathered for the first nearly comprehensive conference of the Arab museum world. (Only Kuwait and Saudi Arabia boycotted the proceedings, presumably on political grounds.)


Beazer Homes USA Inc.(BZH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Two Groups Name Winners
Two organizations have announced the winners of their annual awards.
The Martin Agency of Richmond took top honors last night at the 30th annual International Andy awards presentation sponsored by the Advertising Club of New York.
The agency won nine awards for clients including Healthtex Children's apparel and Sky Radio.
Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners of New York and Doyle Advertising &amp; Design of Boston followed with five awards each.


Shared Medical Systems Corp.(SMED,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Itel Corp.(ITL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AptarGroup Inc.(ATR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thomaston Mills Inc.(TMSTA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


KODAK STOCK JUMPS ON STERLING DRUG RUMORS
The stock of the Eastman Kodak Company rose $3.25 yesterday, to $44.75, as the company scheduled an analysts meeting and a news conference for this morning, promising a "significant announcement." The gain was apparently linked to rumors that the company might sell or spin off its Sterling Drug unit, which was acquired in 1988.
But in recent interviews, George M. C. Fisher, who became Kodak's chairman in December, has indicated little interest in making a major divestiture.
Mr.
Fisher has said he will present his plan to improve Kodak's financial performance in the spring, and until the Sterling rumors began to spread, it was generally expected on Wall Street that today's events were scheduled to present the plan.
The company declined to comment until after the announcement.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Top Quark Doesn't End Physicists' Quest
To the Editor:
Re "Top Quark, Last Piece in Puzzle of Matter, Appears to Be in Place" (front page, April 26): It is always a pleasure when a fundamental scientific discovery makes the front page, so I was delighted to see your report on the possible discovery of the top quark, a subatomic building block of matter.
The top quark has been the most elusive of the quarks and leptons because of its high mass.
Information about it is sorely needed by physicists working at the frontier of fundamental knowledge.


Richard Scarry, 74, Children's Book Author and Illustrator, Dies
Richard Scarry, a best-selling author and illustrator of children's books, died on Saturday at Saanen hospital in Gstaad, Switzerland.
He was 74 and lived in Gstaad.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Richard Jr. of Gstaad.


Rexon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Welbilt Corp.(WBLT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Street Fighter Meets One-Third Champion
Funny how things turned out for Phil Jackson.
No, not the brooding presence on the Chicago Bulls' bench, but the Phil Jackson who is fighting for the World Boxing Council heavyweight championship.
Eight days before his 30th birthday, Jackson is still putting together a life that has often seemed too much for him.
Yet he will be in Atlantic City on Friday night to challenge Lennox Lewis, the W.B.C. champion.


Q&amp;A
Pretty Poison
Q.  What is cinnabar?


A Bitter Debate Over Italy's Fininvest
With Silvio Berlusconi set to become Italy's next Prime Minister, his future seems clear.
What is perhaps less clear is the future of the company he owns, Fininvest S.p.A..
While Mr.
Berlusconi struggles to assemble a cabinet, Fininvest is struggling with $2.3 billion of debt, amassed during its heady growth years in the 1980's.


Intensity And Poise Give Edge To Knicks
Over the past three seasons, the Knicks have won 18 playoff games, while the Nets have won just 3.
That gap is a major reason why New York has forged a 2-0 lead in their three-of-five-game opening-round series that resumes tomorrow night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
New York has faced almost every conceivable playoff situation, steeling them for the emotional roller-coaster ride of post-season play.


U.N. Chief Seeks an African Peace Force for Rwanda
With another attempt under way to get Rwandan peace talks started in Tanzania on Tuesday, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, is writing to most African heads of state asking them if they will send troops for a new all-African peacekeeping operation in Rwanda.
But both initiatives suffered a setback today when the Tutsi-dominated rebel group, the Rwanda Patriotic Front, issued a statement here saying it will not take part in peace talks until the United Nations withdraws its mediator, Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh of Cameroon, whom it accused of bias, and opposing any United Nations intervention in Rwanda.


Howe Is Headed For Disabled List
Steve Howe had his strained left groin muscle examined today and the Yankees will probably place the left-handed reliever on the 15-day disabled list Tuesday and recall Sterling Hitchcock from Class AAA Columbus.


Evicted Soup Kitchen Seeks a Home
The homeless, elderly and mentally ill people who have gathered for years at the only soup kitchen in this seaside city may soon find that there is no such thing as a free lunch.
Five days a week for the last decade, the Long Beach Food and Friendship Inn has been serving meals at noon to the poor of this city of 34,000.
But now that a local church has refused to renew its lease -- the latest in a series of forced departures from churches and community centers over the years -- the kitchen itself has joined the ranks of the homeless.


OM Group Inc.(OMGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Driver With Suspended License Charged in Deaths of 3 in Family
For 27 years he drove through New York without a license, accumulating an ominously long list of suspensions and arrests, including three for driving while intoxicated.
Abraham Meyers, a 55-year-old janitor from Ozone Park, Queens, was obsessed with cars, his neighbors said, and nothing could stop him from getting behind the wheel.
Late Sunday night, Mr.
Meyers climbed into his Lincoln Continental once again, the police said, despite a blood-alcohol level more than twice the legal limit.
He tore down Cross Bay Boulevard in Howard Beach, Queens, they said, driving 71 miles an hour in a 40-m.p.h. zone, and hit four members of the Vaccarello family of Brooklyn as they crossed the street after leaving a family party.
Three of them were killed and a fourth was critically injured.


Quorum Health Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Denver Delays Opening Of Airport Indefinitely
As expected, Mayor Wellington Webb announced today that the new Denver International Airport, already six months late and more than $1 billion over budget, will not open on May 15, missing its fourth deadline.
But officials have found a sure-fire way to avoid blowing another deadline: they will not set one.


A Guide to Tropical Plant Riches
THE plant may be shrubby, but botanists are eagerly searching for it.
Only one example is known, and it was in an area of Honduras where all the trees were cut down.
So far no more have turned up.
The missing plant, Haptanthus hazlettii (above), was one of the major discoveries made by botanists as they prepared a catalogue of the 18,000 plants of the rich tropical area from southern Mexico to Panama.
Completion of the first volume of the seven-volume work, "Flora Mesoamericana," was announced last week in Washington.


Combating Signs of Bias On the Road to Summer
THE shortest line between the sagging tenements and clapboard houses of Hartford's poorest residents and an oasis of parks, fishing holes and wooded trails where many find refuge is Route 44.
But come May, when the trips on Route 44 to the Barkhamsted Reservoir begin, so does the Barkhamsted Express.
To some police officers in Avon, one of several wealthy suburbs along Route 44 on the way from Hartford to Barkhamsted, the Barkhamsted Express means carloads of beachgoing blacks and Puerto Ricans that are as easy to spot as Volkswagens in a Cadillac showroom.


Enquirer/Star Group Inc.(ENQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Starbucks Corp.(SBUX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Reviews/Music; Electronic Sounds From the Studio, Presented Live
Dinosaur rock bands like the Rolling Stones, Pink Floyd and Traffic may be on tour this summer, but so are some of their lesser-known contemporaries.
And they have sledgehammers.
"Don't retire" were the first words Jean-Herve Peron sang tonight when the 25-year-old German band Faust performed at Real Art Ways here.
Then Mr.
Peron, who is in his mid-40's, smashed a few television sets.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  SUSPENDED DRIVER KILLS 3 IN A FAMILY
For 27 years Abraham Meyers drove through New York without a license, accumulating an ominously long list of suspensions and arrests, including three for driving while intoxicated.
Late Sunday, his car hit four members of a Brooklyn family as they left a celebration in Howard Beach, Queens.
Three of them died and the fourth was critically injured.
A1.


Cobra Industries Inc.(COI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Peter Reed, Dancer And Film Maker, 40
Peter Reed, a dancer, dance-company director and film maker, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, said Frances Murdock, a friend.


Panaji Journal; A Pocketful of Portuguese, and New Intruders
Few countries celebrate their railways more than India, where the rail network established under British rule has helped bind the country's disparate regions together.
But here in the former Portuguese colony of Goa, a new railway line has become the centerpiece of a political struggle that is pulling at the fragile fabric of relations between the Hindu population and a shrinking Roman Catholic minority.


Florida East Coast Industries Inc.(FLA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sungard Data Systems (SNDT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


C-MAC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


United Cities Gas Co.(UCIT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Agency Sought For Baseball's Image
Major League Baseball said yesterday that it was seeking its first agency to handle a cause-related marketing program aimed at enhancing the image of baseball.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Utilicorp United (UCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Caraustar Industries Inc.(CSAR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Washington Talk; G.O.P. Seeking Convert In Alabama Democrat
Senator Bob Dole joked in a recent speech that if Senator Richard C. Shelby defected to the Republican Party and Republicans then won control of the Senate this year, Mr.
Shelby could replace him as the party leader.
"Boy, you'd be a great leader, Rick," Mr.
Dole said, adding that he would give the Alabama Democrat "anything he wants" to move across the aisle.


Tractor Supply Co.(TSCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Chiefs Sign Bono to Back Up Montana
The Kansas City Chiefs got some backup protection for JOE MONTANA yesterday by signing quarterback STEVE BONO to a two-year deal.
The Chiefs sent a future draft pick to the San Francisco 49ers for Bono, a veteran in his 10th year.
He joined the 49ers as a free agent from the Steelers in 1989.
Besides the Chiefs, the Jets also were interested in him.


Plan to Link Business Computers
Promising to make corporate computer conversations more closely resemble dial-up telephone calls, AT&amp;T and Novell Inc. said today that they would join forces to enable Novell's popular computer communications software to operate over AT&amp;T's long-distance network.
The companies said field testing of the new service would begin this year and become commercially available in early 1995.
And while pricing has not been disclosed, analysts expect the service to be much less complicated and expensive than setting up and maintaining private long-distance computer networks, as many corporations do today.
Many small businesses do not have the money or expertise to set up private networks.


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Mar 31


Torstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
GFC FINANCIAL CORP., Phoenix, completed its $344.3 million acquisition of Tricon Capital Corp., Paramus, N.J., the commercial finance and equipment leasing services unit of the Bell Atlantic Corporation.
OLD KENT FINANCIAL CORP., Grand Rapids, Mich., completed the acquisition of Edgemark Financial Corp., Chicago, for $62 million in stock.


Roche Set To Acquire Syntex
In the latest consolidation of the health care industry, Roche Holding Ltd., a drug maker based in Switzerland, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Syntex Corporation, a troubled medium-sized pharmaceutical company, in a deal valued at $5.3 billion.
Industry executives said more mergers and acquisitions involving drug makers, as well as hospitals and health maintenance organizations, would probably follow as health care companies struggled with growing competition and demands in Washington for lower prices for drugs and health care services.


Review/Music; So Far From the Fields Of the Dominican Republic
The Upper West Side saw its first gaga procession on Sunday night, when the World Music Institute's "Dominican Roots" concert spilled on to the sidewalk outside Symphony Space.
It was the finale of a show featuring music rarely heard outside the villages of the Dominican Republic, along with one of the island's rural stars, El Cieguito de Nagua.
Gaga ceremonies usually take place around the Dominican Republic's sugar-cane fields in the weeks before Easter.
They are carnival-like parades, akin to the rara rituals of neighboring Haiti, with dancing, drumming and the distinctive low hooting of fututos, which is a word used for both bamboo trumpets and conch-shell trumpets.


Bell &amp; Howell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ralcorp Places Cereals in Review
Ralcorp Holdings Inc., the new spinoff company of Ralston Purina that markets products including cereal, baby food and snacks, said yesterday that it had placed its cereal brands account in review.
The brands, which include the Chex line, Cookie Crisps and Almond Delight, have been handled by Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade pubications estimated them at $15 million to $30 million.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P.(SFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ivax Corp.(IVX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric (SDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc.(HFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In an Instant, a Close Family Is Torn Apart
The Vaccarellos did nearly everything together.
They went to church together.
The children studied karate together.
On Sunday, they went to a party together at a catering hall in Howard Beach, Queens.
For once, they did not go home together.
A Lincoln Continental with its headlights off ran them down as they crossed a street, the police said.
The mother, Cathy Vaccarello, 47 years old, and two daughters, Marie, 18, a Brooklyn College student, and Concetta, 17, a high school senior, were killed.


Poison Ivy: Cubs Go 0-11 at Wrigley
Reds 9, Cubs 0
John Smiley pitched a two-hitter and the Cincinnati Reds beat the Chicago Cubs, 9-0, last night, sending the embarrassed Cubs to their club-record 11th straight loss at Wrigley Field.


Noble Drilling Corp.(NDCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Theory Tested on Why Body's Defenses Go Haywire in AIDS
AS the virus that causes AIDS slowly and brutally disassembles the body's immune system, it causes confounding turmoil at every node of the defense network.
Some immune cells overreact to the infection, while others fail to respond when called.
The signaling molecules called cytokines that normally control the body's battle plan, telling the T cells, B cells, macrophages and antibodies when and where to strike, start to babble or stammer or grow tongue-tied, sending all the wrong signals at the wrong times.
The confusion is so great that scientists have just begun sorting out which defects in the immune system are central to the progression of AIDS, and which are relatively minor disruptions.


People
*
Paul Wilmot, public relations director at Vogue magazine, New York, was promoted to the new position of corporate public relations director at its parent, Conde Nast Publications, New York, while continuing his duties at Vogue.


Executive Changes
BORDEN INC., Columbus, Ohio, named Robert P. Magrann senior vice president of the company's North American Foods division.
CONTINUUM GROUP INC., Cranford, N.J., named John F. Levy chief financial officer.


Books of The Times; An Age's Destiny as Documented by Grace Paley
The Collected Stories By Grace Paley 386 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.
In one of the tales in Grace Paley's "Collected Stories," the narrator's father asks her why she can't write simple, straightforward stories, like the ones Maupassant and Chekhov wrote: "just recognizable people" and "what happened to them next."


Newbridge Networks
Newbridge Networks, a maker of digital networking products that slumped from $73.50 a share last summer, has climbed sharply in recent sessions.
It was cited in yesterday's issue of Barron's by Jeffrey Vinik, manager of the Magellan Fund, as a stock that may be a bargain.


Short of Votes, Clinton Presses Fight for Assault-Gun Ban
Acknowledging the uphill battle he faces, President Clinton met with Congressional leaders today and telephoned wavering members of the House to try to persuade them to support legislation to ban 19 types of semiautomatic weapons.
And, appearing with a display of dozens of handguns and assault weapons, many of which would not be outlawed by the ban, Mr.
Clinton said no member of Congress should be penalized at election time for supporting a weapons ban that he said was so obviously needed and unassailable that it was a "lay-down no-brainer."


Mandela and De Klerk: Words on a Transition
Following are excerpts from the statement yesterday by President F. W de Klerk of South Africa conceding defeat in the election, as provided by Reuters, which translated that part of his speech that was in Afrikaans.
It is followed by excerpts from the statement by Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress, as provided by The Associated Press, after Mr. de Klerk's remarks.
Mr.
Mandela spoke in English.
DE KLERK STATEMENT
Mr.
Mandela will soon assume the highest office of the land with all the awesome responsibility which it bears.
He will have to exercise this great responsibility in a balanced manner which will assure South Africans from all our communities that he has all their interests at heart.


Mine Safety Appliances (MNES,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Atomic Spies, or Atomic Lies?
Pavel Sudoplatov, the last of Stalin's wolves, has emerged tottering from his lair to inform us of his crimes.
In his memoir, "Special Tasks," the 87-year-old former member of Stalin's secret police also implicates four of the most important physicists behind the Manhattan Project, the United States Government's program to develop the atomic bomb.
In a chapter called "Atomic Spies," Mr.
Sudoplatov's accusations against Niels Bohr, Enrico Fermi, Leo Szilard and J. Robert Oppenheimer continue his career of assassination; only this time his target is the character of honorable men.
By his own testimony, Pavel Sudoplatov is a criminal and a murderer, but his co-authors -- his son Anatoly, a professor at Moscow University, and Jerrold and Leona Schecter -- ought to be ashamed.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Friday about a request to delay the opening of the new airport in Denver misstated the daily interest on the airport's bonds.
It is $500,000, not $500 million.


On My Mind; Are Arabs Ready for Peace?
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel has something important in common with Saddam Hussein and Bill Clinton.
Saddam Hussein did not tell the Iraqi people when he invaded Kuwait that there was a chance they would be pounded into military defeat.


MANDELA PROCLAIMS A VICTORY: SOUTH AFRICA IS 'FREE AT LAST!'
With a dignity that owed nothing to defeat, Frederik Willem de Klerk, the last white ruler in Africa, tonight conceded his presidency to Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.
"Mr. Mandela has walked a long road, and now stands at the top of the hill," said Mr. de Klerk of the man he freed after 27 years in prison, and with whom he negotiated the surrender of white power.
"As he contemplates the next hill, I hold out my hand to Mr. Mandela in friendship and in cooperation."


Octel Communications Corp.(OCTL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


It's Uphill, but FedExes May Yet Wear Helmets
In its period of grieving since losing National Football League TV rights, CBS has listened to a lot of pitches from producers and programmers eager to fill the network's free time on Sundays with figure skating, Canadian football, non-synchronized swimming and sky surfing with Merv Griffin.
Since December, CBS has listened to the pitch for the "A League," a proposed rival to the N.F.L. that would start in September 1995 with 12 company-owned teams.
Brandweek, an industry trade magazine, named Anheuser-Busch, Federal Express, Pepsico, Disney and American Express as possible owners.


Review/Dance; A Tharp Water Ballet, But Without the Water
The Boston Ballet celebrated its 30th anniversary on Saturday night with a gala peek at "Waterbaby Bagatelles," a new ballet by Twyla Tharp that is both idiosyncratic and terrific even by the best Tharp standards.
After this single benefit performance, the work is not scheduled to be seen again until March.
Obviously on a fresh creative jag, Ms.
Tharp sets her ballet in a fantasy swimming pool.
Aqua is the dominant hue, and the waterbabies of the title are a female classical ensemble on toe and in elegant bathing caps that are actually close-fitting turbans.


American Barrick Resources Corp.(ABX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thomas Industries(TII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Right Not to Observe Religion in the Schools
To the Editor:
"A Campaign to Put Biblical Values in the Public Schools" (news article, April 13) accurately describes the "highly organized, well-financed movement" behind this campaign, but one point needs emphasis: Those individuals and organizations that object to this campaign are not anti-religion.
Religion has flourished in the U.S. because the state has remained neutral on religious matters.
We become concerned when any religious group attempts to impose its views on others, particularly in the public schools.


Southern Union Co.(SUG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Liberty Corp.(LC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trico Products reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Oilers Squeeze Carlson Under the Cap
CODY CARLSON, who will replace WARREN MOON as the Houston Oilers' quarterback, signed a restructured contract yesterday that will help the Oilers meet the National Football League's salary cap.
Carlson's new contract is worth $10 million.
He will get a $1.8 million signing bonus and a 1994 salary of $2.1 million. (AP)


T. Rowe Price Associates Inc.(TROW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ryland Group Inc.(RYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hooper Holmes Inc.(HH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Youth Shot on Bristol Courthouse Steps
A 17-year-old was shot and critically wounded today when a midday dispute that began inside the police-court complex here spilled out to the courthouse steps.
The gunman, the police said, was 15.
The authorities said they suspected the incident was gang-related.
It comes only six months after an 18-year-old student was fatally shot by a rival gang member outside a high school in nearby New Britain.


Coming Back Around to Blass
"Every five years I get rediscovered," Bill Blass said wryly.
He can tell this is one of the good years from the enthusiastic reactions of store buyers who were writing orders for his fall collection and the number of magazine editors who want to photograph his clothes.
"My philosophy has not changed," he said.
"But sometimes it works better than other times."
It was clear that Mr.
Blass had a success from the moment the first of his fall styles appeared on the runway of the tent in Bryant Park, where most Seventh Avenue designers introduced their collections last month.
Three models in brightly colored double coats with undulating edges appeared together; one was in an orange coat over a blue coat, another in orange over chartreuse and the third in purple over orange.
Worn over black tights and black dresses, the coats were beacons of color in a fashion scene that has been dominated by dark or neutral colors for some time.


Oliver Cope, 91, a Top Surgeon Who Was a Harvard Professor
Dr.
Oliver Cope, an innovative surgeon who taught at Harvard Medical School, died on Saturday at his son's home in Woodsville, N.H.
A former resident of Lincoln and Cambridge, Mass., Dr.
Cope was living with his son at his death.
He was 91.
He died after a brief illness, said his son, Robert.


Teen-Aged Twist in a Venerable Sport
With BILL KOCH now an underdog in America's Cup racing with his all-female crew, and with DENNIS CONNOR the favorite of traditionalists, KEVIN MAHANEY of Bangor, Maine, has announced a bold counter stroke to gain support for his own Cup defense venture.
Mahaney announced yesterday that his boat would sail next year under the name Young America.
He said $4 million of the Young America syndicate's $16 million budget would be devoted to a national education project aimed at young Americans in the classrooms, on the telephone, at the end of on-line computer terminals and in front of televisions sets.


Showboat Inc.(SBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


KCS Energy Inc.(KCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.73
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
3.85
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.41
4.28
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.03
5.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.30
6.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.14
8.09
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.37
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


'Little Voice' Is to Close
"The Rise and Fall of Little Voice," a comedy-drama with music by Jim Cartwright, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Neil Simon Theater, 250 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
The Saturday evening performance of the play, which was directed by Simon Curtis, is to be its 9th regular performance; it had 19 previews.


Two Airlines To Offer Joint Rome Flights
Continental Airlines and Alitalia Airlines said yesterday that they would start offering joint flights in July between Rome and Newark, adding to the growing list of carriers that have linked forces to extend their networks of routes.
This popular industry tactic is known as "code sharing," because the same flight is listed with each partner's two-letter code in computer reservation systems.
But it has been called deceptive by some industry executives and politicians, including Senator Wendell H. Ford, Democrat of Kentucky, who has called code sharing "inherently dishonest."


Montana Power Co.(MTP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nimby Groups Can't Legally Bar Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
"Social Service Agencies Face Need to Convert Chaos to Order" (news article, April 17) fails to take into account even one of many organizations and private individuals who are committed to supporting housing for people with mental illness in New York City.
Once more, you interview the same spokespersons of a vocal Nimby (Not in my backyard) group who repeat their same arguments as to why disabled people should be barred from living in their community, the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
However, Nimby groups and local politicians who are succumbing to their strong-arm tactics may be violating the Federal Fair Housing Act.
Under this law, it is illegal to block or interfere in any way with housing for disabled persons.
The so-called saturation theory, used to limit the number of mentally ill people that can live in a particular area, is specifically prohibited by the law.
Consistent with this, local zoning laws, fair share and land use laws cannot be legally used to block housing for people with psychiatric disabilities; these local laws are overridden by the Federal law.


Network Systems Corp.(NSCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A New Offer For Centex Is Accepted
The MFS Communications Company raised its tender offer for Centex Telemanagement Inc. by 22 percent today, and Centex agreed to accept it.
Under the merger agreement, MFS increases its offer for Centex stock to $11 a share in cash, from $9 a share, in a deal that values Centex at about $225.5 million.


It All Begins With Street Hockey in Sneakers
Back when he was a high-school kid in South Boston, Brian Noonan played in a summer hockey league that included older players, some from college, some from professional teams.
One of the big names in the group at the time was Craig MacTavish, then in the early stages of his career with the Boston Bruins.


German Court Allows Possession of Small Amounts of Marijuana
Germany's highest court has touched off a national debate by ruling that the possession of small amounts of marijuana and hashish should no longer be subject to criminal penalties.
Under the court ruling, which was handed down on Thursday, laws against the substances remain on the books, and they are still technically illegal.
But the police will no longer make arrests for possession.


Senate Campaign Is Financed by Individuals
To the Editor:
"Health Debate Is Filling Campaign Coffers" (front page, April 19), on my race for the Senate, fails to put the issue in perspective.
You have repeatedly praised my health care plan because it is good public policy.
Publications ranging from The New Republic to Fortune have also favored it.
I drafted the legislation back in 1991 and 1992, long before I had any thought of running for the Senate.


AGENCY OFFERING AN AID BLUEPRINT FOR PALESTINIANS
The World Bank unveiled a three-year, $1.2 billion program today, worked out with the Palestine Liberation Organization, to quickly lay an economic foundation for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
Last Oct. 1, the United States organized a meeting of 40 donor countries, which pledged $2.4 billion to support the new Palestinian authority in the former Israeli-occupied areas.


Newcomers to Internet Need Combat Training
DEAR Mr. Power Luser:
I just got an account on America Online so I can explore the Internet and have all sorts of fascinating discussions with people on their bulletin boards.
What is the first thing I need to do?  2400 BAUD


Mayor Vows Investigation Of Incident
After watching a videotape in which police officers appear to be beating a handcuffed Staten Island man, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he was troubled by the seeming brutality of the arrest and would start a full investigation.
The incident, caught on videotape last month by a woman from her sixth-floor apartment window, occurred only a few feet from where another man died after struggling with officers on Friday.


Demand Action on Assault Weapons
AK-47's, Uzis and Street Sweepers are made with one purpose: to kill human beings quickly and efficiently.
They are not sporting weapons; they have no legitimate civilian purpose.
The Senate has already voted to ban these guns, along with a list of other semiautomatic weapons and detachable magazines that can hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition.
The ban would not apply to guns now legally owned, although it would require the filing of a Federal form for such guns to be transferred.
The Senate's assault weapons ban was passed as part of the crime bill.
It was chopped off the House version.
Now it is before the House as a freestanding bill, sponsored by Representative Charles Schumer of New York.


INSIDE
Mrs. Clinton's Role Queried
In a Congressional report on the travel office affair, Hillary Rodham Clinton is quoted as having urged a White House official to replace workers with "our people." Page B8.
Roche Holding of Switzerland agreed to acquire Syntex, a troubled drug company, for $5.3 billion.
Page D1.
U.N.
Peace Force Sought
The United Nations is asking African nations whether they are willing to take part in a peacekeeping force for Rwanda.
Page A3.
Sheik's Documents Seized
F.B.I. agents searched the home of one of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's aides and seized copies of the cleric's writings, lawyers said.
Page B1.


Clinton Makes No Progress With Beijing
With a month to go before he must decide whether to renew China's preferential trade status, President Clinton made no progress during a meeting today with a top Chinese official toward resolving differences between the two countries over human rights.
In a written statement, the White House said Mr.
Clinton had reminded Deputy Prime Minister Zou Jiahua of his insistence that China do more to improve its human rights record by the June 3 deadline.
But senior White House officials said later that Mr.
Zou had simply reasserted Beijing's view that the United States should not interfere in its internal affairs.


Viacom Executive Named Network President at NBC
NBC named Neil S. Braun, the chairman of Viacom Entertainment, as president of the television network yesterday.
He will replace Pierson Mapes, who ended an association of almost 25 years with NBC by announcing his early retirement.


Wisconsin Energy Corp.(WEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In a Groove, and Swinging Hard; O'Neill Turns His Simple Batting Rhythm Into a Harmonic Motion
The routine begins with the left foot dig, dig, digging until it fits snugly into the dirt beside home plate.
Then the bat is waved once, twice, three times toward the pitcher, measuring for the upcoming task.
But it is the right foot tap, tap, tapping that signals the impending collision of bat against baseball.
Paul O'Neill is ready to hit.
Before the Yankee outfielder even creates cleat prints in the dirt or lifts his right foot to hit, he has hoarded information about the man lurking on the mound and the situation he has been thrust into.
Will the pitcher rely on sinkers or fastballs?
Will he work high and tight or low and away?
Will he use off-speed pitches while behind in the count?
Does the team need a double or a sacrifice fly?


Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc.(WG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Pair of Early Upsets in Italian Open  With the big names either skipping the tournament or drawing first-round byes, little-known players ousted two seeded players in first-round play yesterday at the women's Italian Open in Rome.
Federica Fortuni of Italy provided the first surprise by beating 16th-seeded Miriam Oremans of the Netherlands, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
Joannette Kruger of South Africa, No. 95 in the computer ranking, then eliminated No. 15-seeded Meike Babel of Germany, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1. (AP)


Pride Cos. L.P.(PRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Dr.
FRED EPSTEIN, director of pediatric neurosurgery at New York University Medical Center, has saved thousands of children's lives, but that is not why he is to receive an honorary doctorate from Southern Vermont College in Bennington on May 15.
Rather, it is for his achievement in overcoming a learning disability to become a nationally recognized physician and professor.
Dr.
Epstein, 54, struggled through elementary and high school, through college (Brandeis and New York University) and medical school (New York Medical College) unaware that there was a reason for his learning difficulties.
In fact, he still does not have a name for the condition, but he recognized it immediately 10 years ago when he heard a specialist's description of learning problems encountered by his daughter Ilana.


Ad Drive Opens for Canadian-Style Health Care
Supporters of a Canadian-style system of government-financed health insurance announced a new advertising campaign today, hoping to build on their success in a recent grass-roots campaign on behalf of the idea in California.
The new campaign pits the comedy team of Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara against the Health Insurance Association of America's "Harry and Louise," two aging yuppies fretting about the future of health care in a series of television advertisements.


Airport-Opening Delay Is a Jolt to Bondholders
Bondholders in Denver's new $3.2 billion airport were jolted yesterday with the announcement of yet another delay in the opening.
The publicly traded revenue bonds that financed the construction dropped as much as one point in trading in the municipal bond market.
Analysts note that with each delay of the airport's opening the investment risks increase.


Factor in Female Sexuality
THE contribution of testosterone to female sexuality is murky and fiercely debated.
Dr.
Karen A. Hutchinson, an assistant clinical professor of medicine at Yale University and the director of medical education at Bridgeport (Conn.) Hospital, recently reviewed all the scientific literature on the subject and reached some surprising conclusions.
She found that while male sexuality correlated with testosterone levels in an almost connect-the-dots sort of pattern, female eroticism could not be so neatly sorted out.
Estrogen obviously is not a stimulant to sexual feelings, she said (if anything, it may soften the intensity of desire), but neither does testosterone seem to be a guaranteed aphrodisiac.


Hungarians Cooling To Foreign Investment
When foreign investors stampeded into Hungary with billions of dollars in the heady days after the fall of Communism, expectations were high that the new money would be the engine for an economic turnaround.
With its grand capital city and its open door, the most prosperous and Western-leaning of the Communist countries lured investors with tax breaks, political stability and a Government that made the investment climate appealing.


Chess
The history of blindfold chess goes back at least to the eighth-century Arabs.
Since it does not permit a board or pieces, it can be played anywhere, on horseback, for example, as long as the players can report their moves to each other.
Quick play probably began not long after the chess clock was introduced in 1883.
Joop van Oosterom, a Dutch entrepreneur, brought the two together in his Melody Amber Tournament in Monaco from March 26 to April 7.
The adventurous sponsor assembled almost all the world's top players in this event in which each contested one game against the other 11 at the quick tempo of 25 minutes for each player for all moves.
Each also contested a second game against the others at the same tempo but this time neither player was allowed chess pieces.
They briefly communicated their moves by mouse on the empty screen of a computer chessboard.
The clock invented by Bobby Fischer was used to time both types of game.
For the quick game, it gave the players 10 additional seconds each time they moved.
For the blindfold-quick game, it gave the players 20 extra seconds each time they moved.


Scientists Hope More New Species Will Be Discovered in Vietnam
LURKING in the dense rain forests and mountains of Vietnam, many previously unknown animal species may remain to be discovered, and naturalists hope to identify some of them before the rapid expansion of human settlement drives them to extinction.
The recent discovery of two new hoofed creatures in the Vietnamese wilderness has spurred the search for others.


Orion Capital (OC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Anatomy of a Disaster: 9 Runs, None Earned
It was a comedy, and mainly one caused by errors.
Jose Vizcaino botched a two-out ground ball in the third inning last night at Shea Stadium, and, from that moment, the Mets' whole night fell apart.
Bobby Jones could not pitch, his teammates could not get one more out, and the Mets could not do anything to get the Giants away from the plate.
By the time the inning ended, the Giants had scored nine runs off Jones -- all of them unearned -- to set up a 10-3 victory.
Those nine runs were the most scored against the Mets in one inning since the Cincinnati Reds stuck them with 10 in a game at Riverfront Stadium on July 19, 1988.


Puzzling Currency Move; The Dollar Was Supposed to Rise. It Fell. The Answer May Lie in New Expectations.
The biggest question on the minds of many market analysts last week was this: How could it be that American interest rates were rising and yet the dollar was suddenly falling against both the Japanese yen and the German mark?
Normally, when American interest rates rise, the expectation is that the dollar will get stronger, because Germans and Japanese will want to buy dollars to put them in American banks or bonds to take advantage of the higher interest returns.
But instead, it went the other way.


Fretter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sunrise Medical Inc.(SMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Compania Cervecerias Unidas S.A. (CCUUY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Washington Energy (WEG,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


Pacers Send Magic on a Long Florida Vacation
Pacers 99, Magic 86
The Indiana Pacers sent the Orlando Magic home for the summer, completing a surprising three-game sweep of their first-round playoff series with a 99-86 victory last night in Indianapolis.


Case Breaks New Ground In DNA Tests For Paternity
To resolve the question of paternity and a claim to an estate, a judge in Manhattan has ruled that both the parents of a dead man and the 7-year-old boy whose mother claims he is the dead man's son must submit to DNA testing.
Legal experts say this is the first case in New York State in which DNA tests will be used to determine inheritance by examining whether the chromosomes of a child born out of wedlock match those of his purported grandparents.


Accounts
*
Boston Whaler, Edgewater, Fla., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando and Milwaukee, to handle its account, previously at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., until that agency resigned the account when Boston Whaler was sold by Reebok International Ltd. to Meridian Sports.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
American Psychological Center, Brooklyn, to 2 Guys Who Do Ads, Brooklyn, as the first agency to handle advertising for the chain of walk-in storefront clinics.
Billings were not disclosed.


Wainoco Oil Corp.(WOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Central La. Electric (CNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Citizens Utilities Co.  (CZN.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
A judge dismissed criminal charges yesterday against JACK NICHOLSON, after the man who accused the actor of bashing his Mercedes-Benz with a golf club said the two had reached a settlement.
Mr.
Nicholson had been scheduled to be arraigned on misdemeanor counts of assault and vandalism, but ROBERT BLANK told Judge MARTIN SUITS of Municipal Court in Los Angeles that he was satisfied with Mr.
Nicholson's apology and the settlement of a lawsuit, The Associated Press reported.
Terms of the settlement have not been disclosed.
The Deputy City Attorney, Jeff Harkavy, objected to the dismissal.


Halliburton Co. (HAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tennant Co.(TANT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
Young Performers Series  Bryant Park
The Bryant Park Young Performers Series got off to its spring start yesterday afternoon with a concert of songs leaning more toward experience then to youth.
Roberta Peters, the soprano, was the main attraction.
She introduced the young tenor Mark Marriott, joining him in the Brindisi from "La Traviata" and turning him loose for "La donna e mobile" from "Rigoletto."


UNC Inc.(UNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pure Human Antibodies Reported From Mice
TWO groups of scientists working separately say they have prepared genetically altered mice that can be used to produce human disease-fighting antibodies of unusual purity.
In a technically daunting technique, the mice's own antibody-making genes were knocked out and replaced with the equivalent genes from humans.
When such a mouse is injected with a foreign substance like a virus or bacterium, its immune system generates antibodies against the invader in the usual way, except that these are human and not mouse antibodies.


Incinerator Operators Say Ruling Will Be Costly
Operators of many of the nation's 125 waste-to-energy incinerators said yesterday that the Supreme Court decision that incinerator ash may be hazardous waste would cost them more money.
They could not estimate how much the cost would rise but said no operator anticipated that the ruling would force an incinerator to close.
The biggest casualty of the ruling, many people in the field said, might be a number of proposed incinerators, including one planned for the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Supporters and opponents of that incinerator agreed that the ruling could substantially increase protective measures in ash disposal, increasing both the political hurdles and the costs.


Shaking Up the Schools
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines has been on the job for only eight months.
But in fairly short order he seems to have grasped what must be done to restore life and hope to New York City's academic wasteland.
First, he has begun to crack down on principals who have presided lazily over failing schools.
He now proposes an ambitious, citywide revision of the curriculum that should lead to a dramatic upgrade in standards.
Ideally, he will attempt next to bring mediocre teachers up to snuff.


Jury Acquits Dr. Kevorkian Of Illegally Aiding a Suicide
Four years after Dr.
Jack Kevorkian helped the first of 20 people end their lives, a Michigan jury today cleared him of charges that he had violated a state law prohibiting assisted suicide by helping a terminally ill man take his life last year.
The jurors cited uncertainties over Dr.
Kevorkian's motive, the wisdom of the two-year-old law under which he had been prosecuted, and precisely where he had helped a 30-year-old man end the agony of his degenerative nerve disease.


Observer; Gone With the Unum
I have always been an "E Pluribus Unum" person myself, but the future does not look bright for an "E Pluribus Unum" America.
The melting pot in which the Pluribus were to be combined into the Unum was not the success its advertisers had promised.
Well, what ever is?
It is the destiny of Americans to be oversold by slogans.
They know it instinctively, which is why advertising is far more to blame than Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson combined for the cynicism in which we now wallow.


Justices Decide Incinerator Ash Is Toxic Waste
In a decision that could substantially increase the cost of waste disposal, the Supreme Court ruled today that any toxic residue created by burning household and industrial waste in municipal incinerators must be treated as hazardous waste and not dumped in ordinary landfills.
The 7-to-2 decision interpreted a Federal law governing hazardous waste, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976.
For years the law has been the subject of administrative and judicial confusion about its application to the ash left by the new generation of municipal incinerators that burn trash and produce energy.


Lessons of Independence for a New South Africa
To the Editor:
The South African population has gone to the polls to elect a new government.
The election will undoubtedly establish a predominantly black government and will bring about the final transfer of political power from European to African hands on the African continent.
At this historical juncture, it may be useful to pause to consider what, if anything, we have learned about power transfers and early independence from those African states that preceded South Africa in attaining freedom.
To be sure, South Africa is more urban, better educated -- even its black population -- and more industrial than were its neighbors to the north when they achieved independence.
It also has a large and talented multiracial middle class.
But ethnic and regional antagonisms exist just as they did elsewhere and the apartheid legacy is a uniquely bitter one.


Newmont Gold Co.(NGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Conseco To Acquire An Insurer
An affiliate of Conseco Inc., a holding company that invests in insurance companies and related financial-services businesses, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Statesman Group in a transaction valued at about $350 million.
Conseco Capital Partners II, a limited partnership in which Conseco is a limited and general partner, agreed to pay Statesman shareholders $15.25 cash a share and the right to receive up to $2 cash a share in addition, based on the outcome of litigation against the Federal Government concerning Statesman's former bank subsidiary.


Programs That Need th Inning Stretch
BASEBALL programs could fill a stadium this spring.
One, Baseball '94 for Windows: The Complete Interactive Preview Guide, is a magazine and encyclopedia for a computer running Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later with about eight million empty seats on the hard disk.
The opening screen offers six choices: players, teams, statistics, fantasy baseball rules and strategy, looking at 1994 and grab bag (miscellaneous information).


U.N. Letter on Bosnia
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has said he shares the Clinton Administration's "concern" at criticism of Washington's Bosnia policy by the senior United Nations officials there.
Ms.
Albright complained to Mr.
Boutros-Ghali after Mr.
Akashi called the United States "timid" and "afraid" because of its refusal to send ground forces into Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Vibe Magazine Editor Resigns
Jonathan Van Meter has resigned as editor in chief of Vibe, a music magazine, noting "creative differences" with officials at the publication.
Time Inc.
Ventures issued an announcement last week.
"The creative differences basically involved the growing pains that a new magazine invariably has as to how it should define itself and move forward," said Peter Costiglio, a spokesman for Time Inc.


'My Fair Lady' Closes
"My Fair Lady," a revival of the 1956 Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe musical, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Virginia Theater, 245 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
The play was directed by Howard Davies, and starred Michael Moriarty and Melissa Errico.
It ran for 165 regular performances and 16 previews.


Chancellor Says Stiff Standards Won't Mean More Dropouts
Acknowledging that his plan to raise math and science standards for all high school students would be difficult, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he did not think the stricter requirements would increase the number of dropouts.
The plan, announced on Sunday, will require the city's 250,000 high school students to take three units each of academic science and mathematics to graduate -- a huge change in a system where less than 25 percent of all juniors and seniors took such courses in the last school year, and some students earned a diploma without having ever taken an algebra class.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Review/Television; Update on a Political Earthquake
"Politics in Russia is just intrigue," says President Boris N. Yeltsin's former press secretary, setting the theme for tonight's incisive two-hour "Frontline" report.
"The Struggle for Russia" covers the tumultuous two and a half years after the failed August 1991 coup against Mikhail S. Gorbachev, then president of the expiring Soviet Union, from which Mr.
Yeltsin emerged as the symbol of a new, democratic Russia.
The idealism of that August, the narrator says, seems "a distant and melancholy memory."


Irish Jockey Critically Injured in Tumble
The Irish jockey DECLAN MURPHY, one of jump racing's most stylish riders, was in critical condition in an intensive care unit yesterday after falling in a race at Haydock Park in England.


Hahn Automotive Warehouse Inc.(HAHN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Computer Sciences Corp.(CSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Male Hormone Molds Women, Too, In Mind and Body
TRY as humans may to appreciate life's complexities and half-tones, we often resort to good old-fashioned dualism, dividing the world into conservatives and liberals, rich and poor, straights and gays, somebodies and nobodies, and, of course, men and women, with their complementary genitalia and their characteristic hormones.
Men have androgens, most notably testosterone, while women have estrogens.
Even the words have a binary spin: "androgen" comes from the Greek "maker of males," and "estrogen" signifies the maker of the estrus cycle, the boss of ovulation and menstruation, the essence of womanhood.


CHRONICLE
PAUL NEWMAN will replicate in Ireland the summer camp he established eight years ago in Connecticut for children with cancer and serious blood diseases.
In ceremonies conducted on Saturday with ALBERT REYNOLDS, Prime Minister of Ireland, the film star signed a lease on Barretstown Castle, 25 miles outside of Dublin.
Under the terms of the 99-year lease, the Irish Government will collect one Irish pound, or about $1.50, each year from the Barretstown Castle Gang Camp, which will occupy the 500-acre premises, where sheep and cattle roam.


SOCCER
World Cup Tickets
American organizers yesterday announced that ticket sales for individual games for the tournament set a record on the first day of sale Sunday with more than 100,000 tickets being sold.


Modine Mfg. Co.(MODI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Leaseway Transportation Corp.(LSWY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hardee's Food Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chiquita Brands International Inc.(CQB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Washington National Corp.(WNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


I.B.M.'s Head Of PC Unit Resigns Post
The recovery of I.B.M.'s troubled personal computer business had been regarded a year ago as a model for the kind of transformation that I.B.M.'s new management hoped to emulate across the company.
Streamlined, nimble and quick to market with flashy new products, the IBM Personal Computer Company had come back with a vengeance.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Announced that Joe Sparks resigned as manager of Toledo of the International League.
Named Larry Parrish manager of Toledo.
National League


Peoples Energy (PGL,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


Council Panel's Report Criticizes Preventive Health Care System
A City Council committee released a bleak report yesterday on the city's new system of preventive health care clinics, charging that the opening of the last six clinics has been hampered by delays and that the system is staffed so poorly that patients must wait -- sometimes as long as two months -- for routine appointments.
Giuliani administration officials said they had received the report only yesterday morning and were unable to respond to many of the findings.


Amre Inc.(AMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


How the Whale Lost Its Legs And Returned To the Sea
AGES after some adventurous (or misadventurous) fish left the sea and planted the flag of vertebrate animal life on land, their descendants had it both ways as amphibians and then completed the epic transition, evolving into terrestrial reptiles, mammals and birds.
But something about the water must have kept beckoning, until a few irredentists among the mammals did eventually reclaim a place in the sea.
Most prominent of these mammals are the whales.
Although they may swim the oceans with power and grace, these leviathans are more closely related to the camel and cow than any fish in their wake.
Their anatomies retain vestiges of the four-legged land animals in their ancestry, the ones that began the bold return to the sea more than 50 million years ago.


McNall Agrees to Sell Stake in Kings
The agreement to sell a majority interest in the Los Angeles Kings by the troubled owner BRUCE McNALL to the telecommunications executive JEFFREY SUDIKOFF and his partner, JOSEPH COHEN, was made final last night.
Bank of America agreed to provide financing for the much-delayed transaction, according to a statement issued by the Kings and Sitrick Krantz &amp; Company Inc., a financial relations firm.


F.B.I Seizes Papers at Home of Sheik's Assistant
F.B.I. agents searched the New Jersey home of one of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's legal assistants yesterday morning and seized copies of the Egyptian cleric's writings, tapes of his sermons and other materials, prosecutors and defense lawyers said.
Federal prosecutors, who are preparing for the sheik's trial this fall on charges of involvement in a terrorist conspiracy, said in an affidavit that the search was necessary to collect some of Mr.
Abdel Rahman's highly charged pronouncements, which they believe may shed light on the conspiracy.


Escape From Suburbia; Community Associations Thrive Amid Debate on Freedom, Privacy and Democracy
It was the hot-air balloon race in Hunterdon County that lured Bill Savage to suburbia's new frontier.
He had come to see colors lift and sweep across the sky, and found in the horse farms and open fields the suburban dream he had lost at home in Morris County.
There, narrow paths were being widened for a new shopping mall, and congestion had brought urban-sized traffic jams to his door.


Clinton Expected to Name S.E.C. Member to Head C.F.T.C.
After a long delay, the Clinton Administration will announce on Tuesday its intention to nominate Mary L. Schapiro as head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, a Government source said this evening.
Ms.
Schapiro, a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission and formerly a lawyer at the C.F.T.C., has been thought for many months to have been the White House's choice to head the commodities agency.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In the latest consolidation of the health care industry, Roche Holding, the Swiss-based drug maker, agreed to acquire Syntex in a deal valued at $5.3 billion.  [ D1. ]


Reviews/Music; Care of the Voice and Soul
Six years ago, the jazz cellist and composer Diedre Murray went out on her own, abandoning a safe role as a sidewoman in the bands of such musicians as Henry Threadgill and David Murray.
As part of the New Faces, New Voices, New Visions series on Saturday night at Davis Hall at City College, she took another step away from her past and presented an a cappella work that existed almost entirely outside the jazz idiom.
The piece, a work in progress called "The Voice (Within)," was equal parts gospel, blues, doo-wop, choral music and, yes, a little jazz.
It was scored for eight voices and accompanied by an expressionist slide show prepared by Quimetta Perle. (Ms. Murray watched from the sidelines.) The vocalists sat on stools in a semicircle around Richard Harper, who conducted and enthusiastically performed 50 minutes of solos, rounds and four-part harmonies.


Trimas Corp.(TMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp.(TNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cigna Corp.(CI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tesoro Petroleum Corp.(TSO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fresenius USA Inc.(FRN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15 SOUTH AFRICAN BATON PASSED  President F. W. de Klerk conceded defeat with dignity in South Africa's election, and Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress accepted victory with equal grace as vote counting continued.
A1  THE CELEBRATIONS BEGIN  As Nelson Mandela claimed his presidential victory, joy swept the black ghettoes of South Africa, with crowds singing and dancing, fireworks and applause.
A1  The spirit of the election, not the letter, its author says.
A14  More violence in Natal after a respite for voting.
A15  AID PACKAGE FOR PALESTINIANS  The World Bank announced a $1.2 billion aid package to help the Palestinians achieve self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho, with programs ranging from sewers to housing to health facilities.
A1  Israeli and P.L.O negotiators will meet their deadline.
A7  U.N.
EFFORT ON RWANDA  The United Nations is asking African nations if they would send troops to a peacekeeping operation in Rwanda, with another attempt under way to start peace talks.
A3  DISAPPOINTMENT IN HUNGARY  Hungary invited foreign investment as Communism fell, but with a presidential election coming and with the economy lagging, many are accusing the Government of selling the country's patrimony.
A12  A PRIME MINISTER'S BUSINESS  With Silvio Berlusconi set to become Italy's next Prime Minister, his future seems clear.
What is less clear is the future of the company he owns, Fininvest, which has struggled with $2.3 billion in debt.
D1  The Polish Airlines modernization attracts American carriers.
D6  A German controversy over a ruling to ease drug laws.
A12  No progress on human rights in a U.S.-China meeting.
A8  Washington is reconsidering whether to use force in Haiti.
A3  Goa Journal: On the wrong track in India.
A4 National A16-20, B8 RULING ON CITY WASTE  The Supreme Court ruled that toxic residue created by burning waste in municipal incinerators must be treated as hazardous and not dumped in ordinary landfills.
A1  SETBACK FOR INCINERATORS  Experts said the Supreme Court decision could hamper cities planning to build incinerators by increasing the cost of design and giving fodder to opponents of the plants.
A18  KEVORKIAN IS ACQUITTED  A Michigan jury cleared Dr.
Jack Kevorkian of charges that he had violated a state law prohibiting assisted suicide by helping a terminally ill man take his life.
A1  MORE DELAYS FOR AIRPORT  The troubled Denver International Airport is still not ready for business, officials said, and no new opening date has been set.
A16  FEW OPT FOR IMPLANT  More than a year after the contraceptive Norplant was made available to students at a Baltimore high school, few girls have taken up the offer.
A16  SHORTER LIST FOR COURT  President Clinton and his senior aides narrowed the search for a Supreme Court nominee to three or four candidates after a long meeting, Government officials said.
A16  FIRST LADY'S ROLE IN TRAVEL AFFAIR  An investigation into dismissals at the White House travel office portrayed Hillary Clinton as having a more active role in the shake-up than previously reported.
B8  A DEMOCRATIC DEFECTOR?
Washington Talk: Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama has long been considered a Democrat on the verge of crossing the aisle.
The talk has recently grown louder.
B8  PUSHING FOR GUN BILL  President Clinton tried to persuade wavering members of the House to support legislation to ban the manufacture of 19 types of semiautomatic weapons.
B8  ADS FOR HEALTH PLAN  Supporters of a Canadian-style system of government-financed health insurance announced a new advertising campaign, hoping to build on their success in a recent grass-roots campaign on behalf of the idea in California.
B8 Metro Digest B1 DEATH OF A FAMILY  For 27 years Abraham Meyers drove without a license, accumulating a long list of suspensions and arrests.
On Sunday his car hit four members of a family, killing three.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  A meeting of the Arab museum world.
C15  Action-film producer on her life and works.
C15  Music: Two concerts by Faust.
C16  Diedre Murray.
C16  "Dominican Roots." C19  Dance: Boston Ballet in a new work by Tharp.
C15  Books: Grace Paley's stories.
C19  Television: Update on the new Russia.
C20  Fashion B9  Coming back around to Blass.
Science C1-14  Fossil evidence shows how the whale returned to the sea.
C1  Male hormones help shape women, too, in mind and body.
C1  A scientist who leaped from yeast studies to cancer research.
C1  Theory seeks to explain why immune defenses fail in AIDS.
C3  Scientists are seeking more new species in Vietnam.
C4  Q&amp;A C5  Genetically engineered mice turn out human antibodies.
C6  Personal Computers C8  Peripherals C9  Obituaries B10  Richard Scarry, best-selling author and illustrator of children's books.
Oliver Cope, a surgeon and professor at Harvard Medical School.
Sports B11-17  HOME RUN MYSTERY  Baseballs are flying out of major league ball parks in record numbers and people are searching for the reasons why.
A1  Baseball: O'Neill in a groove.
B11  9 unearned runs in third inning sink Mets.
B13  Basketball: The deep Knicks.
B11  Pacers sweep Magic.
B15  Columns: Berkow on violence.
B11  TV Sports B14  Football: Moore's new role.
B14  Hockey: Rangers' Noonan reflects his roots.
B14  Devils fighting for fans, too.
B14  Sharks continues upset run.
B14  Horse Racing: The Derby's dress rehearsal.
B11  Sports People B16  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Shaking up the schools.
Demand action on weapons.
Horror in Rwanda, shame in U.N.
Letters  Russell Baker: Gone with the Unum.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: Are Arabs ready for peace?
Yirmiyahu Yovel: Understanding terrorism.
Richard Rhodes: Atomic spies, or atomic lies?
Amy Knight: The man who wasn't there.
Chronicle B7 Chess C14 Crossword C20


Clinton Considering Hiring Private Lawyer
President Clinton is exploring whether to hire a prominent Washington lawyer to represent him if he is sued by a woman who has accused him of making an unwanted sexual advance in 1991, White House officials said today.
The officials said that Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House counsel, had held preliminary conversations with the Robert S. Bennett, who has represented many well-known Washington figures.
Mr.
Bennett represents Harold M. Ickes, a deputy White House chief of staff, who is among several top aides to Mr.
Clinton who have been subpoenaed by the special prosecutor in the Whitewater matter.


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


P.L.O. Pact With Israel Appears Set; Syrian Chief Rebuffs Israel
Israeli officials said today that they were disappointed that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria made no concessions in his response to a new Israeli peace plan that calls for dismantling settlements in the Golan Heights.
An Israeli official also voiced frustration that the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Shara, publicly dismissed parts of the Israeli plan as "silly" when the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, was eager for a favorable response.


Western Waste Industries(WW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Safeguard Scientifics Inc.(SFE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Another Name, and a Big One, in Lottery
GLENN ROBINSON of Purdue, everybody's college basketball player of the year last season, announced yesterday he is giving up his final year of eligibility to turn pro.
"I'm leaving because I'm in the unique situation a lot of people don't have -- the opportunity to go into the lottery or maybe even be the No. 1 pick," Robinson said at a news conference at his alma mater, Gary Roosevelt High School in Gary, Ind.


Snyder Oil Corp.(SNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Luxottica Group S.p.A.  (LUX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
Florence Gould Hall Chamber Players  Gould Hall
Stravinsky gave a tart edge to an otherwise genteel afternoon of music by the Florence Gould Hall Chamber Players.
This was "L'Histoire du Soldat," or at least five of its movements, in an arrangement for clarinet, violin and piano.
The curtailed instrumentation jogs the ear.
Used to Stravinsky's more varied colors, one hears detail afresh, in different clothes.


Tredegar Industries(TG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


By Design; Tie-Dyed and Labeled
A generation ago, there was a flurry of tie-dyeing -- a method of creating designs by tying bunches of fabric with waxed thread so the dye affects only exposed areas.
It was part of the anti-commercialism of the flower children, who tie-dyed T-shirts and scarves to wear with their love beads and jeans.
Tie-dyeing is back again.
But this time it's designers who are applying the process to everything from swimsuits to evening wear.
Henri Bendel has a collection of matte jersey T-shirts and dresses ($325 to $825) by Todd Oldham and tie-dyed cotton T-shirts by Saraco Polo and Gillian Julius ($48 to $58).


Three More Brands For Hall of Fame
Three more brands -- Campbell's, McDonald's and Federal Express -- are being named to the Marketing Hall of Fame by the New York chapter of the American Marketing Association.
The organization will honor them on June 7 at its 26th Annual Effie Awards ceremony, which recognizes effectiveness in advertising.
The three brands join Absolut vodka, Coca-Cola and Nike in the Hall of Fame, which was established last year.


SPI Pharmaceuticals (SPI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tellabs Inc.(TLAB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc.(GOSHA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City Weighs Rent Charges For Homeless in Shelters
In an effort to prod homeless people to seek treatment or training, New York City and the state are considering charging those who refuse help a "modest" rent for remaining in a city shelter.
If adopted, the policy would most sharply affect homeless people who suffer from mental illness or addiction and receive substantial monthly disability or veterans' benefits.
The new rules would apply to homeless single adults, but not to families.


Escaped Family of 5 Tells of Starvation in North Korea
A family of five that escaped from North Korea said today that starvation is so severe there that children cannot keep their heads up in school and elderly people are being found dead in the fields, apparently having gone to die to relieve their families of the burden of feeding them.
Yo Man Chol, his wife and three children, arrived here Saturday, having escaped from North Korea by walking across a frozen river into China.
While many individuals have defected from the North over the years, the Yo's are only the second complete family to do so, the first having arrived in 1987.


WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL (WEN,N)
Wendy's International reported a 27 percent rise in first-quarter earnings yesterday, attributing the strength to the rising demand for the fast-food chain's menu offerings.
Earnings totaled $12.5 million, or 12 cents a share, compared with $9.8 million, or 10 cents a share, in the first quarter of 1993, James Near, Wendy's chairman and chief executive, said.
Revenues, at $319.8 million, were up 3 percent from $310.4 million in the 1993 period.


Pacificorp (PPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Once Again, Playoff Overtime Is No Friend of the Devils
The reprieve was only temporary.
The Devils were fortunate to go into overtime last night after tying the Boston Bruins with 3.5 seconds left in regulation on a goal by Bruce Driver.
They faced the inevitable in the extra session.
They had four good chances to score in overtime.
The Bruins had five, and it was Don Sweeney who had the last chance and made the most of it.


General Re Corp.(GRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nichols Institute (LAB.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Some Ninth-Inning Rain On Orsulak's Parade
It was all so perfectly dramatic, and then so perfectly awful for the Mets at Shea Stadium last night.
In the end, they were beaten by the San Francisco Giants, 6-5, blowing the game in a way that Manager Dallas Green cannot tolerate.


Many Said to View TV Outside Home
Television viewership outside the home has increased as American life styles change, according to a study conducted by Nielsen Media Research for the Network Television Association in New York.
Marcella Rosen, president and chief executive of the association, told the Worldwide Broadcast Audience Research Symposium in Paris on Monday that 28 million adults in the United States watch television away from home each week, with more than one-quarter of that viewing taking place at work.
The report said that almost three-quarters of all out-of-home viewing is done at work, at colleges and in hotels and motels.


Capitals Hope Series Takes Season's Shape
When it was time for the Washington Capitals to go home and begin the work to reduce a two-game deficit, Sylvain Cote realized he may have figured out this series against the unbeaten Rangers.
Cote, a veteran defenseman in his third season with the Capitals, remembered the six losses in seven games in January, a stretch that ended with the hiring of Jim Schoenfeld as coach at a point when the playoffs seemed an increasingly remote possibility.


Forest Laboratories Inc.(FRX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Two giant pharmaceutical makers took aggressive steps to help them compete in the rapidly changing market for prescription drugs.
SmithKline Beecham is buying Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, a discount drug marketer, for $2.3 billion.
And Pfizer is creating a managed health care unit with Value Health.  [ Page D1. ]
Kodak will sell off noncore businesses like its Sterling Winthrop drug unit and concentrate on its photography operations.  [ D1. ]
Nynex and Times Mirror formed a joint venture to offer electronic shopping services in the New York City area.  [ D1. ]
Electronic Arts and Broderbund called off the planned merger between the two software makers.  [ D5. ]
Kemper will consider putting itself up for sale if its stock does not rise by at least 13 percent in the next year.  [ D5. ]
What amounts to a real estate merchant bank was formed by Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst and Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.  [ D5. ]
Junior bondholders of R. H. Macy oppose two competing reorganization proposals.  [ D6. ]
I.B.M. won an unusual endorsement from China for its PowerPC chip technology.  [ D8. ]
Viacom is exploring the sale of Madison Square Garden.  [ D20. ]
NBC will receive $2.5 million from a foundation to broadcast a special program on health care.  [ A1. ]
A Federal appeals panel, reversing its own opinion, threw out an author's libel suit against The New York Times.  [ A21. ] The Economy
Top business executives have contradictory feelings about the Federal Reserve's recent interest rate increases, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
On one hand, a majority praised the Fed's efforts to control inflation.
But a majority also expressed alarm that the rising rates could hurt their sales.  [ D1. ]  Members of Congress engaged in partisan wrangling over rising rates.  [ D2. ]
The Government's economic forecasting gauge jumped 0.7 percent in March.  [ D1. ] International
Ecuador and its creditor banks have reached a foreign debt agreement that will restructure the country's payments on $7.6 billion in debt and overdue interest over the next 30 years.  [ D15. ] Business Technology
New York City is looking at a waste-disposal technology that a small Italian concern is promoting in Europe and the United States.
The process involves shredding garbage, heating it and pressing it into ice-cube-sized bricks, and then steaming the bricks until they emit a gas that can be burned to make electricity.  [ D7. ] Markets
Stock prices were mixed, with blue chips advancing as a result of late computerized buying.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 13.39 points, to close at 3,714.41.  [ D8. ]
Treasury prices declined and interest rates rose after a Government report pointed to economic strength.
The yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond rose to 7.35 percent.  [ D16. ]
The dollar continued to fall as traders questioned the Clinton Administration's commitment to defending it.  [ D18. ]
Coffee prices sprinted to a 2 1/2-year high amid continuing concerns about tight supplies.  [ D18. ] Today's Columns
Investors in Media Vision Technology learned that it is sometimes risky to believe a profit number before the auditors get through with the books.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Bartle Bogle Hegarty of London is gambling that it can grow rapidly by helping American marketers explain what makes themselves specially American.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D20. ]


CHRONICLE
ANITA F. HILL will take a yearlong unpaid leave of absence from the University of Oklahoma College of Law to write two books, the university announced on Monday.
She has signed a contract with Doubleday to write both her autobiography and a book that will place the issue of sexual harassment in its historical and contemporary contexts.


A Night Chefs Wear Sequins
THERE were the sealed envelopes, the outlandish outfits and the fans cheering on the nominees.
There were the forced smiles of the losers and the teary eyes of winners who, in their speeches, thanked spouses, parents, pets and a Higher Being in a bow tie: the apotheosis of American cooking, James Beard.
The occasion was the fourth annual James Beard Awards, the food world's Oscars, honoring the top chefs and restaurants around the country, the best cookbooks, the best cooking shows, even the best newspaper and magazine articles.
Highlights of the ceremonies, two hours' worth, were telecast by the Television Food Network, with Robin Leach and Donna Hanover as hearty co-hosts.


Clinton Says Haiti Military Must Go Now
Seeking to step up the pressure on the Haitian military, President Clinton warned the country's leaders today that "it's time for them to go" and said he had not ruled out the use of force in Haiti.
Mr.
Clinton's warning, after a monthlong policy review, is part of Washington's new campaign to use economic sanctions and the threat of military action to force the Haitian leaders to step down so that the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, can return to office.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LAFARGE COPPEE S.A., Billancourt, France, a maker of mineral-based building materials, is selling control of its Orsan unit, a manufacturer and marketer of biochemicals for the food industry, to Amylum, Brussels, a starch producer, for $73 million.
MELVILLE CORP., Rye, N.Y., said its Marshalls unit had agreed to acquire most of Investcorp's New York Department Stores of Puerto Rico Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Beard Foundation Hands Out Its Annual Awards
DOZENS of chefs, cookbook writers, journalists, food personalities and wine experts were anointed with the hallowed oil (extra virgin olive, no doubt) of the James Beard Foundation in ceremonies that stretched over several days, culminating with the main presentations last night at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan.
Three New York chefs won national awards.
The chef of the year is Daniel Boulud of Daniel; the pastry chef of the year is Jacques Torres of Le Cirque, and the outstanding service award was won by Joseph Baum of the Rainbow Room.


Elek-Tek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Performance Food Group (PFGC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


U.N. Chief Asks Rights Aide To Take On a Role in Rwanda
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has asked the newly appointed High Commissioner for Human Rights to play a major role in trying to investigate and stop the massacres in Rwanda, United Nations officials said today.
The Secretary General met with the new High Commissioner, Jose Ayala Lasso, in Geneva today for several hours to discuss his mandate.
They will meet again on Wednesday to decide how he will go about the assignment.


Metropolitan Diary
ANYONE who has attempted to squeeze aboard an E train and get off at Lexington Avenue and 53d Street around 8 A.M. on a weekday knows only too well what a zoo the subway can be.
The other morning, Joe Socolof of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was among the mass of journeyers cramming on to the two working escalators.
So was a youngster -- age about 8 -- who looked up at his mother.


No Headline
"I appreciate that the Federal Reserve is a guardian against inflation. But I also must say that the higher rates have increased the installment payments on our loans and they inhibit our customers." ROBERT W. CARDY, president of a Pennsylvania steel company.  [ D1:5. ]


Brooklyn Incinerator Opponents See Victory in High Court Ruling
Residents and officials who have spent more than a decade waging legal and political warfare against New York City's plans to build new trash incinerators believe they now have some overwhelming ammunition: a convincing economic argument.
Opponents of incineration said yesterday that a Supreme Court decision on Monday requiring that the ash generated by incinerators be subject to strict hazardous-waste standards would make the costs of incineration prohibitive.
They argued that the costs -- for testing as well as possible special storage -- could well doom the planned $450 million Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator, as well as a proposal to reopen an incinerator in southwest Brooklyn.


Disabled Take Protest to Party Offices


To Knicks, The Proof May Come In Game 3
PURCHASE, N.Y., May 3 -- When Patrick Ewing emerged from the Knicks' two-hour practice today and saw a throng of reporters outside the gym, he said: "What happened? Somebody die?"
In a sense, it was a death watch.


Some Limits on the Global Village
Last night's appearance by President Clinton was billed as a "Global Forum," but only a few parts of the world could have had any immediate knowledge of it.
While CNN is available in 62 million homes in the United States and more than 50 million in Western Europe, the figure for the rest of the world is under 30 million.
While the program was seen in prime time in the United States, it would have been seen after midnight or later in Europe and Africa.
It was dawn in much of Asia.


Dan L. Thrapp, 80, Chronicler of West
Dan L. Thrapp, a chronicler of the American West, died on Friday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 80.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


Premdor Inc.(PI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gotti Facing Decision on Giving Up Power
In the unwritten but sacrosanct code of the American Mafia, the boss of a mob family can be displaced only by death -- from natural causes or murder.
For two years from a cell in the harshest prison in the country, the authorities say, John Gotti has exercised his autocratic power as the boss of the nation's largest Mafia group, the Gambino crime family.
And for two years, according to law-enforcement officials, Mr.
Gotti cautioned potential rivals that his conviction of murder and racketeering would be reversed and he would return to his regal haunts and swashbuckling life style in New York City.


Junior Bondholders Oppose Both Macy Plans
As expected, junior bondholders of R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that they opposed both competing reorganization proposals that the retailer and Federated Department Stores Inc. had submitted to creditors last week.
Under the Macy plan, the company's two junior classes of bondholders would receive nothing but the chance to buy 25 percent of Macy's equity on the company's emergence from bankruptcy.
Federated, which is trying to merge with Macy against Macy's wish to remain independent, was also stingy with the bondholders, proposing to pay them $75 million on their $1.3 billion in claims.


Good Economic News Depresses Bond Prices
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday, on the heels of a Government report that suggested the economy is likely to continue to grow in the months ahead.
The March index of leading indicators, the Government's gauge of economic activity in the next six to nine months, was up seven-tenths of 1 percent, slightly more than expected.
The increase was aided by a large jump in the length of the average workweek, which had been held down in the February by frigid weather in much of the nation.


Precision Castparts (PCP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Tennessee Valley Authority reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


What's utterly cheeky yet totally American? Why, a London agency.
IF American agencies can't figure out what American consumers want, how is it that executives of a British agency believe they can?
"It's very cheeky," John Hegarty, president and creative director at Bartle Bogle Hegarty, said yesterday, laughing.


Valassis Communications Inc.(VCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Executives Are Contented but . . .
With their sales rising smartly, a majority of America's top executives are far more sanguine about the economy than the general public is, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
But many executives also have a complaint: they can't get the price increases that many say are needed to keep their businesses thriving.
The executives favor, in effect, a bit more inflation -- for their industries, at least -- than the current mild national level.


ISRAELIS AND P.L.O. COMPLETE DETAILS ON THE HAND-OVER
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., agreed early this morning on the final details of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho, clearing the way for a signing ceremony later today.
"Everything is solved," said Nabil Shaath, the chief Palestinian negotiator.
"Everything is agreed."


College Fund Is Threatened Over Speeches
In a backlash against the recent fiery speeches at Howard University by Khalid Muhammad of the Nation of Islam, officials at the United Negro College Fund say they are being flooded with letters from people threatening to boycott fund raising for black colleges.
"We have received some pretty nasty hate mail that has condemned all black students, calling them all racists and saying, 'What good is education if all black students are emerging as racists and anti-Semites,' " said William H. Gray 3rd, president of the college fund.
"We have received letters that have attacked black colleges and have basically said they are breeding grounds for anti-Semitism."


Buying the Air Time, Foundation Fosters NBC Program on Health
A leading foundation active in health care has bought a two-hour block of prime time on NBC television and has asked the network's news division to fill it with an ambitious examination of health care reform.
The special program will be broadcast without commercials on Tuesday, June 21, from 9 to 11 P.M.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation will pay NBC $2.5 million for the air time, a figure that both sides said represented fair-market value.
The foundation will also provide an additional $1 million to promote and advertise the special.


More Deals By Makers Of Drugs
Continuing the rapid change in the prescription drug industry, two of the world's largest pharmaceutical manufacturers announced moves yesterday to help them compete in the evolving environment of lower-priced drugs.
SmithKline Beecham, a British-American company based in London, said it had agreed to buy Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, one of the largest marketers of discount-priced drugs to managed health care companies, for $2.3 billion in cash.


Review/Theater: Moonshot and Cosmos; A Sip of Lanford Wilson, With an O. Henry Twist
It seems only right that the Circle Repertory Company's 25th anniversary season should conclude with a collaboration between the two people most strongly identified with it.
Together, the playwright Lanford Wilson and the director Marshall W. Mason have produced some of the most memorable productions in recent American theater.
And to mention even a partial list of those plays -- "The Hot l Baltimore," "The Fifth of July," "Talley's Folly" -- is to invoke an affectionate sigh from those who recall seeing them at Circle Rep.
One is all the more reluctant to report that "Moonshot and Cosmos," the collective title for two monologues by Mr.
Wilson that opened last night, ends what has been a disappointly lackluster season at Circle with a modest, muffled whimper.


Xtra Corp.(XTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


SENATORS CRITICAL OF C.I.A. POLICING
A struggle long conducted in secrecy erupted into the open today as Congressional overseers of the Central Intelligence Agency battled its Director and belittled the Clinton Administration for opposing their plan to put spy catching in the hands of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In the opening round of what promises to be a long and bitter argument over the C.I.A.'s ability to police itself, Mr.
Clinton signed an executive order putting his national security adviser, Anthony Lake, atop a new Government board managing counterintelligence, the business of catching spies and turncoats.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the Supreme Court's decision on Federal regulation of incinerator ash misstated the ruling.
The Court said the ash had to be tested, and handled as hazardous waste if it turned out to be toxic; it did not decide that the ash is toxic waste.
Because of an editing error, the article about the decision misstated the goal of a suit filed by the Environmental Defense Fund that led to the decision.
The fund sued to have the ash brought under the regulatory structure of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; it did not sue to have all ash deemed a hazardous waste.


Index of Leading Indicators Advanced by 0.7% in March
In a sharp rebound from the effects of winter storms, the Government's chief economic forecasting gauge jumped by seven-tenths of 1 percent in March, the eighth consecutive month without a decline.
Though today's Commerce Department report was in line with expectations, economists said the rise in the index of leading indicators provided reassurance after last week's report that the economy had grown at a somewhat disappointing pace of 2.6 percent during the first quarter of the year.


Corrections
A recipe in the Plain and Simple column last week left out part of a step.
A corrected version follows.
Salmon on a Bed of Greens And Mango


Judge Removes Protection From California Songbird
In a move that disappointed environmentalists and pleased developers, a Federal judge on Monday removed protection from a small California songbird whose imperiled status has blocked billions of dollars worth of construction and development for a decade.
The bird is the California gnatcatcher, a species that some experts believe is represented by only 2,000 to 3,000 mating pairs remaining in coastal sage habitat in parts of five counties.


A Cynical Ploy by House Democrats
The House and Senate now have a rare opportunity to overhaul a discredited system of campaign financing that puts Congress in hock to special interests, favors incumbents and discriminates against challengers.
But House Democrats are playing a cynical game of chicken with the Senate that could doom reform.
President Clinton, who thundered about reform during his campaign, should tell Speaker Thomas Foley and the House majority leader, Richard Gephardt, to stop the shenanigans.
It is the least he can do, given his earlier pledges.
Continued Presidential silence also undermines Mr.
Clinton's friend and ally George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, who has done much to help the President on other issues and who hopes to see campaign reform enacted before he retires at the end of this year.


Myers Industries(MYE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Associates Corp. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


C-MAC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Can This Be the End Of Mostly Mozart? Talks Are in Progress
As Lincoln Center prepares to announce the programs for this summer's Mostly Mozart Festival, discussions are taking place at Lincoln Center that could eliminate the festival completely, several people involved in the talks have said.
Beginning in 1995, the New York Philharmonic may take over some summer dates at Avery Fisher Hall from the festival, which has used the orchestra's home during the summer.
By 1996, the Philharmonic could displace Mostly Mozart entirely.
Another option being considered is a theater and dance festival in the New York State Theater.
The Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra's three-year contract expires after the summer, and a contract with Gerard Schwarz, the festival's music director, has yet to be signed.


New Top Admiral to Push Wider Combat Role for Women
Eager to steer a new course after the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal, the Navy's new top admiral said today that he would try to accelerate plans to assign women eventually to all ships and submarines.
Adm.
Jeremy M. Boorda, who took over 10 days ago as Chief of Naval Operations from Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, also said he wanted to recruit more women into the Navy, now that women are allowed to serve in more than 90 percent of Navy jobs.


In America; Fasting for Haiti
President Clinton's comment yesterday seemed unequivocal.
"It's time for them to go," he said, referring to the military leaders who have put the torch to democracy in Haiti.
The Administration is making a big (if belated) push for tougher United Nations sanctions against the outlaw regime of Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, and reports are rife that Mr.
Clinton is seriously considering some form of military intervention if intensified sanctions don't work.


Market Place; For Media Vision, a hard lesson about the worth of paper profits.
SOMETIMES, it is risky to believe a profit number before the auditors get through with the books.
That is one lesson from Media Vision Technology, a one-time high-flier and institutional favorite that has collapsed this year.
From a peak of $46.50 a share, reached on Jan. 21, the stock traded yesterday as low as $4, a decline of 91 percent.
It rallied a bit, closing at $5.25, down $1.25 for the day in Nasdaq trading, after the company, based in Fremont, Calif., disclosed another delay in revising its now discredited financial report for 1993.


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Film; Clinging To Justice In a Sicilian Town
Though the recent corruption scandals in Italy have thrown powerful men out of office, "La Scorta" ("The Bodyguards") considers the impact of anti-Mafia action on lowlier and nobler figures.
The film, a smart political thriller, focuses on the bodyguards protecting an honest, imperiled judge trying to clean up a Sicilian town.
The story is based loosely on the life of an actual judge, Francesco Taurisano.
But the director, Ricky Tognazzi, is looking at broader issues: the pervasiveness of government corruption and the way the bodyguards try to maintain a shadow of their normal lives.
As the film starts, a judge and his bodyguard are murdered in the Sicilian town Trapani.
A replacement, Judge De Francesco, is sent from Rome to take over the investigation into the town's Mafia ties, and is assigned four bodyguards, all of them young locals.
The captain among them is Andrea, a calm family man with three small children.
Angelo is hotheadedly eager for the assignment because the murdered guard was his friend.
Another guard is secretly engaged to a local woman but can't reveal this because it might be cause for a transfer, and the fourth is trying to be reassigned to guarding doors or pouring coffee at some relatively safe government building.
He would seem to be the smart one, but this film values heroism.


Jews Have Reason to Fear Italian Fascism
To the Editor:
"The Italian government did not turn a single Jew over to the Germans despite great pressure," Roland N. Stromberg states, citing my "Italians and the Holocaust," published in 1987, as the source for his belief (letter, April 13).
As my book makes abundantly clear, that statement is only true for the period before Sept. 8, 1943.
After that, the German occupiers of Italy reinstated Mussolini as head of the Italian Social Republic, the so-called Republic of Salo.
Henceforth, the Duce and his fanatic Fascist followers collaborated eagerly, and took independent initiatives against the Jews.


Webber Is Top Rookie
CHRIS WEBBER of Golden State, the top pick last summer in the National Basketball Association draft, yesterday was named the league's rookie of the year.
He defeated ANFERNEE HARDAWAY of Orlando in the closest vote since 1981.
Webber got 53 votes to 47 for Hardaway in balloting by a panel of journalists.
JAMAL MASHBURN of Dallas got the remaining vote.
After Webber was drafted by Orlando, he was traded by Golden State to Orlando for Hardaway. (AP)


Group Seeks Boycott Of Calvin Klein
The Los Angeles chapter of the National Organization for Women has joined a group called Boycott Anorexic Marketing, endorsing a nationwide boycott of all Calvin Klein products to protest the designer's advertising, which features what the groups consider ultrathin models.
"Advertising has always been used to impact our society's way of thinking, and women have been paying the price for far too long," Tammy Bruce, president of the Los Angeles organization, said in a statement.


Multicare Cos.(MLTI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unknown's Painting Hangs Out at Modern for a Weekend
On one wall of the high-ceilinged third-floor gallery at the Museum of Modern Art was a Robert Motherwell.
A few steps away were two small, colorful Jasper Johnses.
A medium-size Claes Oldenburg was just around the corner.
And then there was that unusual black-and-white Paul Rebhan.
A Paul Rebhan?


Ply Gem Industries(PGI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Storing Up Treasures Of 2 Different Kinds
IN Lillian Schloss's apartment on West End Avenue there are the 13 cats in the back rooms and the bicycle that the 72-year-old widow rides every day and the political cartoons drawn by her late husband and then, too, there are the more than 400 exquisite pieces of Chinese tomb sculpture that take up most of the space in the living and dining rooms.
It is definitely not an Architectural Digest sort of place, no indirect lighting and coordinated colors to lead the eye from one point of interest to another.
No, it is eclectic and cluttered.
Beside the Chinese figurines, many of them of museum quality, are hooked rugs and photographs of grandchildren.
This is not a gallery to draw public admiration so much as a home to be lived in, a place where the greatest treasures are clearly experiences and memories.


Ragan (Brad) Inc.(BRD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mandela and de Klerk Meet On Picking a New Cabinet
Nelson Mandela conferred on the formation of a new South African Government today as the slow-moving tally of the national election vote indicated his party's victory would fall short of two-thirds control of Parliament.
The vote count, plagued by technical problems, did not cast doubt on his landslide victory, or on his election as the nation's first black President and leader of a new government of multiracial power sharing.
But the slow tally caused a postponement, until Monday, of the new National Assembly's meeting to formally choose him.
His inaugural, the occasion for a gathering of world leaders, is still scheduled for Tuesday.


Clinton Hires Lawyer to Handle Sex Suit
President Clinton has hired a prominent Washington lawyer to represent him if he is sued by a woman who has accused him of making an unwanted sexual advance in 1991, White House officials said today.
The officials said Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House counsel, met with the lawyer, Robert S. Bennett, to ask him to defend the President against the threatened suit.


Wounded Hasidic Student Is Recovering


Off the Menu
1980's Decor, 90's Prices
Cafe Centro, the newest venture from Restaurant Associates, was conceived in the 1980's -- and it shows.
The $4.5 million, 220-seat restaurant in the Met Life building at the corner of Vanderbilt Avenue and East 45th Street is filled with honeyed woods and rich burgundy and green upholstery.
But the restaurant, which will open June 10, will not have 1980's prices.
Dinner for two should run no more than $60, not including beverages, tax and tip.
Originally, Cafe Centro was going to be called Grand Grill and was to be the most expensive of the company's restaurants in the building, said Nick Valenti, the chairman of Restaurant Associates.


Egypt Executes 5 Militants
Egypt hanged five Muslim militants here today on charges of trying to kill Prime Minister Atef Sedki in a car bombing, military prosecutors said.
The men were convicted in March of blowing up a car in a Cairo suburb last November as Mr.
Sedki's motorcade passed.
Mr.
Sedki escaped unharmed, but a schoolgirl was killed and 21 people were wounded.
Four other men who are fugitives were also sentenced to death in the case, and five defendants received prison terms ranging from one to three years.


Viacom Exploring the Sale Of Madison Square Garden
Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it was exploring the sale of Madison Square Garden, which consists of the sports complex in Manhattan, as well as the New York Knicks and Rangers and the company's regional sports network, MSG.
Frank Biondi Jr., president and chief executive of Viacom, said in a statement yesterday that while the Garden was a healthy operation, it was not essential to Viacom's long-term goals.


Coleman Plans a Nonstop Trip to Round 2
Derrick Coleman's philosophy on practicing during the regular season seems to be that any day without practice is a good day.
But come playoff time, the Nets' 6-foot-10-inch power forward changes his outlook.
Trailing the Knicks, 2-0, the Nets are on the brink of first-round elimination as they head into Game 3 on Wednesday night at the Meadowlands.
Coleman is not ready for an early summer vacation.


Mandela's Honeymoon
Soon enough the doubts will niggle at the new South Africa.
"What unity?" someone will ask of the so-called Government of national unity, which attempts to harness the wild ambitions of rival politicians to common purpose.


Bad Drivers, Bureaucracy And the Law
State motor vehicle laws do little to keep thousands of New York City's worst drivers -- speeders and drunks and those who have no licenses at all -- off the road.
Officials say the system has long penalized drivers who play by the rules, paying tickets when they get them and showing up for court dates, and has little power to stop those who ignore the laws and continue to drive.


Sewage Pipe Bursts in Mexico, Fouling Beaches in San Diego
A break in one of Tijuana's main sewer lines has poured at least 12 million gallons of untreated waste a day into the Pacific Ocean near the coast, closing a 15-mile stretch of beach from the Mexican border to Coronado across the bay from here.
The spill, apparently caused by a buildup of sand and grit that made the sewer line burst in Tijuana, was detected on Saturday night, said Dave Schlesinger, director of San Diego's Municipal Wastewater Department.


How Cornell Student Housing Really Works
To the Editor:
Re "In Cornell's Student Housing, Boundaries Are Drawn With the Oldest Kind of Division" (Education page, April 20): I am a graduate of the Agriculture and Life College of Cornell University, class of 1993, and I had the privilege of living on campus my entire four years.
The first two were spent on West Campus as a resident in the Class of 1918 Hall (also called University Hall 4).
The second two were as a resident adviser in Mary Donlon Hall on North Campus.


Clinic Entices Patients With $10 a Visit
THE Prudential Health Care Plan, which provides health care to 45,000 Medicaid recipients in Baltimore, has undertaken an innovative incentive program to encourage poor, pregnant women to see a doctor and to attend sessions on nutrition, smoking and substance abuse.
Every time a woman in its Medicaid program shows up for an appointment, she gets a $10 bill on the spot.
Since beginning the program in 1991, Prudential has seen a sharp increase in the number of pregnant women visiting its clinics and a decline in the average length of stay in newborn intensive care units.


Danka Business Systems Plc (DANKY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


G&amp;K Services Inc.(GKSRA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Kevorkian's Trial Has Come to End But Debate on Assisted Suicide Hasn't
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was playing golf today, confounding predictions that he would mark his court victory on Monday by helping a 21st person kill himself.
But while his acquittal of charges that he violated a state law prohibiting assisted suicide has temporarily resolved his own legal status, the debate over the issue remains more unsettled on more fronts than ever.
Judges, state legislators, a panel of experts appointed by those legislators, and voters may all have chances soon to decide under what circumstances doctors should be permitted to help which patients kill themselves.
But given the complex moral and legal issues involved -- the acquittal has generated calls both to tighten and loosen the law on assisted suicide -- the immediate prospect is stalemate, particularly since this is an election year in a state with an elected judiciary.


CHRONICLE
LINDA LAVIN is taking the uniform she wore as Alice, the diner waitress she played on her television series for nine years, to Washington tomorrow for a meeting with HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, Vice President AL GORE, Secretary of Labor ROBERT B. REICH and other Government officials.
No, she's not going to serve them coffee, but she will have the uniform with her as a symbol of the reality of being a working woman in this country today.


Benjamin Schechter, Theater Director, 74
Benjamin Schechter, the managing and artistic director of Folksbiene, a Yiddish theater in Manhattan, died on Monday at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 74 and lived in the Bronx.
He died of congestive heart failure said Leonard Schechter, his son.


Hanover Direct Inc.(HNV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


National-Standard Co.(NSD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ticket Brokers Subpoenaed
The New York State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell has obtained subpoenas for records and testimony from every licensed ticket broker in New York City, significantly broadening his investigation into the resale of theater tickets, an aide to Mr.
Koppell said yesterday.
The subpoenas were issued about a month ago, as part of Mr.
Koppell's probe into what he has described as rampant price-gouging.
They included requests for records from about 50 brokers in Manhattan, said Jeff Maclin, a spokesman for the Attorney General.
The records requested were to be submitted to Mr.
Koppell's office this week, Mr.
Maclin said.


Nikon Picks Its New Agency
Nikon Inc. in Melville, L.I., said yesterday that it had selected Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis to handle its photographic products account, with billings estimated at $10 million.
The account had been handled by Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York since 1990.
That agency and Nikon abruptly ended their relationship two months ago on an unusually bitter note.
Fallon was awarded the account after a review that began with eight or nine agencies and was narrowed to Fallon and three others: Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco and two New York shops, Grace &amp; Rothschild and Merkley Newman Harty.


Vietnam: A Taste Trip From North To South
CREME caramel is as easy to find in Ho Chi Minh City as it is in Paris.
Baguettes poke out of baskets in every market and on every street corner, and from Haiphong, northern Vietnam's largest port, to the Mekong delta, in the south, French pastry look-alikes adorn bakery windows.
Everywhere, too, the crumbling French colonial architecture lends a European air to this hauntingly beautiful country.
From the aquamarine waters to the vibrant-green rice paddies, from the mountain ranges to the deep jungles, Vietnam comes in hundreds of shades of green, one more seductive than the next.
No wonder the French, whose century-long rule of Vietnam ended in 1954, still love it and are returning in droves as tourists.
Americans are on their way and their welcome will be warm.


Patrick Industries(PATK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.86
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.03
4.00
2.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.41
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.08
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.33
6.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.16
8.14
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.40
5.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Charles Botstein, 83, Radiotherapy Chief
Dr.
Charles Botstein, the retired chief of radiotherapy at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, died on Monday at his home in Riverdale.
He was 83.
The cause was kidney cancer, said his daughter, Dr. Eva Griepp.


M.S. Carriers Inc.(MSCA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Kodak Strategy: Just Pictures
Largely abandoning forays into pharmaceuticals, household products and medical tests, the new leader of the Eastman Kodak Company announced yesterday that he would adopt the strategy George Eastman formulated over 100 years ago and concentrate on pictures.
George M. C. Fisher, who came to the company from Motorola Inc. in December, said Kodak would sell its noncore businesses, including Sterling Winthrop Inc., which makes pharmaceuticals and over-the-counter drugs; L&amp;F Products, which makes Lysol and other home and personal-care products, and the Clinical Diagnostics division, which produces medical testing devices.
Together, they generated $3.7 billion last year, or about one-fifth of Kodak's $16.7 billion in revenues for 1993 -- a year in which Kodak had a $1.5 billion loss. 'Tremendous Opportunities'
The company plans to build upon its traditional film and camera business and continue to perfect techniques for capturing images in digital form and storing and processing them as computer files.
Such technologies have applications not only for photography but also for business customers in increasingly computerized workplaces.
"Imaging offers Kodak tremendous opportunities for long-term success and growth," Mr.
Fisher said at a news conference in New York yesterday.
"To achieve maximum success, we have concluded that we must commit our entire resource base to imaging opportunities and divest noncore businesses."
Kodak, based in Rochester, has been under pressure from investors to cut costs and improve performance.
Indeed, it was unhappiness on the part of large, institutional investors that led the company's board to dismiss Mr.
Fisher's predecessor, Kay R. Whitmore, last year.
Investors responded positively to the company's announcement, and Kodak stock closed up $1.375 a share yesterday, ending the trading day at $46.125 on the New York Stock Exchange, where the stock's volume of 3.79 million shares made it the fourth most active.
On Monday, Kodak's stock rose $3.25 a share on rumors that Sterling would be sold.
The reaction among financial analysts was that Kodak was finally leaving businesses that it never should have entered in the first place.
"He had to do it, and he did it," said Brenda Lee Landry, an analyst with the investment firm Morgan Stanley.
"Those businesses were not making any money if you subtracted debt from operating earnings. So any earnings growth in the next 24 months will have to come from cost cutting."
Many on Wall Street sounded a sharp note of skepticism about whether the company would find much profitability in conventional film.
"The big question beyond the disposition of assets is what is going to happen to the core business," said B. Alex Henderson, with Prudential Securities Research.
"How are they going to offset tremendously negative factors in film and paper and demonstrate they can make money in electronic imaging?"
Among its health businesses, the company said it planned to retain only its medical and dental imaging businesses, which use both X-ray film and electronics.
Kodak said that the French pharmaceuticals company Elf Sanofi, which has several joint programs with Sterling, had the right of first refusal to buy the pharmaceutical portion of Sterling Winthrop.
No buyers have yet been found for the other, smaller pieces of Sterling, which include over-the-counter remedies, or for the other Kodak units that have been put up for sale.
Kodak officials declined to say how much money they expected to realize from the sales, saying they were in preliminary negotiations with potential buyers.
However, they conceded the company might have an unspecified "book loss" for the year, once all the details, including tax treatment, were worked out.
This is the second major divestiture for Kodak, which last year spun off its Eastman Chemical Company, which had $3.9 billion in sales.
In addition, the company has sold several smaller operations.
Company Will Shrink
As a result of the sales and divestitures, the company will be much smaller, with about $13 billion in sales compared with $20.2 billion at the end of 1992.
But it will shortly have less debt as well because the company has said it will use the proceeds of the sales "to achieve significant debt reduction." At the end of the year, Kodak had $7.2 billion in long-term debt.
Mr.
Fisher said the divestitures would permit the company's managers to concentrate on the core imaging business.
And he continued to resist calls from Wall Street to sharply reduce staffing levels.
"Rather than simply take an ax to budgets and manpower, we are trying to change, in significant ways, how this company operates," Mr.
Fisher said.
Mr.
Fisher said the company would "focus on profitable participation in the five links of the imaging chain: image capture, processing, storage, output, and delivery of images for people and machines anywhere in Kodak's worldwide market."
He said Kodak would press its traditional sale of consumer products, like film and photographic paper, and would move into electronic imaging in areas where "Kodak can profitably compete."
Mr.
Fisher said he had established 10 special teams to improve return on net assets by increasing revenues and cutting costs.
The program includes growth of market, asset management, span-of-control, cost of quality, research and development productivity, marketing opportunities, portfolio review, process re-engineering, cycle-time improvement and policy opportunities.
Fisher to Lead Groups
Mr.
Fisher said he would personally lead the growth of market and cycle-time improvement groups.
The biggest piece of the divestitures will be Sterling Winthrop, which Kodak acquired in 1988 for $5.1 billion.
But analysts say Sterling has never become an integral part of Kodak's business and has been a drain on the company's capital budget and a distraction for management.
Although Elf Sanofi has first rights to bid on Sterling's pharmaceutical operations, there may be at least one competitor.
A spokesman for the German drug company Bayer A.G. said yesterday that the company was interested in buying Sterling Winthrop's over-the-counter drug business in the United States.
Sterling markets a number of drugs under the Bayer name and the German pharmaceutical company has long wanted to reclaim its name in the United States.
It lost control of the name in this country after World War I.


Lancaster Colony Corp.(LANC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Commerce Bancshares Inc.(CBSH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Film; A Bunch Of Women Discussing Motherhood
Henry Jaglom approaches film making as if it were a form of party giving, assembling his guests in suitably grand surroundings and then encouraging them to make small talk.
And no talk is too small.
Mr.
Jaglom's reluctance to pull the plug on his performers' loose, improvised musings can produce the occasional memorable thought, but it can also leave his actors hanging badly.
It is not impossible, under these free-form circumstances, for a person whose remarks are too fatuous to be upstaged by a bowl of fruit.
Still, Mr.
Jaglom's subjects seem to love the chance to reveal themselves, if only because the director's attention would seem to be so flattering.
Once again assembling a large group of extroverted women (with a special penchant for the types who wear hats indoors during the daytime), Mr.
Jaglom displays a therapist's patience for hearing them ventilate.
The plot of "Babyfever" is so negligible that Mr.
Jaglom often lets his cast members simply face the camera and say what's on their minds.


NEW CHIEF APPOINTED FOR MUTUAL OF AMERICA
The Mutual of America Life Insurance Company, based in New York, said yesterday that it had appointed Thomas J. Moran president and chief executive effective Oct. 1.
William J. Flynn will retire on that date as chief executive but will continue as chairman and will be chairman of the board's executive committee.
Mr.
Moran, 42, has been president and chief operating officer of Mutual of America since February 1992.
He joined the company in 1975.
Mr.
Flynn, 67, joined Mutual of America as president in 1971.
He became chief executive the next year and was named chairman in 1982.


Mavericks Dismiss Buckner as Coach
QUINN BUCKNER, who presided over the team with the worst record in the National Basketball Association, was discharged today by the Dallas Mavericks with four years left on his contract.
DICK MOTTA, who coached the Mavericks from 1980 to 1987, was the top candidate to replace Buckner.
Dallas finished with a 13-69 record after a season marked by a chorus of complaints from the team's best players. (AP)


Chiron Corp.(CHIR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Eating Well
IT is a scene not likely to be repeated in many fourth-grade classes.
Twenty-five 9- and 10-year-olds either up to their elbows in flour, spinach, beets and tomatoes or stirring a pot full of tomatoes, onions, garlic, asparagus and peas were vying for an opportunity to turn the flour mixture into pasta with the aid of a pasta machine.
Student 1: I crank now.


Clinton Air Traffic Control Plan Suffers Setback
Facing objections from the chairmen of important Congressional panels, the Clinton Administration decided today to pursue negotiations with the opponents and halt the introduction of legislation to create a Government corporation to operate the nation's air traffic control system.
But the decision to hold up the legislation did not come until after Vice President Al Gore and aviation officials had ushered the press and industry executives into a ceremony that had been billed as a celebration of the introduction of the bill.


Teddy Bear Sprang From Brooklyn Roots
To the Editor:
An item in the April 25 Chronicle notes that the Steiff company was giving a party at Theodore Roosevelt's birthplace to introduce a replica of a blue teddy bear that it made in 1908.
While Steiff bears have delighted children for generations, this might be a good time to remind readers that the stuffed toy bear associated with Teddy Roosevelt actually sprang from Brooklyn.


Young Expo Dusts Off a Lost Art
The National League has a new statistic this season: the number of players on the Pedro Martinez suspension list.
Reggie Sanders of Cincinnati was the first player to make the list, and Derek Bell of San Diego awaits the addition of his name, probably later this week after Len Coleman, the league president, reviews the file.
Think home runs are being hit more frequently?
This season will most likely mark the fastest time in which two players have wound up suffering suspensions because of one pitcher.


Giuliani Backs A Candidate In R.I. Contest
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has so far studiously avoided stepping into the New York Republican primary for governor.
But he made his first foray into national Republican politics yesterday, throwing his support behind a former United States Attorney in a primary battle for the gubernatorial nomination in Rhode Island.
Mr.
Giuliani flew to Providence late in the afternoon to be the featured guest at a reception and two fund-raising events for Lincoln C. Almond, who is facing Representative Ronald Machtley in the September primary for the right to challenge the Democratic Governor, Bruce G. Sundlun.
Karen Crowe, a spokeswoman for the Mayor, said his trip was paid for by the Almond campaign.


Sports of The Times; It's Likely Daly Will Exit 16W
WHY would Chuck Daly come back to the New Jersey Nets?
Why would a man who will be 64 years old by the start of the next professional basketball season remain on a road with so few directional signs?
Why would Daly want to continue to coach a team that might be going nowhere?


Mycogen Corp.(MYCO) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Astoria Financial Corp.(ASFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Zapata Corp.(ZOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gaza's Palestinians Wait to Celebrate
On what was supposed to be the last day of full Israeli control over the Gaza Strip, Amin Dhair had no trouble today containing excitement.
He had none.


Review/Piano; Brendel Reveals Hidden Beethoven Contours
There was a world of difference between Alfred Brendel's performances of four Beethoven sonatas on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall and his readings of the same works in his classic recordings of the 1970's.
Back then, he seemed to be teaching the sonatas, presenting them as gems of crystalized musical imagination, set in velvet and examined in a bright, analytical light.
Those accounts were by no means passionless, but their principal appeal was intellectual.
Now the excitement Mr.
Brendel finds in these works is more visceral, more concerned with the gritty, real-life side of Beethoven's music.
The velvet has not entirely been cast aside, but the emphasis has shifted from admiring the music to experiencing it.
The works at hand in this installment of Mr.
Brendel's three-year Beethoven cycle were the composer's first three sonatas (Op. 2) and his 23d, the "Appassionata" (Op. 57).
The juxtaposition of the early works, completed in 1795, and the mature "Appassionata," composed a decade later, tells an interesting story of shattered conventions and conceptual expansion.
What Mr.
Brendel showed, however, was that the seeds of explosive emotionalism that drive the "Appassionata" are to be found in the Opus 2 Sonatas, disguised by a veneer of Haydnesque decorousness.


Report Had Criticized Runway in Crash
Two months before the crash of a charter plane last week that killed eight people, a consultant proposed extending the runway where the crash occurred and eliminating the steel fence that the plane hit.
The proposal was one of five included in a report issued in February to an advisory committee studying the expansion of Sikorsky Memorial Airport, which is owned by the City of Bridgeport.
The report does not cite safety as the reason for extending the runway, arguing only that the change would "better serve the needs of both existing and potential users."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  ACCORD ON GAZA AND JERICHO  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, reached agreement in Cairo on the final details of of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
The accord cleared the way for a signing ceremony today.
A1  Caution prevailed in Gaza as negotiators discussed terms.
A15


Opposition by Suburban Parents Dooms Connecticut School Proposal
An ambitious plan to remake Connecticut's public schools has died in the Legislature, a target of resistance from teachers and vigorous opposition from some parents.
But its fate seemed most rooted in the failure of its advocates to convince the public, particularly suburban parents, that sweeping change was needed.
The plan was similar to proposals being considered in more than 30 states.
It called for raising academic achievement by setting high standards for what children should learn and then testing to make sure they did so.
Teachers, in turn, would focus less on grading children and more on helping all children meet those standards.
The stated goal was a "fundamental restructuring" of public education.


Lightly Turning to Thoughts of Greens
THERE is an incredible array of greens available now at most supermarkets, and they are generally very inexpensive.
All of them -- from mustard greens to collard greens, turnip greens, beet leaves and Swiss chard -- are excellent either sauteed or braised, although some of them cook faster than others.


UDC Homes Inc.(UDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Keeping Pace With Spring


Sales Fail to Reach Estimates as Art Auctions Begin
If you thought there were no bargains left in contemporary art, think again.
Last evening was a bumpy night at Christie's, where 32 of the 76 works offered failed to sell.
While the salesroom overflowed with the usual international crowd of dealers and collectors, this sale, the first of the major spring auctions, disappointed sellers.
But no one was surprised.
The sale totaled $12.5 million, far below Christie's estimate of $19 million to $25.8 million.


New Achievement Test Brings Sharp Questions
This year, Betty Cordoza gave her fourth-grade students directions for taking the state achievement test.
Don't worry about coloring in bubbles with a No. 2 pencil, she said.
It's a new test; no more bubbles.
Let your mind roam.
Be creative.
Last Thursday, on the second day of the new test, called the California Learning Assessment System, Mrs.
Cordoza roamed her classroom as groups of students discussed the reading and writing part.
They were talking about ways to protect nature and why it was important.
The next day, they would come back with their notes and write essays individually about the questions they had discussed: Should we build a nature center on the playground?
What should it look like?


Toromont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bans on Recruiters By Schools Upheld To Fight Gay Bias
New York's Court of Appeals today became the first top state court to rule that school boards can ban military recruiters from their schools because of the Pentagon's policy of discrimination against homosexuals.
The 6-to-1 decision, which reversed the rulings of two lower courts, does not automatically ban military recruiters from the state's public schools.
But it allows local school boards to enact rules that would prohibit military recruitment as long as they ban all potential employers with explicitly discriminatory policies.


Gasifying Garbage To Produce Electricity
Trash incinerators are unpopular with their neighbors, but the main alternatives also have drawbacks: landfills can pollute groundwater, and they are filling up rapidly, and recycling is cumbersome and often expensive.
So what is a sanitation department to do?
New York City, among other options, is looking at a technology that a small Italian concern is promoting in Europe and the United States.
The process involves shredding garbage, heating it and pressing it into ice-cube-sized bricks, and then steaming the bricks until they emit a gas that can be burned to make electricity.
Along with electricity, the process produces an ash with 15 to 20 percent of the volume of the original garbage.


LDI Corp.(LDIC,NMS) reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


In Reversal, Appeals Court Dismisses Libel Suit Against Times
A three-judge Federal appeals panel, changing its mind about the standard that should be applied to determine whether literary criticism is defamatory, yesterday threw out an author's libel suit against The New York Times.
The ruling came on a suit brought by Dan E. Moldea, author of "Interference: How Organized Crime Influences Professional Football." A review in The New York Times Book Review four and a half years ago described the work as "sloppy journalism" and, Mr.
Moldea charged, falsely characterized several passages in its support of that assessment.


Air Base That Is Being Closed Will Get an Accounting Center
In a move to take the sting off the closing of military operations at Griffis Air Force Base -- and placate New York politicians -- the Clinton Administration has decided to put a Defense Department payroll and accounting office on the base that will bring 700 new jobs to the Mohawk Valley.
The decision is part of a nationwide plan to consolidate the Pentagon's accounting and administrative operations at 25 centers around the country, against 300 now.
New York officials said the plan would buttress their efforts to retain the Rome Lab technology center and its nearly 1,000 jobs at the base when it comes up for Pentagon review next year.


Mosinee Paper Corp.(MOSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Rangers Roll On, but the Party Is Just Starting -- Sixth Straight Victory Puts Garden Fans In Seventh Heaven
The Ranger fans are getting giddy.
They are parading around Madison Square Garden with tinfoil replicas of the Stanley Cup.
They are waving whisk brooms that signify a series sweep.
This shows a bit of hubris just two games into the second round of a four-round tournament, but these people aren't known for humility in victory or suffering in silence.
They think they've waited long enough for a trophy -- since 1940.
They act as if it is due them.
And, with the way things are going for their team, this just might be their year.


Public &amp; Private; Life After Death
My great journalistic contribution to my family is that I write obituaries.
First my mother's, 22 years ago, listing her accomplishments: two daughters, three sons.
Then that of my father's second wife, dead of the same disease that killed his first one.
Last week it was my sister-in-law.
"Sherry Quindlen, 41," I tapped out on the keyboard, and then it was real, like a last breath.
"When you write about me," she said one day in the hospital, "be nice."


In School; What the faculty agonized over, students take as a matter of course at UMass
It has taken years of work for professors to put into place a cultural diversity course requirement for University of Massachusetts/Boston students.
"The Diversity Subcommittee of the Academic Affairs Committee is responsible for approving whether courses meet cultural diversity content standards," said Prof.
Estelle Disch, the college's coordinator for diversity awareness.


Burlington Industries Inc.(BUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Lawmakers Split Over Rate Rises
Members of Congress engaged in partisan wrangling over rising interest rates today, with Democrats warning that they could threaten economic growth while a prominent Republican called for further increases.
The flurry of comments on monetary policy followed the release this morning of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee's annual report on the state of the economy.
Both the Democratic and Republican portions of the report concluded that higher interest rates were a big threat to the economy, but only the Democrats explicitly blamed the Federal Reserve for the recent increases in rates.


Charter One Financial Inc.(COFI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Television; Long Time on Less-Traveled Roads
As "One for the Road With Charles Kuralt and Morley Safer" gets started, Mr.
Safer says, "This is not a tribute." But that is exactly what it is, of course, on the occasion of Mr.
Kuralt's departure, after 37 years, from CBS News.
In a conversation in the New York Public Library, Mr.


Kernels of Truth
It was enough to induce popcorn shock: Those fluffy kernels sold at movie theater concession counters are loaded with saturated fat.
And that's before you douse them with what passes for melted butter.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest revealed last week that most theaters have been cooking their popcorn in coconut oil; coconut oil's capacity to raise blood cholesterol exceeds that of butterfat, beef tallow and lard.
A health outcry a few years ago led many large food processors and restaurants to stop using the tropical oil, but not the friendly folks who run the local multiplex.


Times Mirror And Nynex In Venture
Symbolizing the end of more than a decade of bitter fighting between telephone and newspaper companies about turf in the emerging information age, the Nynex Corporation and the Times Mirror Company, publisher of Newsday and New York Newsday, said yesterday that they had formed a joint venture to offer electronic shopping services in the New York City area.
The agreement, which will combine the telephone company's directory listings with the newspaper company's advertising and news services, is intended to create a new electronic information resource that the companies can use as the basis for a variety of interactive electronic shopping projects. 'Personal Shopping Assistants'
But initially, when the service is introduced next year, it will appear to be a step backward from the panoply of high-technology fax, personal computer and interactive video links to the new information network.


WLR Foods Inc.(WLRF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Bill to Ban Some Assault Guns Seems Headed for House Defeat
With the Democratic leadership of the House of Representatives divided, a bill to ban 19 specific assault weapons faces almost certain defeat on Thursday when opponents force the bill to a vote.
The defeat would probably prevent a ban on assault weapons from becoming part of the final anti-crime legislation that House and Senate negotiators expect to agree on later this month.


'Casserole' Cooked on Top of a Stove
CALLING a dish a casserole suggests that it is baked in the oven, but for meals that must be ready in 20 to 30 minutes, oven baking is not an option.
Today's sweet and hot rice "casserole" with chicken is done on top of the stove.
The rice is cooked in one pot and then mixed with the ingredients and cooked for a couple of minutes to meld the tastes.


Witness Called to Rebut Rifkin Defense Case
The prosecution in the Joel Rifkin murder trial called on its star witness today to rebut the defense argument that Mr.
Rifkin is not guilty by reason of insanity.
Dr.
Park Elliot Dietz, whose testimony helped win the conviction of Jeffrey Dahmer, the serial killer, said that Mr.
Rifkin had "extreme sadistic fantasies about inflicting pain and suffering on people" and that his "fantasies eventually became reality," but that he carried out the murders in a "meticulous and methodical way."


Zenith National Insurance Corp.(ZNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on Monday about residents' reaction after a Staten Island man died in police custody misstated the first name of a resident who criticized the police tactics in the neighborhood as "heavy-handed." He is Robert Collins, not Roger.


Prosecutors in Officer's Death Are Rebuffed on Murder Charge
A grand jury yesterday refused to go along with Brooklyn prosecutors who charged five teen-agers with murder after a police officer died in a car crash while responding to a mugging that the youths allegedly committed.
After the officer was killed last Wednesday morning, the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office charged the teen-agers, who were caught near the mugging scene, not only with crimes related to the mugging, but with felony murder -- causing a death while committing or fleeing from another crime, in this case the attempted robbery of a 41-year-old man.


Corrections
An obituary on April 28 about William Horowitz, a Connecticut banker who was a leader in his state's educational, religious and civic affairs, misstated the given name of his son, who survives him.
It is Daniel, not David.
The obituary also misstated the business of Botwinik Brothers, where Mr.
Horowitz was a vice president and director.
The concern sells machinery; it does not manufacture it.


Talley Industries(TAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Against Drunken Driving, Student Unit Mourns Own
This coming Monday was to be Death Day at Fontbonne Academy Hall in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, where 17-year-old Concetta Vaccarello was a coordinator of the Students Against Driving Drunk chapter.
At 26-minute intervals, a student was to slip on a black T-shirt and fall silent for the rest of the day, signifying another victim of drunken driving.
But yesterday students in Concetta's homeroom class sat around her empty desk and prayed.
Late Sunday night Concetta, her sister and mother were killed on a Queens street by an unlicensed driver who had more than twice the legal limit of alcohol in his blood.


West Co.(WST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blocked From Escaping, 2 Children Die in a Bronx Fire


Time Warner's Stock Surges
The stock of Time Warner Inc., the giant media company, shot up $3.875 yesterday to close at $40 a share on the New York Stock Exchange, as rumors swirled that Seagrams Ltd. would increase its 14.8 percent stake in the company.
The rumor was fueled by news that E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday to issue $3 billion in bonds.
The filing said the money would refinance maturing debt in the next two years.


Sealed Air Corp.(SEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Can Holy Bull Survive A Derby Rabbit Test?
When will they know whether anybody can catch Holy Bull in the Kentucky Derby?
One-half mile into the race on Saturday, most of the trainers will know.
They will look at the tote board to see how fast the horses are running, and they will know to the fraction of a second if somebody can outrun him to the finish line, three-quarters of a mile down the track.


Aris Industries Inc. reports earnings for ear to Jan 29


Stocks Are Mixed, With Dow Rising 13.39
Stocks were mixed yesterday, with the broad market mired in a narrow trading range and blue chips advancing as a result of a late flurry of computerized buying.
"The stock market was driven by the bond market," said Louis Ehrenkrantz, president of Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
"The bond market is worried that the Fed will raise rates again and the bond market is uppermost in everybody's mind."


Piper Jaffray Cos.(PJC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


College Lacrosse
Tournaments Near
This is the week to win, to look good.
The teams for the men's National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments, 12 in Division I and 8 in Division III, will be selected on Sunday.
The women's qualifiers, 6 in Division I and 8 in Division III, will be selected on Monday.


Casino Cheating 101; Police and Other Officials Learn to Spot Those Who Break the Rules of the Game
Some people mash the blackjack cards with their rings.
Others strap on tiny computers and work the keys with their toes.
Still others drill holes in slot machines and blow Coca-Cola into the works.
And some cheat in a clumsy way, so their allies' wiles will escape unnoticed.
People will do almost anything to cheat the house, Atlantic City's cynical veterans say, and times have never been better to get away with it.
Casinos are mushrooming all over the country, and so too are the opportunities for the men and woman who try to take advantage of inexperienced dealers to cheat.


Clinton Defends Foreign Policy Record
Saying that the United States "cannot turn our back on the world," President Clinton offered a broad defense tonight of his foreign policy initiatives and issued tough-sounding challenges to North Korea and other foreign governments.
"America cannot solve every problem, and must not become the world's policeman," he said in an international forum televised by Cable News Network.
"But we have an obligation to join with others to do what we can to relieve the suffering and restore peace."


American Medical Response (EMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sterling Software Inc.(SSW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Music; The Met Opera Orchestra Without the Met Opera
Whatever complaints might be raised about the Metropolitan Opera's casting and production values, it is generally agreed that James Levine, during his 24-year tenure, has transformed the orchestra from an acceptable pit band into a virtuoso instrument.
Mr.
Levine took the Met Orchestra to Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon for a program that demanded both technical and conceptual muscle flexing.
The main offerings were two turn-of-the-century tone poems, Strauss's "Death and Transfiguration" and "La Mer," by Debussy.
But surely the lure for many ticket buyers was the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli, who performed at the start of the program and just after intermission.
A few seasons ago Ms.
Bartoli quickly seduced the vocal world with her fresh voice, charming stage presence and thoughtful interpretations.
Now that everyone has calmed down, camps of detractors have pitched their tents.


Cyclone Kills at Least 100 Along Coast of Bangladesh


2 Children Die in a Blaze As Appliance Blocks Exit
Two children were killed in a fire in their South Bronx home yesterday when the family was unable to move a refrigerator blocking the window in front of the fire escape, Fire Department officials said.
Their mother and three siblings were reported in critical condition yesterday at Jacobi and Lincoln Hospitals.
The fire appeared to have started in a mattress in the fifth-floor apartment at 465 East 140th Street and Brook Avenue, in Mott Haven.


First Eastern Corp.(FEBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Food Notes
Murray's in Chelsea
If value defines the 90's, Murray's Chelsea, a larger branch of Murray's Cheese Shop in Greenwich Village, could not be timelier.
This new shop, its shelves crammed with quality and bargains, replaces Chelsea Foods, a place that had gone, in 80's fashion, from trendy takeout to even trendier cafe.
Rob Kaufelt, whose family once owned Balducci-style stores in New Jersey, bought the original Murray's Cheese Shop on Cornelia Street three years ago and updated it with the help of the cheese expert Steven Jenkins.
Now, at Murray's Chelsea, Mr.
Kaufelt has taken on David Grotenstein, a disciple of Mr.
Jenkins, as a partner.
Mr.
Grotenstein left Fairway Market on the Upper West Side about a month ago after seven and a half years in the cheese department.


Give Police Department Its Fair Share of Credit
To the Editor:
I agree with "Blue Wall of Silence: Graft Shielded Behind Old Code" (news article, April 26) that there is a pull on all police officers between loyalty to their fellow officers and duty to the citizenry they serve.
While it is disheartening to read of such cases as the arrest of corrupt members of the force at New York City's 30th Precinct, it is encouraging that it has brought this unwritten code of silence to the forefront of issues the department needs to address.


Giuliani Refuses Chancellor On Money for New Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani refused yesterday to give the New York City schools system an extra $4.2 billion that Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he needs to build new schools to relieve overcrowding over the next five years.
The decision prompted another dispute between the two men, one that most likely will have to be settled by the City Council.


Ashley Boone Jr., Marketing Executive For Films, Dies at 55
Ashley A. Boone Jr., a motion-picture marketing and distribution executive associated with hits like "Star Wars," "The Empire Strikes Back" and the James Bond movies, died on Sunday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 55.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


How Cornell Student Housing Really Works; A University's Role
To the Editor:
I was dismayed by your April 20 Education page article on de facto segregation of Cornell's undergraduate student housing.
I graduated from an Ivy League school in 1988, and in my sophomore year, my white roommate and I were placed within an all-black rooming group of women we didn't know.
It was undoubtedly an act of administrative convenience, putting students where the rooms were, rather than an attempt at forced integration.


Driver Says Police Refused Help in Death of S.I. Man
An ambulance driver told officials investigating the death of a Staten Island man in police custody that he tried to attend to the man as he lay bleeding on the pavement, only to be told by police officers to "stay away," two investigators said yesterday.
The man, Ernest Sayon, 22, died Friday night about an hour after a struggle with police officers conducting an anti-drug sweep in the Park Hill apartment complex.


Rolling Stones World Tour to Start Aug. 1
The Rolling Stones cruised by boat from the Manhattan docks at West 79th Street to Pier 60 at West 19th Street yesterday to announce "Voodoo Lounge," their world tour set to begin Aug. 1 in Washington, with performances at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., on Aug. 12 and 14.
In an era of ever-rising ticket prices, the Stones said theirs would be "pretty reasonable," at $25, $39.50 and $50.
No date has been announced for ticket sales for the Giants Stadium shows, but tickets can be bought beginning Saturday for the concerts in Washington; Toronto; East Lansing, Mich.; Columbia, S.C., and Columbia, Mo.
More than 20 American sites are on the tour, for which the boat trip yesterday was what the promoters called the "maiden voyage."


Fidelity New York F.S.B.  (FDNY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A.M.A. Says It Will Support Some Compulsory Insurance
WASHINGTON, May 3 -- Taking a compromise position on a central question in the health care debate, the American Medical Association said today that companies with 100 or more employees should be required to buy health insurance for workers, but that smaller companies should not.
Dr.
James S. Todd, executive vice president of the association, affirmed the group's commitment to health insurance for all Americans, but offered a new twist.
For several years, the association supported an employer mandate, requiring all employers to provide coverage for workers, but in December it backed off amid complaints from some of its more conservative members.


Oxford Health Plans (OXHP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 29
Apr. 22
Apr. 30
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.7
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.0
Gasoline stocks
215.7
216.8
223.1
Distillate stocks
103.6
102.6
100.1
Crude imports, daily
7.3
7.5
7.6
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.8
1.7
Crude stocks
338.5
339.1
347.7
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
94.8
94.2
89.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Outback Steakhouse Inc.(OSSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Book Notes
That Harriman Book
Christopher Ogden's unauthorized biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France and a woman he calls "the courtesan of the century," contains all manner of juicy details about her many love affairs with powerful (and not always unmarried) men.
But Mrs.
Harriman really must bear some of the blame herself.
The ambassador, who originally intended the book to be an autobiography and hired Mr.
Ogden as her co-author, spent 40 hours talking to him on tape before bailing out in alarm when she discovered how much publishers were willing to pay, and what they expected in return, namely total honesty with lots of detail. (Random House's final offer, in fact, was $1.625 million for her life story, a sum she turned down.)


Value Health Inc.(VH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Burstein Enters Democrat Race For Legal Chief
Karen S. Burstein, a former State Senator who resigned last month as a Family Court judge in Brooklyn, announced today that she will run for Attorney General.
Ms.
Burstein, 51, entered a race for the Democratic nomination that is crowded with candidates and likely to be one of the most lively primaries this year.
G.
Oliver Koppell, the former State Assemblyman who is now acting Attorney General, and Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, have already joined the race formally.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Teleglobe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Teen-Ager Accused in Killing Says He Only Meant to Scare
It was not that he wanted to kill the man, the teen-ager said.
He was simply trying to scare him.
And it was not that he intended to shoot four times.
His finger got "stuck" on the trigger "and the shots just kept going."
In a videotape played in a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday, the 17-year-old's matter-of-fact tones and slouching image riveted jurors and spectators as he gave his version of how a man was shot to death in Prospect Park in broad daylight last June.


Books of The Times; Memoir of a First Mother More Warm Than Saintly
Leading With My Heart By Virginia Kelley, with James Morgan 286 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.50.


Musical Tribute to Armenia
"Interrupted Chime," a musical tribute to Armenia, is to be presented on May 11 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
It is to feature the American debuts of the chorus and orchestra of the New Opera of Moscow and 22 singers from the Nerses Shnorali Ancient Armenian Music Choir.
The program includes music of 15 centuries, from the fifth century to the present, by Khachaturian, Rossini, Schubert and the 12th-century composer Nerses Lambronatsi.
The contralto Lina Mkrtchyan is to make her American debut as one of the soloists.
Tickets are $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Embargo Seen As Insufficient For the Return Of Aristide
Even as the Clinton Administration has begun to push for broader United Nations sanctions against Haiti, many diplomats and Haitian analysts say that the effort will prove too little too late to restore the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The analysts say that since October, when an international effort to restore Father Aristide collapsed amid a violent army-sponsored campaign of defiance, the Haitian military's hold on the country has grown steadily stronger.


Western Resources Inc.(WR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Books of The Times; Memoir of a First Mother More Warm Than Saintly
Leading With My Heart By Virginia Kelley, with James Morgan 286 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.50.


Wine Talk
I'D always taken Orvieto for granted.
Another pleasant, inconsequential Italian white wine.
But one day I was gazing with awe at the south wall of the Sistine Chapel in Rome, on which the life of Moses is depicted in a series of frescoes or panels.
The last of them, "The Testament and Death of Moses," was painted by the Umbrian master, Luca Signorelli.
The name clicked.
He was the painter who, 16 years after his work on the chapel when he came to do his masterpieces, the frescoes in the cathedral at Orvieto, asked for part of his payment in wine.
Would a great Renaissance master permit himself to be paid off in a wimpy wine?
It seemed worth the 60-mile trip up the Autostrada from Rome to find out.


Space Mission Is Rescued at the Brink
As the small spacecraft Clementine was about to leave lunar orbit yesterday, headed for a planned rendezvous with an asteroid, Defense Department officials were ready to say, in effect, "dreadful sorry, Clementine," and shut down operations in midflight.
But the officials, relenting under Congressional pressure, agreed at the last minute to find an estimated $3.2 million necessary to keep the spacecraft working through its flight by the asteroid 1620 Geographos at the end of August.
Without the money, a trifling amount by Pentagon standards, the mission would have been canceled on Friday, its work only half done.


Gtech Holdings
Gtech Holdings, which operates computerized lottery systems around the world, has risen sharply this week, after last week's big advance in gaming stocks.
Analysts say the threat of increased taxation on gambling has been minimized, which could lead to higher earnings for companies like Gtech.


Central Vermont Public Serice Corp.(CV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Ballet; Those Dancing Shoes Scoot Uptown to the Met
Lar Lubovitch's choreography was easily the best thing in the short-lived Broadway musical "The Red Shoes" last December.
Now, in an odd but imaginative transfer, his ballet version of Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale -- the show within the show -- has taken on new life as part of American Ballet Theater's season.
In its second week, that season is clearly on a roll: the dancers, especially those coming up from the ranks, are spirited and excellent.
Above all, the mixed bills of one-act works have been better selected, with none of the deadening sameness of the past.
Art and entertainment are not mutually exclusive, as Monday night's bill proved so vividly at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Children and adults alike are bound to be charmed by the pair of red toe shoes that scoot across the stage on their own.


Stop the Serbs. Now. For Good.
We have been here so many times before in the Bosnian saga: acts of barbarism by the Serbs, the mobilization of a shocked international conscience, threats of air strikes (or actual air strikes, of the most limited kind), a tactical Serbian withdrawal, more talks aimed at persuading the warring parties to accept a carving up of territory that rewards aggression.
Then the Serbs move on to yet another Bosnian community, applying the same mixture of violence and intimidation to secure their aim of an ethnically pure Greater Serbia.
The tragedy of Gorazde may for now at least be over.
But there are other towns of equal strategic interest on which the Serbs are now free to concentrate their forces.
Yesterday the U.N. intervened to head off a Serbian attempt to expand the Brcko corridor in northern Bosnia, but such interventions merely divert Serbian aggression.
It is time to halt it -- late, but not too late.
We have the justification, the interest and the means.


METRO DIGEST
COURT BACKS MILITARY RECRUITING BANS New York's Court of Appeals became the first top state court to rule that school boards can ban military recruiters from their schools because of the Pentagon's policy of discrimination against homosexuals.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY GIULIANI REFUSES MONEY FOR SCHOOLS


A Country Music Mecca in the Texas Outback
For 363 days of the year, this dusty West Texas hamlet is home to a handful of farmers who go about the difficult business of trying to pull peanuts and sweet potatoes from land that gets too little rain.
But on the last weekend in April for the last 23 years, it has also assumed another identity as the unlikely site of a Woodstock, of sorts, for serious fans of country-and-western music.


Free at Last!
It was a magical moment: the peaceful passage from an era of oppression to a dawn of liberation in South Africa.
In Nelson Mandela's words, it was indeed "a joyous night for the human spirit." With a smile that would melt a snowman, and a jaunty dance that millions were soon imitating, South Africa's president-to-be claimed victory for his party, and his cause.
Part of what made this moment so special, and last week's election so moving, was the interplay between the leader and his cause.
After 27 years in prison, Mr.
Mandela emerged to lead a people who were also in bondage.
Their struggle was embodied in the unwavering persistence, physical endurance and almost mystical spirituality of this singular man.
He had been jailed years ago for daring to demand a nonracial parliament.
Now he was presiding over the election of that very parliament.


Blumenau Journal; A City of Blonds Builds Walls: Migrants Keep Out
His blue eyes matching his blue inspector's smock, Milton Dallavalle patrols Blumenau's tidy bus station, looking for poor people.
"They come in daily," the inspector recently said of his job intercepting the jobless and the homeless from Brazil's less fortunate regions.
"Just today a family arrived with six children. The bus station administrator offers to pay their fares home."


Capitol American Financial Corp.(CAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Big Venture To Finance Real Estate
Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst, a Dallas leveraged-buyout firm, and Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, a New York investment bank, announced today that they had formed what amounts to a real estate merchant bank.
They are the latest big investors to plunge into real estate in search of the high but risky returns that have become harder to achieve from leveraged buyouts.


Challenging Pupils Is a Full-Time Game


Midland Co.(MLA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


China Endorses PowerPC Chip by I.B.M.
I.B.M., which has lobbied hard with mixed success to get companies interested in its PowerPC chip technology, won an unusual endorsement yesterday, from a country -- China.
China's Ministry of Electronics Industry has agreed to help promote the use of PowerPC technology and products in China and to develop supporting software.


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Jets End Mini-Camp
Jets Coach PETE CARROLL ended mini-camp yesterday by paying tribute to his coaching staff, which includes four new members, and by breathing a sigh of relief after watching his inexperienced group of receivers.
The Jets veterans worked out in the morning and left the team's headquarters at Hofstra University in the afternoon, completing a five-day mini-camp that also included rookies.
The rookies broke camp on Monday afternoon.
Coming into mini-camp the receiving corps was one of the biggest trouble spots on the team.
ROB MOORE was the only starter last season who saw significant playing time.
ROB CARPENTER, who played sparingly last season, has been penciled in as the other starter.


Serbs Lagging In Complying, U.N. Asserts
Ten days after Serbian forces were supposed to have complied with a NATO ultimatum to withdraw from Gorazde's city center, the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia acknowledged today that problems remained over their compliance.
"We still have some unresolved questions over Gorazde," the United Nations official, Yasushi Akashi, said here after meeting with Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian Prime Minister.
Mr.
Silajdzic is adamant that Bosnian peace talks will not resume in earnest until Serbian forces are removed from NATO's "exclusion zone" around Gorazde, a circle with a three-kilometer radius.


In Jericho, They Ask Who's in Charge
The files in Ahmad Maharneh's office lie in neat rows in a metal cabinet, ready for review.
His desk drawers are stocked with up-to-date reports on his department, the local bureau of social welfare.
All he needs now, he says, is for someone to come and take charge.


One Pass, One Shot, Huge Deficit for Devils
"That's how overtime goes," said the Devils' Tom Chorske. "It's a one-shot deal."
Don Sweeney of the Bruins made the shot, an easy one set up by Adam Oates, and the game was over, the Devils the losers to Boston, 6-5, tonight in the 10th minute of sudden-death overtime.


Peruvians Looking More Sourly at Tough Leader
Only six months ago, President Alberto K. Fujimori was riding a wave of popularity generated by the Government's near victory over one of Latin America's most potent rebel groups and a reignition of Peru's economy.
Indeed, last fall, Mr.
Fujimori seemed certain of being re-elected in 1995.
But today the political balance appears to be tipping against Mr.
Fujimori, despite all his successes.
Voters seem unhappy over the Government's handling of a high-profile human rights case, in which a military hit squad killed nine college students and a lecturer in 1992, and with economic growth that has yet to reach the millions of Peruvians locked in poverty.


Florida Adopts Bill on Everglades Pollution
Florida today adopted legislation that resolves a long-running dispute over reducing agricultural pollution of the Everglades, but the ambitious project it envisions does not address many broader questions about the future of the state's endangered marshland.
"This is certainly not the end," Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said in a telephone interview after attending a ceremony at which Gov.
Lawton Chiles signed the measure.
"You might consider it the end of the beginning, but it is only the beginning."


Personal Health
A YEAR ago, a neurologist described five cases of serious neurological problems, including four strokes, in women aged 54 to 84 after shampoos in beauty parlors.
As is common practice when beauticians shampoo hair or neutralize a permanent wave, the women's heads were tipped back over the edge of the sink.
Now, after a year of detailed studies of blood flow to the brain, the neurologist, Dr.
Michael Weintraub, believes that the risk of stroke and lesser forms of brain damage when the neck is arched or twisted in extreme positions is much greater than he had originally believed.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Ford Motor Credit Co., a unit of Ford Motor Co., is selling $500 million of 7.25 percent notes due in 1999 at 99.886 to yield 7.277 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A by Standard &amp; Poor's and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Orange County, Fla., is selling $190.99 million of tax-exempt tourist development tax revenue bonds initially priced to yield a maximum 6.316 percent for a bond due in 2024 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 3.75 percent in 1995 to 6.10 percent in 2010.
Other long bonds are priced to yield 6.264 percent in 2019 and 6.206 percent in 2019.
Insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., the issue is rated triple-A by Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's and Fitch. *
Plitt Theatres Inc., Toronto, a unit of Cineplex Odeon Corp., filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an issue of $150 million of senior subordinated notes through Morgan Stanley and Smith Barney Shearson. *
Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., Miami, filed with the S.E.C. to sell as much as $500 million of securities.


Jean Brown, 82, Avid Collector Of Dada, Surrealism and Fluxus
Jean Brown, a collector of Dada, Surrealism and Fluxus, died on Sunday at the Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass.
She was 82 and lived in Tyringham, Mass.
She died of natural causes, said her son, Jonathan, of Princeton, N.J.


INSIDE
Clinton Defends World Policy
In a television program beamed around the world, President Clinton sought to explain why it has been so hard for him to take action in trouble spots like Haiti and Bosnia.
Page A12.
Unresolved: Suicide Debate
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's acquittal has settled his legal status, but the debate over assisted suicide remains unresolved on many fronts.
Page A16.
Mostly Mozart No More?
At Lincoln Center, there is talk of eliminating the Mostly Mozart Festival, which is to have its 28th season this summer.
Page C15.
Close (Budget) Call in Orbit
Pentagon officials were ready to close down Clementine, a low-budget spacecraft that mapped the Moon, with its mission half done.
But they relented under pressure.
Page A18.
Mixed Review on Rates
Top business executives have contradictory feelings about recent interest-rate increases, a New York Times/ CBS News poll shows.
Page D1.


Pacific Enterprises (PET,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 Companies In Software Drop Merger
Electronic Arts Inc. and Broderbund Software Inc., makers of educational and entertainment software, called off their planned merger today.
The companies said that recent declines in Electronic Arts' stock price had made the deal unattractive to Broderbund and that they were unable to arrive at revised terms.
Broderbund will pay Electronic Arts $10 million in connection with the termination of the merger.


PictureTel Corp.(PCTL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Sigma-Aldrich Corp.(SIAL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nine West Group Inc.(NIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Armstrong Laying Claim To 12-Day Tour DuPont
A year ago, Raul Alcala of Mexico, riding for the Dutch WordPerfect team, won the Tour DuPont, the United States' most important bicycle race.
Lance Armstrong of Austin, Tex., riding for the American Motorola team, finished second.
On Wednesday night, when this year's 12-day Tour DuPont begins with a prologue time trial, Alcala and Armstrong will both ride for Motorola.
Since this race last year, Armstrong has won the world and United States Road-Racing championships, plus a stage of the Tour de France plus a $1 million bonus for sweeping three American races, all at the age of 21.


Cost of 4-Year Degree Passes $100,000 Mark
Several of the nation's leading colleges have broken the $100,000 barrier for a four-year degree.
Beginning this fall, Yale freshmen will pay $26,350 a year for tuition, fees, room and board, and Harvard students will pay only $120 less than that.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology is charging $26,075.
Brown is $25,954.
Swarthmore is $25,900, and Stanford is the cheapest of the costly at $25,465.


Cleric's Defense To View His Effects
Any tapes, books and papers that Federal agents seized from the home of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's paralegal on Monday will be screened not only by a Government lawyer but by three defense lawyers as well, a Federal judge ordered yesterday.
The order by U.S.
District Court Judge Michael B. Mukasey came one day after agents searched the New Jersey home of Mohammed Nabeel Elmasry looking for some of the highly charged writings and sermons of Mr.
Abdel Rahman.
Prosecutors have said that they believe those materials may help link the blind cleric to a terrorist plot to bomb New York City landmarks and assassinate political figures.


How Cornell Student Housing Really Works; Like the Real World
To the Editor:
As an African-American who left for his freshman year at Harvard College 25 years ago next fall, I read your April 20 Education page article on Cornell's student housing with nostalgia.
The same life-style issues that we confronted as minority and majority students are still faced by our children today.
My son, who graduates from Harvard College in June, has kept me fairly up to date, so the article did not come as a surprise.


First Brands Corp.(FBR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aon Corp.(AOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Elscint Ltd. (ELT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mulholland Laugher Gets Scary In the End
Terry Mulholland has been somewhat annoyed about his agonizing start with the Yankees, but he was calm before tonight's game.
He signed autographs, he shagged fly balls and listened but did not participate as teammates teased Melido Perez.
Mulholland looked comfortable and confident.
When the game began, it quickly became apparent that Mulholland still felt comfortable and confident.
He held the Angels without a run for seven innings while the Yankees built a 6-0 lead.
But Mulholland's comfort and confidence subsided in the eighth when he was blitzed for five runs, including Chili Davis's mammoth grand slam, to transform an apparent laugher into a serious 6-5 game.


Flawed Breast Cancer Study Faces Cutoff of Financing
Federal health officials have threatened to cut off all financing for a breast cancer project coordinated at the University of Pittsburgh unless the university takes further steps to revamp the flawed project's leadership.
Specifically, officials of the National Cancer Institute said they objected to retaining the project's two top scientists, Dr.
Bernard Fisher and Dr.
Carol Redmond, in leadership roles.


Food Vendors Enhance Urban Quality of Life
To the Editor:
Putting needed and responsible street food vendors in midtown Manhattan out of business (news article, April 21) is the lowest priority battle for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to be waging -- a waste of time and money of New York City employees to enforce an inappropriate regulation.
Street vendors do not create any significant business competition or traffic congestion.
The merchants just don't like how they look.


Syncor International Corp.(SCOR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the stock market's activity on Monday misstated the change in the closing price for Eastman Kodak in some copies.
Its shares rose 3 1/4, to close at 44 3/4; they did not fall 3 1/4.


Twining Just Runs Away With the Withers Stakes
While most of the nation's top colts were training in Louisville for Saturday's Kentucky Derby, an impressive little chestnut ran away with the Withers Stakes on opening day at Belmont Park yesterday and served notice that he might loom as a big factor in the 3-year-old picture come summer.
Twining, unraced as a 2-year-old and moving up in class to take on stakes competition for the first time, overtook the pacesetting Able Buck near the top of the stretch and pulled away to an easy five-length victory over seven rivals in the 119th running of the $100,000-added Grade II race.
Able Buck held on for place, a length and a half in front of the late-closing Presently.


Loews Corp.(LTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Evangelical Slate Loses in Televangelist's City
Pat Robertson, the leader of a movement to elect evangelical Christians to local government posts throughout the country, suffered a setback on Tuesday when all five of his candidates lost a school board election in his hometown, Virginia Beach.
Voters in that coastal resort rejected candidates backed by Mr.
Robertson, and instead elected a slate endorsed by the Virginia Beach Education Association, the teachers' union.


Red Sox Eye Adversity From First-Place Perch
For those who await the mighty fall of the Boston Red Sox the annual invasion of harsh reality -- today is D-Day.
For today, May 5, brings a double dose of the sort of reality skeptics predict will slow the team that thus far has dominated the American League: the possibility of a serious injury to a key player, Frank Viola, and the end of welcome exposure to the American League's worst -- the American League West.


Rangers Are Wary Despite Streak
At the current, unprecedented rate of Ranger playoff success, following a club-record sixth consecutive victory, it now seems plausible that the fans in the upper reaches of Madison Square Garden may have to discover new ways to entertain themselves.
Up where the language remains as blue as the seats once were, where desperate hopes have been crushed by the likes of Bobby Schmautz, Ace Bailey and John Druce -- obscure heartbreakers in the wrong color sweater -- is it merely a matter of time before we start hearing an off-key, a capella rendition of "Do You Know the Way to San Jose?"
But all the way downstairs, where all this uncharacteristic good fortune has been built, there seems to be an understanding that it is far, far too early to talk about a victory parade.


National Healthcorp L.P.(NHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 Are Arrested in Spain Amid Growing Scandal
The former governor of the Bank of Spain, Mariano Rubio, and the former chairman of Madrid's stock market, Manuel de la Concha, were arrested by the police tonight and held in custody on charges of tax fraud.
The arrests followed the resignation only hours earlier of Spain's Minister of Agriculture, Vicente Albero, who admitted that he owed 37 million pesetas -- about $274,000 -- of undeclared income from 1984 to 1987.


PSI Resources Inc.(PIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unpaving the Parking Lot, So to Say, and Putting Up Paradise
When the residents of a low-income housing project in a drug-ridden section of northeast Washington were invited to name their newly rehabilitated buildings, they chose proud names: Miracle Court, Harmony Court, Freedom Court, Justice Court.
"We called the first building Miracle because the whole business took a while, and we were amazed when it actually came about," said Cathy Jordon, a resident of the project since 1979.


Store Guard Arrested for Bribery In Shoplifting Case Involving Sex
A security officer was charged yesterday with bribery and official misconduct after prosecutors said he released a shoplifting suspect from custody in exchange for her having sex with him in a Manhattan courthouse.
The officer, Andre Cartey, 32, was arrested Tuesday evening after investigators secretly tape-recorded a conversation he had later with the woman.
Prosecutors said he acknowledged his role in the incident on the recording.


Federal Judge Says Ban on Suicide Aid Is Unconstitutional
Abortion and suicide, two ends of the spectrum of life, have been linked for the first time by a Federal judge, who ruled on Tuesday that the Constitution guarantees people not only the right to terminate pregnancies without Government interference, but also the right to end their own lives.
In striking down a 140-year-old Washington State ban on assisted suicide, Judge Barbara Rothstein of United States District Court in Seattle said the law violated the 14th Amendment clause against state infringement of individual liberty.


Otter Tail Power Co.  (OTTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 New Consolidations in Blood-Testing Industry
The rapid consolidation in the $32 billion blood-testing industry continued yesterday as two of the nation's largest laboratory chains announced separate acquisitions.
National Health Laboratories Inc. agreed to buy Allied Clinical Laboratories Inc. in a deal valued at about $220 million, including $24 million in debt, making it the second-largest deal in the industry in recent years.


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.(PDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devils Are Quickly Heading Downward
All of a sudden, the Devils bear little resemblance to the team that accumulated 106 points in the regular season and played so inspiringly in eliminating Buffalo over seven games in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The Devils came into Boston today with losses in the first two games of the second round, both in New Jersey, the second more painful than the first.
When their series with the Bruins resumes at Boston Garden on Thursday night, the Devils will face a task more suited for desperation than inspiration if they intend to make it to the third round.


Henry Dyer Tiffany Jr., Headmaster, 84
Henry Dyer Tiffany Jr., former headmaster of the Allen-Stevenson School in Manhattan and the Bancroft School in Worcester, Mass., died on Sunday on his 84th birthday at the Summerhill Retirement Center in Peterborough, N.H.
He was a resident of Weare, N.H.
A native of Port Chester, N.Y., he graduated from the University of New Hampshire in 1931 and served in the United States Navy in World War II.
As headmaster of the Bancroft School from 1943 to 1959, he was responsible for the construction of a new campus.
He headed the Allen-Stevenson School from 1959 until his retirement in 1975.


INSIDE
Tokyo Official Speaks Out
A senior minister in Japan declared that the massacre of Chinese at Nanjing was a "fabrication." Page A9.
A Season for Goodbyes
In northern New England, the burying of those who died in winter is an unfailing sign of spring.
Page A22.


Johnson Replaces Thomas on U.S. Team
Point guard KEVIN JOHNSON of the Phoenix Suns was named to the United States team that will compete in this summer's World Championship of Basketball in Canada.
A three-time All-Star, the seven-year veteran replaces ISIAH THOMAS of the Detroit Pistons, who tore an Achilles' tendon after being named to the team. (AP)


Police Officer Gets Jail Term For Embezzling
He did not gamble, drove a battered old car and often came to work in slovenly attire, his fellow Harrison police officers said, so they are still mystified as to what Lieut.
Herman Diller did with their union dues.
But today at least they know that he will be punished.
Mr.
Diller, a member of the 60-officer Police Department until he pleaded guilty in January to grand larceny and was dismissed, was sentenced to 60 days in jail and five years probation for embezzling $44,423 from the Harrison Police Association, the department's union.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Candidates Listed For Four A's Awards
The American Association of Advertising Agencies, or the Four A's, has named the finalists in the annual competitions for its A+ Creative Awards and A+ Advertiser Award.
For the creative awards, 15 agencies in four regions were selected in the category of shops with billings exceeding $20 million.
In the East, they are BBDO New York; Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York; the Martin Agency in Richmond, and Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.
In the Central region, they are the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago; Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis, last year's winner; Fallon McElligott, also of Minneapolis, and McConnaughy Stein Schmidt Brown in Chicago.


Jewell Garrelts, 90, Engineering Teacher and Columbia Dean
Prof.
Jewell M. Garrelts, a bridge engineer who taught at Columbia University for 45 years and helped design the Rainbow Bridge over Niagara Gorge, died Friday at the Dunrovan Health Center in Cresskill, N.J.
A longtime resident of Tenafly, N.J., he was 90.
He had had several strokes in the last few years, his family said.


Watkins-Johnson Co.(WJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Penguins Say Lemieux Will Not Retire
MARIO LEMIEUX, who talked openly of retirement following the Pittsburgh's playoff collapse, almost certainly will return next season, HAROLD BALDWIN, the Penguins' chairman, said yesterday. (AP)


Ex-Mayor Keeps Eye on What's Going On in New York City
To the Editor:
I was astonished and infuriated to read the mysteriously titled "In the Office of Mr. Beame and His Honor" (On Sunday, May 1).
The column, originally represented to me by the writer as a typical day with an 88-year-old former New York City Mayor who goes to his office every day, wound up being mean-spirited, trivialized and inaccurate.


Bridge
The first NorthEast pairs champions -- and apparently the last, because there are no plans to repeat the tournament -- are Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., and Ruth Stober of Great Neck, L.I.
They played last weekend in Stamford, Conn., and were competing with players there and also in Wilmington, Del., Wakefield, Mass., and Kingston, Ontario.
On the diagramed deal, Stober as South overcalled one heart with one no-trump, an aggressive action based on the probability that the heart jack would be worth a trick.
This landed her in three no-trump when her partner, also aggressive, bid over West's pre-emptive three clubs.


Auto Sales Slip From March Pace
After car buyers unexpectedly stampeded showrooms in March, the torrid growth of auto sales eased in April to a 4.9 percent jump, compared with a strong period a year earlier.
Auto makers whose sales growth slowed pointed to several factors in reporting their totals today, from shortages of some best-selling cars and trucks to rising interest rates.
Regardless of the explanation, auto industry analysts, who perversely regarded the March news as too good, were delighted with the more measured pace of April.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The United States teamed up with the central banks of 16 nations to buy dollars in a global campaign intended to show investors that the Clinton Administration is serious about maintaining the dollar's value.  [ Page A1. ]
Stock prices were mixed as traders closely followed the turbulence in the bond and currency markets.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 16.66 points, to 3,697.75.  [ D10. ]
Treasury prices and yields bounced up and down as investors showed skepticism over the Federal Reserve's defense of the dollar.
The yield on the 30-year bond slipped to 7.33 percent.  [ D17. ]
Beef prices tumbled to their lowest levels since December 1991, as rich supplies weighed on the market.  [ D20. ] Companies
The torrid growth of auto sales eased in April, climbing 4.9 percent.
Auto makers attributed the slowdown to factors including shortages of some best-selling models, rising interest rates and bad weather.
But industry analysts were pleased with the results.  [ D1. ]
LDDS Communications is offering $2 billion to acquire Wiltel Communications Systems.  [ D1. ]
National Health Laboratories agreed to buy Allied Clinical Laboratories in a deal valued at about $220 million.  [ D4. ]
Southwest Airlines started its own computer reservations system to combat moves by rival carriers to curb travel agents' access to its schedules and fares.  [ D4. ]
Time Warner Cable has put into effect a hiring freeze and plans to cut capital expenses by $100 million this year because of rate cuts imposed by Federal regulators.  [ D4. ]
Forty-six companies have responded to a challenge by Northeastern governors to help reduce packaging waste.  [ D4. ]  The Economy
Farmers are pushing themselves and their equipment to the limits to get their spring planting done as quickly as possible.  [ D1. ]
A Congressional study will recommend that the S.E.C. be given broad new powers to regulate dealers and corporate users of complex financial instruments known as derivatives.  [ D1. ]
The economy is growing solidly in most of the nation except California, the Federal Reserve said, as the Government reported a surge in factory orders.  [ D19. ]
Representative John D. Dingell is investigating an F.C.C. decision to grant radio licenses free to three companies.  [ D7. ]
The F.D.A. is imposing stricter rules on food labels.  [ A20. ]  International
A Vietnamese delegation has come to the United States to seek foreign investment, marking the first such visit since the American trade embargo was lifted in February.  [ D1. ]  Moscow money managers have visited Wall Street in their search for ways to revive the Russian economy.  [ D9. ]
Spanish police arrested the former governor of the Bank of Spain and the former chairman of Madrid's stock market on charges of tax fraud.  [ D2. ]
State-run industries in China are diversifying in an effort to deal with cash-flow problems.  [ A10. ] Today's Columns
Gaza and Jericho are likely to find their main chance for growth lies in economic embrace with Israel, even though they are becoming autonomous areas.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Japanese investors have been placing their bets on Ford Motor by bidding up the shares of Mazda, which is 25 percent owned by Ford.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Occasionally, an advertisement becomes part of the popular culture, succeeding beyond an agency's wildest dreams.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ]


Authentic Fitness Corp.(ASM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Theater in Review
The Autobiography of Aiken Fiction  Samuel Beckett Theater 410 West 42d Street Clinton Through May 15 By Kate Moira Ryan; directed by Adrienne Weiss; set by Narelle Sissons; lighting by Rick Martin; costumes by Angela Wendt; sound by Jennifer Sharpe; dramaturge, Suzanne Bennett; production stage manager, Warren S. Friedman.
Presented by Women's Project and Productions, Julia Miles, artistic director, and New Georges, Susan Bernfield, artistic director.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
Oralgiene U.S.A., Los Angeles, to Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York, as the first agency to handle the electric toothbrush maker's advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $7 million. *
Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Tex., to the Hively Group, Houston, to retain advertising responsibilities for its account for a second year.
Billings were estimated to exceed $2 million. *
Unibev Ltd., Golden, Colo., to Karsh &amp; Hagan Advertising Inc., Englewood, Colo., as the first agency to handle advertising for the Coors Brewing Co. unit's seasonal lines of specialty beers like Winterfest, Eisbock and Oktoberfest Marzen.
Billings have yet to be determined. *
Hotel Inter-Continental, Singapore, to Bozell Advertising (S) Pte.
Ltd., Singapore, as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Daka International Inc.(DKAI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


LDDS Offers $2 Billion for Wiltel Network
LDDS Communications Inc., the nation's fourth-largest long-distance company and a major province in John W. Kluge's corporate empire, is offering $2 billion for the Wiltel Communications Systems, Inc., a telephone network.
The LDDS offer, which was made public early today, signals that despite the collapse of the proposed giant merger between Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc., deal-making fever continues to rage in the telecommunications business.


Vencor Inc.(VC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Should Step In as Bosnia Mediator
To the Editor:
Missing among the many suggestions about what to do with the Bosnian situation is a United States initiative for a settlement.
Twice in the past, once in Lisbon before the fighting began and later in Geneva, agreements seemed at hand.
They failed, apparently for lack of outside push.


Check the Manual . . .  Oh, Forget It!
PETER JORDAN is a writer.
Like Ernest Hemingway, he grinds out short, plain, punchy sentences.
Like Danielle Steele or Stephen King, he is widely read: his last work went through several big printings.
But his success has not gone to his head.
Unlike monster-salary, monster-ego authors, he is surprisingly self-effacing.
"When people say, 'I loved this,' I almost say, 'I'm sorry you had to read it,' " he declared.
Mr.
Jordan, 34, writes instruction manuals for Sony television sets, stereo receivers, compact disk players, clock radios and videocassette recorders.
His goal is to get consumers to do what many consider the impossible: set the VCR clock so that it does not flash "12:00" day in and day out.
And maybe, just maybe, make the machine record the right channel, at the right time.


Journal; Four Weddings and a Runaway
To appreciate why Americans are punch-drunk over a British movie with the unlikely title of "Four Weddings and a Funeral," begin with the titillating true-life tale of Michelina Abbatiello.
Ms.
Abbatiello is the 23-year-old secretary who disappeared from a Long Island mall on the eve of her bridal shower in March, leaving behind the luggage she had just bought for her Hawaiian honeymoon, not to mention her clothes, savings-bank nest egg and fiance.


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 19


National Health Institutes to Revamp Criticized Research Program
The National Institutes of Health, the world's largest research institution, announced today that it would revamp its $1.2-billion-a-year internal research program to make it smaller and to give it a more competitive atmosphere.
At a news conference, the institutes' director, Dr.
Harold E. Varmus, said that in making the changes he was following the advice of a committee that had examined the quality of the research being done inside the N.I.H.


Stant Corp.(STNT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hitchcock Is Hooked After Role As Reliever
Sterling Hitchcock sounded like an excitable kid who had just accomplished a monumental first in his life.
The words tumbled forward, his cheeks remained flushed and he even laughed as he described how he secured the last two outs against the California Angels on Tuesday night for his first major league save.
Hitchcock was thrilled that he had been summoned from Class AAA Columbus a night earlier, thrilled that Manager Buck Showalter had injected him into a tense situation with the potential tying run on first base and one out, and thrilled that he had succeeded in escaping it as the Yankees escaped with a 6-5 victory after building a 6-0 lead through seven innings.


Uni-Marts Inc.(UNI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Economic Scene; The Palestinian areas will still be tied to Israel economically.
"WE have been a reservoir of cheap labor for Israel and a dumping ground for Israeli goods," Leila Shahid, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization's office in Paris, explained to reporters.
"That will change now that we have economic rights."
Well, not tomorrow or the next year -- and probably a good thing, too.
For while the agreement on Gaza and Jericho (which will automatically apply to the gestating West Bank "entity") gives Palestinians control over a wide range of matters economic, the protocol acknowledges that the main chance for growth in the new Palestinian areas lies in economic embrace with Israel.


U.S. Should Step In as Bosnia Mediator; No Ledger of Suffering
To the Editor:
Despite great losses of relatives in the Holocaust, I am appalled by the tendency, as exemplified in A. M. Rosenthal's April 26 column, "Bosnia and the Holocaust," to compare every atrocity to this tragedy.
People who are persecuted now do not suffer less because others were treated as badly or worse 50 years ago.
A crime against humanity committed today is not more acceptable morally because the same or a worse crime was committed in the past.
Let us stop arguing and start cooperating.
That would be a better memorial to the Holocaust victims.
MARIANNE RICH  Jamaica, Queens, April 26, 1994


Glimpse Into Rockefellers' Opulent World
Carolyn and Robert Whiting have hiked the trails of the Rockefeller State Park Preserve here for years and always wondered what life was like inside the Rockefellers' private home, Kykuit.
They found out today, when the house was opened to the public for the first time.
"It's incredible," said Mr.
Whiting, a sergeant with the Greenburgh Police Department.
"I could get used to living here."


Singapore Affirms Teen-Ager's Caning but Reduces Strokes to 4
Diplomats and the family of the 18-year-old American sentenced to a caning for vandalism said today that the punishment was imminent after a Government decision to deny clemency.
The Government said earlier today that it had rejected a plea by the teen-ager, Michael P. Fay, that he be spared; Mr.
Fay was convicted of spray-painting cars and other vandalism.
But it agreed to reduce the lashes to four, from six, a decision it said was intended as a goodwill gesture toward President Clinton.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Pro Bono Accounts
Narragansett Council Boy Scouts of America, Providence, R.I., to Pagano, Schenck &amp; Kay, Providence.


Seagull Energy Corp.(SGO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nanny Classes Can Be a Good Investment
LIKE thousands of parents whose professional lives take them away from their small children for much of the working day, Helen Goldstein worries.
In a demanding decade where love and affection may no longer be enough, Mrs.
Goldstein, a lawyer in Manhattan, is concerned that her two preschoolers are cared for by someone who also understands today's emphasis on skill-development at an early age and is familiar with the newest health, safety and nutritional data.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A commercial may become a runaway hit, but a company shouldn't let the idea run too far.
ADVERTISING is, by nature, meant to be popular because people rarely buy products they despise.
Yet usually Americans like few ads they see and love even fewer, if any.
Occasionally, though, beyond the wildest dreams or schemes of advertisers and agencies, without their help or hype, an ad becomes more than popular: it becomes part of the popular culture.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Cadbury Realigns Soft-Drink Accounts
Cadbury Beverages Inc. in Stamford, Conn., has realigned several soft-drink accounts between its two primary agencies, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.
Billings were not disclosed.
Foote, Cone, which already handles brands like Canada Dry and Schweppes, was awarded the Squirt account, previously at Messner Vetere, and the Vernors brand, previously at W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich.
Messner Vetere, which retains A &amp; W Root Beer and A &amp;W Cream Soda, was awarded the Naya waters account, last handled by Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York, and the Hires Root Beer and Hires Cream Soda brands, last handled by Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York.


Sherritt Gordon (SE) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nets Able to Avert Worst Nightmare At the Meadowlands
It was a fantasy gone bad that seemed to be ending with a nightmare.
It was going to go into the books not only as a sweep, but as a choke.
It was going to be the worst result of all for the New Jersey Nets against the New York Knicks.
Here was what not only the season but a series the Nets have been dreaming of for years had come to: Chris Morris at the free-throw line.
A second and a half to play in overtime.
The Nets trailing the Knicks by a point.


K-III Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Denver's Flying Baggage
Glitches are to be expected in a brand-new, $3.2 billion airport.
But the glitch that sets Denver International apart is its high-tech baggage mauler.
Costing almost $200 million, this highly automated contraption is supposed to move 1,400 bags a minute at five times the speed of conventional conveyor belts.
It does not.
And because of that, the airport has yet to open.


Arafat Signs and the Gaza Strip Shrugs
The picture was fuzzy on the balky old television set, but it was clear enough for Salameh al-Arouqi.
What he saw did not please him one bit.
There was Yasir Arafat, master of political pyrotechnics and chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, taking out his pen to sign the agreement that he had finally reached with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.


Houston Industries Inc.(HOU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mittelherwigsdorf Journal; Preaching to the Firebombers? (It Seems to Work)
Several dozen residents of this eastern German village turned out to meet Heinz Eggert on a recent evening, but none asked him about the great issues that have preoccupied him since he became Saxony's Interior Minister three years ago.
The questions were not about his success in combating right-wing violence, his criticisms of German unification or his prickly relationship with his party leader, Chancellor Helmut Kohl.


Greenfield Industries (GFII,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
Because of a computer transmission error, the New York Stock Exchange table in Business Day yesterday omitted the last 50 stocks in some editions.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


4-Year-Old Disappears In Brooklyn
More than 100 police officers searched yesterday for a 4-year-old Queens girl, Raychelle Ortiz, whose mother's boyfriend reported her missing on Tuesday while on an outing in Brooklyn.
The boyfriend, Richard Morales, told the police the two of them went to Brooklyn, where he sniffed some heroin, then took Raychelle window-shopping on Fulton Street.
He said that he left her outside a pizza restaurant while he went in to buy a slice at about 4:30 P.M. on Tuesday and that she was gone when he came out.


Alberta Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lynam Leaves 76ers to Coach Bullets
JIM LYNAM will be back on the sidelines after two years in the front office.
He takes over for WES UNSELD as coach of the Washington Bullets after two seasons as general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers.
It is his third stint as a National Basketball Association head coach, having previously coached the Los Angeles Clippers and the Philadelphia 76ers.
He inherits a Washington team that went 24-58 last season and has not made the playoffs in six seasons.
"I missed coaching, there's no doubt in my mind," Lynam said when he was introduced yesterday in Washington.
"I had been coaching all my life, and I saw this as a terrific opportunity for me and this franchise."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Candidates Listed For Four A's Awards
The American Association of Advertising Agencies, or the Four A's, has named the finalists in the annual competitions for its A+ Creative Awards and A+ Advertiser Award.
For the creative awards, 15 agencies in four regions were selected in the category of shops with billings exceeding $20 million.
In the East, they are BBDO New York; Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York; the Martin Agency in Richmond, and Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.
In the Central region, they are the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago; Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis, last year's winner; Fallon McElligott, also of Minneapolis, and McConnaughy Stein Schmidt Brown in Chicago.


Cardboard vs. Plastic
To the Editor:
As "More Box for the Buck" (The Week in Review, April 24) notes, overlarge boxes are no friends of trees.
But for dubious overpackaging, nothing beats plastic.
Plastic will become a more permanent part of the ecological hereafter, and as packaging it's second only to oysters in user-hostility.
I dare you to free a compact disk from its cellophane without a steak knife or unwrap a blank videotape before whatever you wanted to record is half over.
Then there are individually wrapped cheese slices.
Give me cardboard over shrink-wrap any day. AL QUAGLIERI  Albany, April 25, 1994


James E. Devitt, Insurance Executive, 73
James E. Devitt, a retired chairman of the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, died on Tuesday in Manatee Memorial Hospital in Bradenton, Fla.
Mr.
Devitt, who lived in Holmes Beach, Fla., was 73.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Judith.


Study Backs Breast Chemotherapy Regimen
Cancer researchers are reporting today that the chemotherapy dose usually given to women with advanced breast cancer is more effective than a lower dose that can have fewer side effects.
The study, by a large group of medical researchers, involved 1,572 women with breast cancer that had already spread outside their breast to their lymph nodes at the time it was discovered.
They were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups.


AGCO Corp.(AG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


D'Amato Spars With F.C.C. Member Over Howard Stern
Howard Stern may or may not be a serious candidate for governor of New York, but the radio "shock jock" has prompted a (sort of) serious debate between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and a member of the Federal Communications Commission over religion, ethnicity, obscenity and freedom of speech.
In March, Mr.
D'Amato took the Senate floor to defend Mr.
Stern, a fellow Long Islander, and to condemn the F.C.C. commissioner, James H. Quello, for trying to tie up efforts by Infinity Broadcasting, Mr.
Stern's employer, to buy a Los Angeles radio station because of pending obscenity complaints against Mr.
Stern's syndicated program.


Webb (Del) Corp.(WBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


49ers Keep Carter and Release Lee
San Francisco, struggling with the salary cap, re-signed running back DEXTER CARTER and waived AMP LEE.
A second-round draft choice out of Florida State in 1992, Lee gained 230 yards on 72 carries last season.
Carter, a No. 1 pick in 1990, played both running back and special teams.
Last season he finished second in the National Football Conference in punt returns, averaging 12.1 per return. (AP)


Outpatient Care Next for Strawberry
DARRYL STRAWBERRY has been released from a drug treatment center but will remain on the Los Angeles Dodgers' disabled list while undergoing outpatient care.
"Strawberry will continue to report to the center as part of the outpatient aftercare program recommended for him by the facility," the baseball commissioner's office in New York said yesterday in a statement.
Strawberry, 32, a former Met, entered a treatment center on April 8. (AP)


Burned-Out Church Resumes Serving the Hungry in a Restored Nave


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Cadbury Realigns Soft-Drink Accounts
Cadbury Beverages Inc. in Stamford, Conn., has realigned several soft-drink accounts between its two primary agencies, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.
Billings were not disclosed.
Foote, Cone, which already handles brands like Canada Dry and Schweppes, was awarded the Squirt account, previously at Messner Vetere, and the Vernors brand, previously at W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich.
Messner Vetere, which retains A &amp; W Root Beer and A &amp;W Cream Soda, was awarded the Naya waters account, last handled by Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York, and the Hires Root Beer and Hires Cream Soda brands, last handled by Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY 11 MORE OFFICERS REMOVED IN PRECINCT
Eleven more police officers were taken off the job in the 30th Precinct in Harlem as a corruption investigation continued.
A Federal investigator said they were suspected of knowing of or participating in crimes like stealing, selling drugs and shaking down drug dealers.
A1.
CUSTODIANS ACCEPT CONCESSIONS
Union negotiators for school custodians have agreed to concessions that would reduce their control over school buildings.
A1.
GIRL TRAPPED IN FIRE DIES
A fire in a Brooklyn apartment killed a 3-year old girl and critically injured another girl and a woman trying to shield them.
B3.
MISCONDUCT ALLEGATIONS ON RECORD
An officer involved in a videotaped altercation with a handcuffed Staten Island man has been the subject of seven misconduct complaints in a nine-year career, including four for excessive use of force, law-enforcement officials said.
B4.
JUDGE ISSUES NEW RULES ON EVIDENCE
Responding to complaints from defense lawyers, a Federal judge refined his instructions on how both sides would screen evidence that was seized by agents investigating what the Government charges was a terrorist conspiracy.
B3.
NEWCOMERS REVIVE OLD SOCCER HAVEN
For generations, the epicenter of immigrant soccer in the city has been the Metropolitan Oval, a dusty field in Maspeth, Queens, that was once the playground of the German and Hungarian immigrants.
B3.
GUARD ACCUSED OF TRADING FAVOR FOR SEX
A security officer was charged with bribery and official misconduct after prosecutors said he released a shoplifting suspect in exchange for her having sex with him.
B3.
The Fire Commissioner said that he would eliminate 3 of 21 senior uniformed positions.
B3.
REGION LEGISLATORS PLAY IT SAFE
Connecticut's 1994 legislative session is almost over.
It has been a short, quiet session in which nearly all issues of potential controversy have been put aside or postponed safely beyond the fall elections.
B6.
PSYCHIATRIST SAYS RIFKIN IS SICK BUT SANE
Joel Rifkin, who confessed to strangling 17 women, suffers from a long list of emotional problems and mental disorders, but is not legally insane, a psychiatrist testified.
B6.
SMELT RUNNING, AND SMELTERS FOLLOW
On an evening when the torrents of spring runoff have calmed and the sting of winter has left the tributaries to the Finger Lakes, the smelt start moving toward their spawning grounds.
B6.
D'AMATO SPARS WITH F.C.C.
OVER STERN
Howard Stern may or may not be a serious candidate for governor of New York, but he has prompted a (sort of) serious debate between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and a member of the Federal Communications Commission.
B9.
POLICE OFFICER JAILED FOR EMBEZZLING
He did not gamble, drove a battered old car and often came to work in slovenly attire, his fellow Harrison police officers said, so they are still mystified as to what Lieut.
Herman Diller did with $44,423 of their union dues.
B9.
Chronicle B8


Pittway Corp.(PRY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Currents; Couches That Offer New Ways to Sit
THE arms stand straight up or come across, just so.
And sitting face to face is the new gambit in the sitting-on-the-sofa game.
It's no surprise that the sofa can often make or break a room.
The Kips Bay Show House, which continues through May 15 at 47 and 49 East 65th Street, includes three sofas in new shapes that are sure to prove inspirational.
Mariette Himes Gomez's "Tete-a-Tete" sofa, top right, was adapted from a pair of Louis XVI settees Ms.
Gomez saw at an antiques show. (She took some photographs of the settees, which had already been sold, and designed her own version.) "What's nice about it is the arms that wrap around the front," she said.
"The sofa is for sitting or reclining. There's the joy."


Fire Dept. To Trim Staff And Shift Jobs
The New York City Fire Commissioner said yesterday that he would eliminate 3 of 21 senior uniformed positions in the department and shift 21 other firefighters from administrative to firefighting duties.
He said the moves would make the agency more efficient and save about $2 million a year.
The Commissioner, Howard Safir, also announced that the department's top uniformed officer, Anthony L. Fusco, the chief of department, would retire early next month.
Mr.
Fusco, who is 57 years old and has been in the Fire Department for 34 years, said at a City Hall news conference that he was stepping down reluctantly because of an unspecified "condition," which neither he nor his aides would specify.
He said he had waited until now to step down because he wanted to help Mr.
Safir, who became Fire Commissioner in January, to assume control of the department.


Nations Help to Back Dollar As U.S. Acts to Show Resolve
The United States teamed up with the central banks of 16 other nations today to buy dollars in a global campaign intended to show investors that the Clinton Administration is serious about maintaining the value of the ailing American currency.
It was the first such coordinated intervention since August 1992, and involved the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve, joining with the central banks of Germany, France, Japan and 13 other countries.
The move was planned in a series of secret phone calls overnight.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT HOME WITH: Robert and Ian MacNeil; A Father and a Son, Growing Up Again
THE apartment door swung open and Robert MacNeil extended his hand.
He looked solid, sober, prepared to put matters into perspective the way he does at night on public television's "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour." Beside him was a smiling young man in paratrooper's boots -- his son Ian, a designer who has been tearing up the scenery on the British stage.
It was 10 A.M., time for the MacNeil/MacNeil hour and a report on how a father has come to terms with his gay son.


As Quiet 1994 Session Nears an End, State Legislators Avoid Divisive Issues
Connecticut's 1994 legislative session is almost over.
It has been a short, quiet session in which nearly all issues of potential controversy have been put aside or postponed safely beyond the fall elections.
With the State Constitution mandating that the General Assembly end its work by midnight tonight, legislators began the week intent on tidying up.
The results, though, can seem strangely untidy, as in a bill that the House took up Tuesday night, "An Act Eliminating the Moving Expenses Reimbursement as a Modification in Computing Connecticut Adjusted Gross Income." Sudden Change in Intent
If that seems daunting late-night reading, not to worry.
The bill overwhelmingly approved by the House early this morning never mentions moving expenses.
Puzzle books, computers, dry cleaners, auctioneers, lottery tickets and used airplanes, it does mention -- plus $107 million in tax cuts -- but moving expenses, no.


No Headline
"I turn to the people, the Palestinian people, our neighbors. A hundred years of animosity has created hatred between us. We have killed you, and you have killed us. Thousands of our graves, thousands of your graves are the painful signposts in your history and in our history. Today, you and we stretch out our hands to each other. We begin a new count." YITZHAK RABIN.  [ A16:1. ]


National Sanitary Supply Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bonilla Heats Up at the Hot Corner and Also at the Plate
His batting average used to be somewhere in the Flintstone Era, or so that is how Bobby Bonilla described it.
His power numbers?
Nonexistent.
Only talk about his surprisingly adept defense at third base could make Bonilla smile, so cold were his visits to the plate.
And yesterday at Shea Stadium, Bonilla still wanted to talk about defense.
He wanted to talk about the hard line drive from Matt Williams that brought him to his knees and the difficult chance that he turned into a double play.
But when the Mets write Bonilla's checks, they add all those zeroes for his offense, and they were happy to see him pay back yesterday.


Morningstar Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


If Not Born to Win, Expected To
"Never let them see you sweat," says William F. Weld, reflecting the patrician style that has taken him from Harvard to the top job in the criminal division of the Reagan Justice Department to the Republican governorship of one of the nation's most Democratic state.
He prides himself on his vacations at his family camp in the Adirondacks, where he goes fishing on a private lake, reads Yeats and dines on trout and venison cooked by his guide.
Back in Boston, the millionaire Governor plays squash three afternoons a week.
"I love sort of lying around on the weekend," Mr.
Weld, who lives in Cambridge with his wife and five children, said in a recent interview.
"I enjoy not working as much as I enjoy work itself."


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.(MHO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Drama Continues To the End
Judging from the tape marks on the stage showing Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin where to stand and from the 12-foot-tall polystyrene sphinx and model of the Great Pyramid behind them, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt appeared to be vying for a Tony award for stage direction.
Never one for small gestures, Mr.
Mubarak spared no expense to create a scene of peace and harmony as the leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel waited to sign a long-awaited agreement putting the Gaza Strip and Jericho under Palestinian rule.


Sampling the Services Of Baby Photographers
NEW parents quickly learn the importance of having good photographs of their baby.
Friends and colleagues hint that they'd love to see pictures, and grandparents demand them.
Parents can try to take adequate portraits themselves, but for the inexperienced, equipment can be tricky, and capturing a baby's fleeting expressions is a demanding task.
With this in mind, I set out recently to sample the services of a few baby photographers.


Report on Derivatives Said To Seek New S.E.C. Power
A long-awaited Congressional study of the complex new financial products known as derivatives will recommend that the Securities and Exchange Commission be given broad new powers to regulate dealers and corporate users of derivatives, according to people who have seen versions of the report, which is scheduled to be released later this month.
Even though the report does not conclude that the derivatives market has created inappropriate financial risks, it will also present a long laundry list of other changes to laws and regulations to deal with derivatives, people who have seen the report said.


Genesis Health Ventures Inc.(GHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Facing Cash Flow Problems, China's Marxist Industries Try Diversification
When a blast furnace previously opened at the Wuhan Iron and Steel Company to disgorge its fiery load onto the conveyor, it was another installment in Communism's social contract for the 200,000 workers, dependents and pensioners whose welfare was guaranteed by the state.
Now nothing is certain in Wuhan, and the threat of domestic political upheaval here and in the rest of China is growing.


Singapore Justice on Trial
The Government of Singapore has reduced the American teen-ager Michael Fay's sentence for vandalism -- from six strokes with a rattan cane to four.
Singapore says it cannot completely commute his sentence without undermining its authority.
But it can, and should, if Singapore wants to continue boasting that its legal system is hard but fair.
It now seems clear that Mr.
Fay is the victim of a tainted prosecution.
At the least, there are enough signs of police misconduct to warrant setting aside a penalty.
And Singapore law specifically allows a court to mitigate a caning sentence for a first-time offender between the ages of 16 and 21.


Time Cable, Displeased, Cuts Outlays
Time Warner Inc. sent a signal to the Federal Communications Commission yesterday that it was not happy with the new round of cable regulations effective in July.
In a pointed statement, Time Warner said it was cutting capital expenditures for cable by $100 million this year, though it would not release its planned budget.
It also said it was freezing hiring except in areas related to customer service.


Interco Inc.(ISS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Life as a Watershed Irks Putnam County; New York City Tightens Regulations, and 46 Developers Fire Back by Filing Suit
The water that percolates through the soil and courses down the streams of Putnam County is the same water that eventually gushes out of hundreds of thousands of taps in New York City 60 miles to the south.
So, for almost a century, the fate of this small, no longer bucolic county has been hitched to the city's thirst for clean water.
But the county's strong-willed residents have never quite thought of themselves as just a watershed, some appendage to a big city, and many say they have become tired of being pushed around by the Goliath to the south.
Even Harsher Rules
Residents complain that the city, to protect its water and avoid spending $8 billion on treatment plants, has stepped up enforcement of long-ignored regulations for sewage treatment and storm-water drainage, forbidding the construction of household septic tanks and asphalt parking lots.
In the next few weeks, the city plans to publish even harsher rules that county residents say will make it impossible or prohibitively expensive to build new businesses and homes and will derail the resurgent economy of a county that is two-thirds watershed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
John Connelly was named to the new position of partner and creative director at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Rochester.
He was previously executive vice president and creative director at Ice Inc., Rochester. *
Deanna Maneker, executive vice president at the Stenrich Group, Glen Allen, Va., was promoted to the new position of chief operating officer. *
Ralph Erardy was named publisher of Women's Wear Daily, New York, succeeding Susan Hasson, who was named vice president of corporate sales at the parent, Fairchild Publications, New York.
Mr.
Erardy was previously senior vice president of advertising sales at M. Shanken Communications, New York. *
Mary Jean Wyatt was named general manager at Golin/Harris Communications, New York, assuming responsibilities temporarily held by Richard S. Kline, who continues as chief operating officer.
Ms.
Wyatt was previously president at Ruder-Finn Healthcare, New York. *
Donna Knox, executive vice president at Focus Networks, Dallas, was named president, succeeding Daniel T. Owen, who was named chairman.


Silicon Valley Group (SVGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Where the House Is All Play
THERE are six playhouses in the exhibition "Shelter and Dreams: Playhouses by Architects and Artists," and not a single one is cute.
Set in an 8,000-square-foot garden of 80-foot spruce at the Katonah (N.Y.) Museum of Art, the houses, each about 12 feet square, are a diverse village, mysterious and alluring.
Some could be inhabited; others respond to the presence of humans and are more sculpture than shelter.


Levitz Furniture Inc.(LFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Vietnamese Delegation Seeking American Capital
Like many Vietnamese of his generation, Pham Chanh Truc protested against the American military presence in Vietnam.
He was jailed once, escaped and worked eight years in the Vietcong underground before he was caught and jailed again.
When Communist forces drove out the South Vietnamese Army in 1975, Saigon became Ho Chi Minh City and Mr.
Truc joined its new Government.
Now, nearly two decades later, as vice chairman of the People's Committee of Ho Chi Minh City, Mr.
Truc is leading the first Vietnamese delegation to the United States since the American trade embargo was lifted in February.
With an ambitious two-week tour to drum up financial investment for the city, the Vietnamese are, in effect, inviting Americans back to Vietnam.
Forgoing Pride for Technology
"I don't think I wasted my prime years," Mr.
Truc said in an interview last week as the delegation headed to the headquarters of Pepsico in Somers, N.Y.
"I did the thing I believed in, the right thing, fighting for the independence and sovereignty of Vietnam. So I don't think this is an irony for me, but an advantage. I was able to participate in the first phase of gaining back our country, and I am still here, participating in its construction."


New Storm Warning System Saved Many in Bangladesh
The comparatively low death toll in the huge storm that whipped across parts of southeastern Bangladesh on Monday night with winds of up to 180 miles an hour was attributed today to a combination of modern technology and simple steps that led to the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of villagers to high ground and storm shelters.
A major cyclone in 1991 killed an estimated 131,000 persons, wiping out entire villages and islands and leaving human and animal corpses littering the countryside.
The latest one, according to Bangladesh Government officials, took the lives of 167, although local reporters say the toll could rise to about 500 after relief workers travel to remote areas.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
John Connelly was named to the new position of partner and creative director at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Rochester.
He was previously executive vice president and creative director at Ice Inc., Rochester. *
Deanna Maneker, executive vice president at the Stenrich Group, Glen Allen, Va., was promoted to the new position of chief operating officer. *
Ralph Erardy was named publisher of Women's Wear Daily, New York, succeeding Susan Hasson, who was named vice president of corporate sales at the parent, Fairchild Publications, New York.
Mr.
Erardy was previously senior vice president of advertising sales at M. Shanken Communications, New York. *
Mary Jean Wyatt was named general manager at Golin/Harris Communications, New York, assuming responsibilities temporarily held by Richard S. Kline, who continues as chief operating officer.
Ms.
Wyatt was previously president at Ruder-Finn Healthcare, New York. *
Donna Knox, executive vice president at Focus Networks, Dallas, was named president, succeeding Daniel T. Owen, who was named chairman.


Schulman (A.) Inc.(SHLM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Theater in Review
Dracula  SoHo Repertory 46 Walker Street Through May 22 By Mac Wellman; directed by Julian Webber; set by Kyle Chepulis; lighting by Brian Aldous; costumes by James Sauli; sound by John Kilgore; original music by Melissa Shiflett; assistant director, Jason Porath.
Presented by SoHo Repertory, Mr.
Webber, artistic director; Marlene Swartz, founding artistic direcotr.


U.S. Leather Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Executive Changes
BLACK &amp; DECKER U.S.
HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS, Shelton, Conn., a unit of the Black &amp; Decker Corp., named Don R. Graber president.
COLTEC INDUSTRIES, New York, appointed Richard M. Hoffman senior vice president and general counsel.
DANIELS PRINTING CO., Everett, Mass., named Grover Daniels president and chief executive.
HILTON HOTELS CORP., Beverly Hills, Calif., promoted Dieter H. Huckestein, currently senior vice president of the Hawaii-California-Arizona region, to executive vice president of Hilton Hotels and president of hotel operations.
NUTRI/SYSTEM L. P., Horsham, Pa., named Philip Voluck president and chief operating officer, succeeding Mark Miller, who was named president and chief executive of Canadian operations.
WILSON SPORTING GOODS CO., Chicago, appointed Jim Reid-Anderson senior vice president of finance and administration.


U.S. Should Step In as Bosnia Mediator; Muslims Going to Death
To the Editor:
Contrary to A. M. Rosenthal's "Bosnia and the Holocaust" column (April 26), the question is not: Is Bosnia another Holocaust?
Bosnia is a separate immense tragedy, which might have been avoided by the United States and Western powers.


Standex International Corp.(SXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


John McLiam, 76, Film and TV Actor
John McLiam, a character actor who worked in dozens of films and television shows and wrote the 1957 Broadway play "The Sin of Pat Muldoon," died on April 16 at his home in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 76.
The cause was melanoma and Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Roberta Williams McLiam.


Sports of The Times; Will Nets Ever Get It Right?
WHEN the Nets announced two weeks ago that playoff tickets were about to go on sale, they included a phone number for orders.
But when prospective ticket-buyers called that number, a local insurance office answered.
The announced phone number was one digit off.
It's the story of the franchise.


CHRONICLE
The bust of William Shakespeare gazed down benignly on 200 revelers dressed in an array of ostrich feathers, plumes and riding clothes at the Folger Shakespeare Library's annual benefit in Washington on Tuesday.
The theme was "An Edwardian Country House," and the guests made a considerable effort to dress accordingly.
The library's magnificent reading room, where scholars usually peruse first folios, had been turned into an Edwardian drawing room by JOAN TOBIN, the chairwoman of the evening, with the help of MARK HAMPTON, the New York decorator.
"I'm just her follower," Mr.
Hampton said as he twirled around with Mrs.
Tobin on the dance floor.
"She pulls a little string and I just go after it."


Charter Medical Corp.(CMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pact Breaks Grip of New York School Custodians
Union negotiators for New York City's school custodians have agreed to concessions that would reduce the custodians' control over school buildings, a breakthrough that School Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said would make schools cleaner for children and more accessible to community groups.
The tentative agreement between the union and the Board of Education, which is subject to the approval of union members and the Mayor's office, would effectively create a system of controls tying the promotion of the school system's 853 custodians to their job performance rather than seniority, and holding them accountable to the principals at their schools.


Eljer Industries Inc.(ELJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Whatever Diplomats Do, Jericho's Arabs and Jews Must Handle Details
As Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin put their signatures today to the accord that is to bring self-rule to this town, Ihab Baraghmeh, a local taxi driver, received a call at his home from an Israeli friend at a nearby kibbutz.
"Mazel tov," said the voice over the phone, offering congratulations in Hebrew.


Washington Water (WWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pesticides Not Cleared Of Breast Cancer Link
To the Editor:
You report a study "has found no evidence that breast cancer is caused by pesticide residues that accumulate in body fat" (Health page, April 20).
Your claim of "strong evidence" is not shared by the study's authors.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  PALESTINIAN SELF-RULE BEGINS  Palestinians gained a measure of self-government for the first time as Israel and the P.L.O. signed an agreement that formally began Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
But the borders of Jericho remained in dispute, and follow-up accords will be needed.
A1  WAS IT WORTH IT, GAZANS ASK  As the self-rule accord took effect, the dominant sound in Gaza Strip's ramshackle refugee camps was of one hand clapping.
A1


Staff Builders Inc.(SBLI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A Wall Falls in Jericho
It may be days, weeks or even months before Israelis and Palestinians grasp the meaning of the autonomy accord signed in Cairo yesterday.
The small print spells out the terms of limited self-rule that will apply imminently to the town of Jericho and the Gaza Strip.
But it is the big print that truly matters: after years of strife, bitter antagonists have come together on a formula first proposed at Camp David in 1978 that will permit Israeli forces to withdraw honorably from West Bank territories that Israel seized in the defensive 1967 war.
In short, millions of words about the "Middle East peace process" have been translated, finally, into deeds.
A wall has fallen once again in ancient Jericho; within three months, limited Palestinian self-rule is to be extended throughout the rest of the West Bank.
This has happened despite acts of desperate terrorism by a fanatic core of Arabs and Jews who view these steps to peace as treason.
Whether they succeed depends on the momentum of a deal struck between a pragmatic Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and his enemy-turned-partner, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman.


Corporate Designers Enroll In the 'Less Is More' School
Anything "New" and "Improved" used to have to come in a bigger package.
But in this era of landfills that are full and incinerator ash that is treated as hazardous waste, better should mean smaller, according to the Coalition of Northeastern Governors.
So the governors, from New England, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, issued a challenge in 1991, and 46 companies accepted: Today, many came to show off what they had done.
G.M.
Sheds Styrofoam  The General Motors Corporation, for instance, told suppliers to stop using Styrofoam dividers inside shipping containers, and either bolt the car components down or use cardboard dividers, which are easier to recycle.
That step and others, the company said, cut the amount of landfill waste for each mid-sized car to 13 pounds from 82 pounds in 1991.


Heritage Media Corp.(HTG,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fire Traps 3 In Apartment In Brooklyn, Killing a Girl
A fire in a Brooklyn apartment killed a 3-year-old girl early yesterday and critically injured another girl and a woman trying to shield them.
It was the second time in two days that an apartment fire killed a child whose path to a fire escape was blocked.
In yesterday's fire, officials said, a padlocked security gate prevented escape through a window.
In a blaze on Tuesday in a city-owned building at 465 East 140th Street in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, an 8-year-old boy and his 5-year-old brother died after their mother was unable to move a refrigerator blocking a window leading to the fire escape.


Health Systems International Inc.(HQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treasuries Are Mixed Despite Dollar Defense
Investor skepticism about how serious a defense the Federal Reserve is mounting for the dollar caused prices of Treasury securities to bounce up and down before ending mixed yesterday, analysts said.
A coordinated intervention by the Fed and foreign central banks yesterday morning in support of the dollar had a positive effect on the market, they said, before stronger-than-expected data for factory orders cut the rally short.


A SoHo Show Features Dolls as Art, Not Toys
DOLL artists, like many other artists, create portraits depicting the people they see around them.
They are at a slight disadvantage, however, because they have to overcome ideas of you-know-what as art.
"All of us hate the word "dolls" but can't think of another name for these figures," said Bill Nelson, a doll artist in a show and sale that opens tomorrow in SoHo.
" 'Doll' makes people think of Barbie."


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about new communities in suburbia misidentified the institution that Dr.
George Sternlieb directed until his recent retirement.
It is the Center for Urban Policy Research at Rutgers University, not the Center for Urban Policy and Research.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
Oralgiene U.S.A., Los Angeles, to Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York, as the first agency to handle the electric toothbrush maker's advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $7 million. *
Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Tex., to the Hively Group, Houston, to retain advertising responsibilities for its account for a second year.
Billings were estimated to exceed $2 million. *
Unibev Ltd., Golden, Colo., to Karsh &amp; Hagan Advertising Inc., Englewood, Colo., as the first agency to handle advertising for the Coors Brewing Co. unit's seasonal lines of specialty beers like Winterfest, Eisbock and Oktoberfest Marzen.
Billings have yet to be determined. *
Hotel Inter-Continental, Singapore, to Bozell Advertising (S) Pte.
Ltd., Singapore, as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed.


New Tokyo Minister Calls 'Rape of Nanking' a Fabrication
A senior minister in Japan's new Government has dealt a blow to his country's efforts to heal the wounds of World War II by declaring this week that the massacre of hundreds of thousands of Chinese at Nanjing (then Nanking) in 1937, widely viewed as one of Japan's most infamous war crimes, was a "fabrication."
The official, Shigeto Nagano, the new Justice Minister and a former chief of staff of the army, also criticized former Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa for terming Japan's invasions in Asia as "a war of aggression." In an interview with the Mainichi Shimbun, one of the country's largest newspapers, Mr.
Nagano repeated a longtime claim of Japanese nationalists and rightists: that Japan was "liberating" Asian countries from Western colonial powers.


Three 60's Art Stars Rise and Shine Again
The Beatles they're not.
Still, when Anthony Caro, Kenneth Noland and Jules Olitski reunited here last week, it was for the first time since they achieved art world stardom during the 1960's.
Missing was the group's Brian Epstein, the critic Clement Greenberg, whose guidance and imprimatur had helped to turn them into what they were, for a while.
But other cronies were on hand, like the dealer Andre Emmerich and the critic and historian Michael Fried, for a spirited symposium and exhibition at the Hartford Art School.
Depending on one's perspective, the event was a morality tale about art world fickleness or a revival meeting for devotees of high modernism.
For the artists, now in their 70's and white-haired, it was a chance to jumpstart an association that had become clouded, Mr.
Olitski said, with "ancient paranoias." It was also an opportunity to combine forces once more, this time against what each in turn lambasted as the tyranny of political correctness.
Tactfully, no one accused their brand of abstraction -- as determinedly divorced from reference to the real world as so much new art is engaged by it -- with having exercised a similar tyranny three decades ago.


St. Jude Medical Inc.(STJM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Outcome of Voting In Zulu Heartland Remains in Doubt
The outcome of elections in the volatile Zulu heartland of Natal remained uncertain today, with new vote totals showing a tight race between the African National Congress and its longtime adversary, the Inkatha Freedom Party.
Even though the polls closed five days ago, the battle for control of South Africa's most fiercely contested province intensified as officials of the Congress and Inkatha accused each other of widespread cheating.
The latest tally showed the congress behind by 5 percentage points, with about half the vote still uncounted.


Officer Is Arrested In Wild Gun Firing
A New York City police detective from an elite narcotics task force was arrested early yesterday on charges that he recklessly fired his gun at least 16 times outside an upstate bar, the police said yesterday.
One of the bullets went across a lake, pierced the window of a house and grazed the leg of a 17-year-old woman.
Detective Miguel Irizarry, 36, a member of the Drug Enforcement Task Force, was arrested about 2:30 A.M. outside Flanagan's, a bar in Mahopac in Putnam County, by officers of the Carmel Police Department responding to 911 calls about shots being fired.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Water Wisdom
Q.
I'm replanting my penthouse terrace, a rather hot and dry place, and would like species that require little water.
What would you suggest? -- Maureen Meade, New York.
A.
Since water is no longer a cheap and unlimited resource, it's the wise gardener who looks for plants that manage with reduced rations.
Quite a few plants have minimal water needs, among them barberry, black-eyed Susan, Bar Harbor juniper, coreopsis, Russian sage, tamarix, yew and yucca, all of which are also good for terrace containers.


Spelling Entertainment Group Inc.(SP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Essay; Presume Innocence
Paula Jones, now 27, who was an Arkansas state employee in 1991, claims she was enticed into a hotel room in Little Rock where Gov.
Bill Clinton asked her to perform a sexual favor.
She says she refused.
A trooper who she says extended the Governor's invitation was later quoted saying she indicated otherwise.
Mrs.
Jones took umbrage at that damaging suggestion and went public a few months ago at a confabulation of right-wingers.


Symbol Technologies Inc.(SBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nets Nip Knicks in the One that Almost Got Away
On a night when their season could have ended, the Nets survived -- barely.
Chris Morris's two free throws with 1.5 seconds left in overtime lifted the Nets to a thrilling 93-92 victory over the Knicks tonight in a memorable playoff game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Clinton's Style Means a Slow Process in Picking a Supreme Court Nominee
President George Bush had two opportunities to fill vacancies on the Supreme Court, and on both occasions he leaped eagerly to place his stamp on the institution by picking replacements within days.
But for President Clinton, the process of finding a nominee for the seat held by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring, has gone on for a month as the White House has fallen into a slow-moving and detailed process that characterizes most of the Administration's thorniest decisions.


Florida Rock Industries Inc.(FRK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Teleflex Inc.(TFX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Cracks Still Deep in Contemporary-Art Market
The cracks are still running deep in the contemporary-art market.
Last night, Sotheby's sale took its audience on an unexpected roller-coaster ride, with great highs and plunging lows.
There was even a moment of horror when the promised star of the night, Jasper Johns's "Highway" (1959), a colorful abstract painting from one of this artist's most desirable periods, failed to sell.
This undermined the confidence of the rest of the evening.
Bidding stopped for "Highway" at $7.2 million, under Sotheby's optimistic estimate of $8 million.
The painting was being sold by Peter Brant, the newsprint manufacturer and owner of Interview magazine.
An Owner's Lack of Success
After the auction, experts said they thought it had not sold because Mr.
Brant had been unsuccessfully offering it around himself with a $6 million price tag.


Equitable Cos. (EQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mascotech
Mascotech Inc., a maker of auto parts, yesterday reported disappointing first-quarter earnings of 32 cents a share, when analysts had expected 34 cents.
The company said severe weather had hurt sales of its nonautomotive products, principally for the commercial and residential construction business.
Its stock closed down sharply on the New York Stock Exchange.


Increases in Wages Don't Create Inflation; Unite, You Unemployed
To the Editor:
"Growth of Jobs May Be Casualty in Inflation Fight" (front page, April 24) reports the concern of the Federal Reserve Board and many economists that the danger of inflation would increase if unemployment fell below its 6.5 percent rate.
The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates three times to slow the economy so that fewer jobs will be created.


CHRONICLE
LEE RADZIWILL, who has been director of special events for the designer GIORGIO ARMANI for eight years, is stepping down from the post, and will become a consultant to the designer, the company announced yesterday.
"She asked to leave in order to pursue other interests,"' said Linda Gaunt, the company's director of public relations.
Ms.
Radziwill is married to Herbert Ross, the film director and choreographer, and is the sister of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.


Carr-Gottstein Foods Co.  (CGF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Mexico Arrests State Prosecutor as Accomplice to Drug Ring
Deepening the sense of chaos in a city plagued by violence and corruption, the Federal government has arrested a senior state prosecutor in Tijuana on charges of protecting the powerful cocaine traffickers accused of killing a Catholic cardinal last year.
The arrested prosecutor, Sergio Ortiz Lara, a deputy state attorney general, was seized at gunpoint as he returned to his office on Tuesday afternoon.
The government gave no reason for his detention until many hours later.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GTE GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS CORP., Waltham, Mass., a unit of GTE Corp., received a 10-year contract, worth up to $83 million, to supply integrated voice and data telecommunications equipment for 43 Federal Government sites.
PEOPLES BANCORP OF WORCESTER INC., Worcester, Mass., said shareholders had approved the acquisition of the company by Shawmut National Corp., Hartford, in a stock swap valued at about $180 million.
UNITED STATES BANKNOTE CORP., New York, formed a joint venture between its Brazilian unit and a unit of Video Lottery Technologies Inc., Bozeman, Mont., to pursue on-line lottery contracts in Brazil.


Judge Revises Rules on Screening of Evidence Involving Sheik
Responding to complaints from defense lawyers, a Federal judge yesterday refined his instructions on how both sides would screen evidence that was seized this week by F.B.I. agents investigating what the Government charges was a terrorist conspiracy.
Earlier this week, Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court ordered that a Government lawyer and three defense lawyers would review any tapes, books and papers seized from the New Jersey home of a legal assistant to Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman, a fundamentalist Egyptian cleric, has been accused of plotting a terrorist campaign in New York City.


Framework for Peace: Agreement Between Israel and the P.L.O.
Following are excerpts from the text of the accord signed in Cairo yesterday by Israel and the P.L.O. on Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
The text was issued by the Israeli Foreign Ministry without the annexes or maps.
The Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (hereinafter "the P.L.O."), the representative of the Palestinian people;


Berkley (W.R.) (BKLY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Three Agencies Get Top Obie Honors
Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York, Clarity Coverdale Rueff Advertising Inc. in Minneapolis and Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York shared top honors, winning three awards each, at the 52d annual Obie Awards show sponsored by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America's marketing division.
At a ceremony last night in New York, Angotti, Thomas won one award for work for Saab Cars and two for ads for Molson Breweries.
Clarity Coverdale received Obies for work for the St.
Paul Pioneer Press, the Minnesota Department of Public Safety and Bart's Suburban Driving School.
Lowe won for work for Mercedes-Benz, Grey Poupon mustard and the South Street Seaport.


Canadian Pacific (CP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dingell Plans Inquiry on Licenses to 3 Companies
Citing allegations of "repeated and egregious" violations of Federal rules, a powerful member of Congress has opened an investigation into a Federal Communications Commission decision to grant potentially valuable radio licenses free to three companies.
The investigation, begun by Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, concerns a decision earlier this year to give the three companies what is called a "pioneer's preference" in getting licenses for new wireless pocket telephone and data services known as personal communication services.


Yankee Energy System (YES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Russians Tour Temples of Capitalism
For a Russian of not so long ago, bristling with ideology, a trip to Wall Street would have seemed like Daniel being cast into the lion's den.
But for Leon Asrian and 24 other emerging capitalists from Moscow and Siberia, their visit earlier this week to the world's financial capital was not only a long-sought education but also a delicious chance to gawk.


Wisconsin Public Service (WPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Meola Likely to Be Starting Goalie for U.S.
KASEY KELLER, a backup goalkeeper on the 1990 United States World Cup team and a key starter for Millwall in the English League, was cut from the 1994 United States soccer team yesterday and replaced by JUERGEN SOMMER.
The decision means TONY MEOLA and BRAD FRIEDEL will be the top two goalies on the team, with Meola, of Kearny, N.J., likely to start during next month's World Cup.
Meola has been the team's top goalie since 1989 and started during the 1990 World Cup.
Keller had played just once for the American team since BORA MILUTINOVIC became coach. (AP)


The Gun Minority Flexes Muscle
Foreigners cannot understand it.
Neither can Americans who live in cities where neighborhoods are terrorized by guns and gangs.
How can it be that the overwhelming majority of Americans say they favor stronger Government restrictions on firearms, yet Congress even has trouble controlling civilian possession of rapid-fire weapons originally designed for military and police use.
The answer is that Americans who oppose gun control tend to feel much more strongly about the issue than than do those who favor it.


Croll and Cauthen Elected to Hall
Well, Jimmy Croll has already won one major race this week.
The 74-year-old owner and trainer of Holy Bull, the favorite in Saturday's Kentucky Derby, was elected to the Racing Hall of Fame today for his four decades of success as a trainer of thoroughbreds.
"Does this make my week?" he asked, accepting the award at Churchill Downs.
He paused and replied, "It's a good start."


Lewis Spreads the Word That He's a Champion, Too
Lennox Lewis knows he has not made an impact on the American sports public and this British celebrity is bitter that being a heavyweight champion doesn't have a worldwide realm.
"A lot of people looked to Evander as the only champion out there," said Lewis, who holds the World Boxing Council crown and will fight Phil Jackson on Friday night.


Rayonier Timberlands (LOG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Jericho, Children Celebrate


Earlier Complaints on Officer in S.I. Case
An officer involved in a videotaped altercation with a handcuffed Staten Island man last month has been the subject of seven misconduct complaints in a nine-year career, including four for excessive use of force, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The officials said that two complaints were still under review and that the other five had not been substantiated by the board that investigates such accusations.
The police yesterday offered new details of the incident in Clifton on Staten Island, in which an officer is visible on the videotape striking the handcuffed suspect twice.
The arresting officer in the case, who was the subject of the earlier misconduct complaints, was identified as Richard Rodriguez.
A police official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Officer Rodriguez was visible on the videotape, though the police would not confirm whether he was the officer who struck the suspect.


Christopher D'Amboise Resigns
Christopher d'Amboise has resigned as the president and artistic director of the Pennsylvania Ballet.
The resignation of Mr. d'Amboise, who became director in 1990, is to take effect on June 30, at the end of the company's 1993-94 season.
"Money," Mr. d'Amboise said yesterday when asked why he had resigned.
"What else? When I came here, there was an $8.4 million budget. Every year the budget was cut. This year it was $5.7 million."


Physicians Health Services Inc.(PHSV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


11 MORE OFFICERS TAKEN OFF DUTIES IN 30TH PRECINCT
Eleven more police officers were taken off the job in the 30th Precinct in Harlem yesterday, as a corruption investigation into the precinct continued to grow.
A Federal investigator said the 11 were suspected of either knowing of or participating in crimes like stealing, selling drugs and shaking down drug dealers.
The officers' guns and badges were confiscated and they were placed on desk duty with pay.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton would not detail the accusations against them, except to say they were "very significant and disturbing."


Lee Clark, Doctor Who Helped Build Cancer Center, Dies at 87
Dr.
R.
Lee Clark, who helped build a small university hospital in Houston into one of the world's foremost cancer centers, died there on Tuesday.
He was 87 and lived in Houston.
The cause was complications after colon-cancer surgery, said the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, which Dr.
Clark guided for 32 years.


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


U.S. Schools Misuse Time, Study Asserts
Most American students spend only 41 percent of their school days on academic subjects and are taught by harried and overworked teachers who have little time to further their own education, says a study made public today by the National Education Commission on Time and Learning.
The study, a two-year examination of how students spend their days both at school and at home, outlined why American schools lag far behind those in other industrialized countries.
It showed that American high school students spend far less time on basic academics than teen-agers in Germany, France and Japan.
The balance of American students' time is spent on such things as drivers' education, athletics and nonacademic courses.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Sky Beauty Returns to Winner's Circle  Sky Beauty made a successful return to racing yesterday, scoring a three-length victory over For All Seasons in the $81,425 Grade II Vagrancy Stakes for fillies and mares at Belmont Park.
Ridden by Mike Smith and carrying 122 pounds, Sky Beauty covered the seven furlongs in 1:213/5 and returned $2.80.
The 4-year-old filly had not started since last Nov. 6, when she finished fifth in the Breeders' Cup Distaff at Santa Anita, suffering only her third loss in 12 career starts. (AP) AUTO RACING  Changes Are Detailed in Pit Lanes  Immediate changes to make pit lanes safer are to be made in the wake of last weekend's spate of accidents at the San Marino Grand Prix, the International Automobile Federation president, Max Mosley, announced yesterday.
Mosley, speaking at a news conference after an emergency federation meeting following the deaths of Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger at Imola, said that effective with the Monaco Grand Prix May 15, a mechanism would be introduced at the entry and exits to pit lanes to force cars to slow down drastically.
Three Ferrari mechanics and a Team Lotus employee were injured when struck by a car leaving a pit near the end of the San Marino race. (Reuters) SOCCER  Arsenal Wins European Cup Winners Cup  Alan Smith intercepted a sloppy pass by Lorenzo Minotti and scored in the 19th minute last night, giving Arsenal of London a 1-0 victory over Parma of Italy in the final of the European Cup Winners Cup at Copenhagen.
Parma was trying to become the first team to win the Cup Winners Cup in two consecutive seasons. (AP) LACROSSE  Brown and Maryland Triumph  The Brown men and the Maryland women were victors yesterday.
The Bears, the Ivy League champions, defeated Massachusetts, 12-7, at Amherst, Mass., a victory that enhanced the N.C.A.A. tournament chances of Brown, No. 7 in the rankings, and hurt UMass, No. 13.
Maryland continued unbeaten with a 12-10 triumph at Princeton, the first loss of the season for the Tigers.
These two teams expect to be seeded first and second in the women's N.C.A.A. tournament beginning next week.


Review/Dance; Intimations of Picasso In Words and Movement
Jennifer Muller took on a difficult and perhaps impossible task with "Point of View: A Case of Persimmons and Picasso," the opening program of a one-week season by Jennifer Muller/The Works at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College.
The nearly two-hour piece, one of two programs to be presented during the Kaye season, offered an examination of Picasso's work and esthetic philosophy, with a subplot in which an art history teacher and her whining students talk about the nature of art and perception, and their bearing on everyday life.
Woven through the piece were suggestions of the teacher's and students' lives and mostly difficult relationships, and tableaux representing famous images from the work of the artist.


Clarence Linder, 91, Retired G.E. Executive
Clarence H. Linder, a retired vice president of the General Electric Company, died on Tuesday at Ellis Hospital in Schenectady.
Mr.
Linder, who lived in Schenectady, was 91.
The cause was a burst appendix, said his son, Clarence Jr.


Theme Park Set to Open At Shea Stadium in July
In a step aimed at transforming Shea Stadium into a more entertaining family destination, the Mets and Nickelodeon will open an interactive kids theme park on July 1 that will test baseball's ability to mix with Ren &amp; Stimpy, green slime and Wienerville.
The park, Nickelodeon Extreme Baseball, will be located in a 25,000-square-foot area behind the scoreboard in right field and will adapt the network's participatory games, programs and Florida studio attractions to a baseball motif.


Renaissance Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Man Fasting In Haiti Protest Is Hospitalized
Randall Robinson, a human rights advocate who is fasting to protest the Administration's policy of sending Haitian refugees back to their country, was hospitalized this morning for severe dehydration.
Mr.
Robinson, who has taken only juice and water since April 12, lay in his bed in Providence Hospital here this afternoon and vowed to continue his fast.
His doctor said that he was in no immediate danger, but that his blood pressure was very high and he was unable to consume sufficient fluid.
He is being given fluids intravenously.


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Vermont Journal; With Spring, at Last the Time for Farewells
There is still frost in the mornings here, but on the outdoor basketball courts in town men are already working on their tans, shooting layups with their shirts off.
The purple crocuses are up in front of Judge Frank Billings's brick house on Bond Street.
The frogs are calling out from the ponds.
Slowly, slowly, the hills are turning green.
It is spring in Vermont, and the ground is yielding.
Arlene Nourse was buried today in Riverside Cemetery.
It was the first burial since the end of January, when the snow reached nearly to the top of the tallest tombstones, making the cemetery impassable.


CHRONICLE
Thirty eight years ago, GEORGE ABBOTT won a Tony Award for "Damn Yankees," the Faustian musical about baseball.
The show is back on Broadway, and Mr.
Abbott, who is now 106 and served as a long-distance adviser to the production, is back on the awards circuit.
Tomorrow, he is to receive the Drama League's Distinguished Achievement in Musical Theater Award at a luncheon in the Plaza hotel.
Mr.
Abbott could not travel from his home in Miami Beach for the ceremony, but said yesterday: "I am flattered and delighted. I wish I could be there."


Capital Holding (CPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; Japanese investors bet that Ford will work its magic on Mazda.
INVESTORS in Japan have been placing their bets on the Ford Motor Company in a different way.
They are bidding up the shares of Mazda, the ailing Japanese auto maker of which Ford owns about 25 percent.
At a time when Japan's auto industry is experiencing its worst slump since World War II, the Mazda Motor Corporation is one of the sickest of the companies.
Its sales in Japan last year plunged at twice the rate of the market as a whole.
The Hiroshima-based company is expected to report a loss of 45 billion yen, or about $440 million, for the fiscal year that ended March 31, and losses will continue for at least another year or two.


First Marathon reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


F.D.A. Imposing Stricter Rules on Food Labels
Food companies have been free to use the word "healthy" in any way they want on any product.
Some, for example, have promoted products with little fat but lots of salt as healthy.
But now strict limits are being imposed on the use of the word, preventing foods like jelly beans, which are low in fat, from being called healthy.
On Thursday, the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture are adding healthy to the list of terms they will regulate.


Increases in Wages Don't Create Inflation
To the Editor:
"A Different Take on the 'Myth' of Inflation" (letters, April 27), three responses to the April 15 Op-Ed article by Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, criticize her on tactics, but not on principle.


Foamex International Inc.(FMXI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Tucson Electric Power Co.(TEP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.81
2.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.03
4.03
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.44
4.43
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.11
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.35
6.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.16
8.16
7.73
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.41
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc.(SNTV,NMS) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Updating Wright's Ideal
IN 1991, when Loren and Lorraine Lieberman bought their country house in Usonia, a cooperative of 47 houses on 97 acres of land on the outskirts of Pleasantville, they acquired citizenship in a Frank Lloyd Wright universe.
And when they renovated the house, expanding it by 1,200 square feet to include four bedrooms, three bathrooms and outdoor decks, they had to tamper with an architectural legend, causing some ruffled feelings in the process.
Usonia is one of Wright's three "ideal" communities for Americans, enchantingly rural (what Wright called "natural"), suburbia at its esthetic best.
But some say what was new and daring in the 1950's can be obsolete in the 90's, even in Usonia, the brainstorm of a genius.


A Go-Slow Plan on Health Gains Support in Congress
A variety of developments on Capitol Hill provided fresh evidence today that Congress prefers more gradual, less comprehensive changes in the health care system than President Clinton proposed.
Lawmakers said they would take a slower, more incremental approach for logistical and political reasons.


Stocks End Day Mixed in Listless Trading
Stock prices, closely following the turbulent bond and currency markets, closed mixed yesterday in listless trading, hurting stocks ranging from blue chips like Procter &amp; Gamble to high-technology stocks like Intel.
Stocks recovered somewhat after the Federal Reserve and a host of foreign central banks bought dollars to support the sagging American currency.
The bond market also rebounded from early declines to close down only slightly.


Clinton Signs Law for School Training Programs


Review/Jazz; Panamanian Pianist's Party
The young Panamanian pianist Danilo Perez stood up midway through his set at S.O.B.'s on Monday night and thanked a series of people; he was performing at a party given him by his record company for the release of his new album, "The Journey" (RCA).
Then he sat down, seemed to leave his nervousness behind, and proceeded with the help of his band to perform three rocking pieces that perfectly blended improvisation and arrangement with jazz and Afro-Cuban musical sources.
Mr.
Perez is a smart and gifted pianist, and he has placed himself right at the nexus of several cultural streams.
With his band, which includes David Sanchez on saxophones, Larry Grenadier on bass, Ignacio Berroa on drums and Kimati Dinizulu on percussion, he moves easily between the music of the Caribbean and the United States.
In Mr.
Perez's hands, rhythms constantly shift.
And he sends cultural references flying.
One minute a boogie-woogie figure spreads shadows over an Afro-Cuban riff, another Mr.
Perez muffles the strings inside the piano with his left hand while playing a riff surrounded by a dense and static percussion barrage, only to slide the music gracefully into a deeply swinging section.


Spreckels Industries(SPKL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Don't Arm Bosnia
When the Bosnian Serbs unleashed their fierce attacks on Gorazde last month, sentiment grew for the United States to lift the embargo that is keeping arms from reaching the Bosnian Muslims.
The Senate is to take up that debate today.
Bosnia has suffered much in this vicious war.
Lifting the embargo would be a way of showing support and sympathy for its beleaguered Government and people.
It seems like an easy, cost-free solution.
But it is a bad idea.
Lifting the embargo will neither level the playing field, as proponents argue, nor help the Bosnian cause.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Pro Bono Accounts
Narragansett Council Boy Scouts of America, Providence, R.I., to Pagano, Schenck &amp; Kay, Providence.


Handcuffing Turns Into an Armed Escape
A man who was being arrested yesterday afternoon for violating his probation seized an officer's gun inside a city government building near Union Square, escaped and -- unknown to the police -- went home, with a pair of handcuffs dangling from his left wrist.
As the police evacuated the building, sent officers and dogs to hunt for the fugitive throughout 10 floors and cordoned off several blocks east of Union Square, the suspect, Alberto Rivera, 35, talked to his father in their home on the Upper East Side, the police said.
The Riveras called a lawyer in Lower Manhattan, the police said, thenthe lawyer called the police, and Mr.
Rivera surrendered himself at the Fifth Precinct station house in Greenwich Village a little before 6 P.M.


Composers and Followers
Music by Bach and Handel, their mentors and composers they taught or influenced will be the theme for "Masters and Their Students," a concert by the early-music group Vine yardmusicke at 8 P.M. on Tuesday at the Liederkranz Foundation, 6 East 87th Street, Manhattan.
Works by Handel and his teacher Friedrick Wilhelm Zachau, Bach and his student Johann Ludwig Krebs, and Dietrich Buxtehude, whose music influenced Bach, will be featured.
Kristin Norderval, a soprano, and R. J. Kelley, a hornist, will take part.
Tickets are $15; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 353-3874.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about visitors to the Roof Garden of the Metropolitan Museum of Art misidentified the sculptor of "A Standing Woman," which was in the foreground.
It is by Gaston Lachaise, not David Smith.
Mr.
Smith's "Becca" was in the background.


U.S. Asks Russia for Data on Its Stocks of Nuclear Material
In an effort to stem the spread of nuclear weapons, the Clinton Administration has asked Moscow to disclose how much plutonium and highly enriched uranium it has and where it can be found.
The proposal is part of a broad Administration effort to insure that nuclear material in Russia is properly accounted for and is stored safely.
It also reflects growing concern that Russia's system for keeping track of its nuclear material is not up to Western standards and that the Russian bureaucracy needs to be prodded into taking stronger action.


Reader's Digest Assn.  Inc.(RDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pinnacle West Capital (PNW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


George Sturgis Coffin, Game-Book Author, 90
George Sturgis Coffin, a prolific publisher and writer of books on bridge and other games, died on March 12 at Waltham-Weston Hospital near his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 90.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his executor, Frederic Crafts 3d.


Plea Bargains Struck in Kerrigan Case
Three men accused of plotting with the former husband of the Olympic figure skater TONYA HARDING to hobble her rival, NANCY KERRIGAN, struck plea bargains that will get them 18 months in jail, sources say.
SHAWN ECKARDT, SHANE STANT and DERRICK SMITH agreed to plead guilty to conspiracy to commit assault, legal sources close to the case said Tuesday.
Any fines will be set by a judge at sentencing May 16 in Portland, Ore. (AP)


Theater in Review
All for You  Joseph Papp Public Theater Susan Stein Shiva Theater 425 Lafayette Street East Village Through May 15 Written and performed by John Fleck; directed by David Schweizer and Mr.
Fleck; lighting by Kevin Adams; taped video images, Adam Soch; camera operator, Ryan Hill; boom and grip, Michelle Stevens.
Presented by the New York Shakespeare Festival, George C. Wolfe, producer; Jason Steven Cohen, managing director; Rosemarie Tichler and Kevin Kline, associate producers.


Roadmaster Industries(RDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Mascotech Inc.(MSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Expert Says Rifkin Is Sick But Is Not Legally Insane
Joel Rifkin, who has confessed to strangling 17 women, suffers from a long list of emotional problems and at least three mental disorders, but is not legally insane, a forensic psychiatrist testifed today in Mr.
Rifkin's murder trial.
"He knew that he was a serial killer," said the witness, Dr.
Park Eliott Dietz, who was testifying for the prosecution.
"He knew the nature of his conduct, the consequences of his conduct and that his conduct was wrong."


Lincoln Center Readies A Summerful of Events
Even as they debated the future of the popular Mostly Mozart Festival, Lincoln Center officials announced yesterday that the 1994 edition would run from July 5 through Aug. 20.
They also announced plans for other series -- some 300 performances, on a budget of $13.7 million -- that include Serious Fun, Midsummer Night Swing, Lincoln Center Out of Doors, Jazz at Lincoln Center and Great Performers.
Mostly Mozart is to open with an orchestral program conducted by Gerard Schwarz, with the baritone Thomas Hampson and the pianist Shura Cherkassky as soloists.


WPL Holdings Inc.(WPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Emphysema's a Right?
To the Editor:
In "Who'll Defend the Persecuted Smokers?" (letter, April 18), Judy Kauffman implies that government is trampling on the rights of smokers with the same fuzzy logic as cigarette chief executive officers use in testifying before Congress.
Who is going to pick up the tab for the two-pack-a-day working stiff who develops emphysema at 45 and whose wife and three children must get welfare support?


Review/Television; Dennis Miller Vents Anger With the World
Dennis Miller, who parlayed "Saturday Night Live" and assorted comedy specials into a failed talk-show stint, has returned to television, explaining with a genial sneer that "it's nice to be back from the Federal talk-show-host relocation program." This time Mr.
Miller is going live, Fridays at midnight in what is scheduled so far to be a six-part series.
The third comes up this week.
Like Garry Shandling, star of "The Larry Sanders Show," Mr.
Miller may have found his perfect, uncensored niche on HBO.
The half-hour format of monologue, guest interview and news-of-the-week recap (shades of "Saturday Night Live") leaves him space to wander wherever his biting wit might take him.


Heartland Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unhappy Anniversary for Stumbling Sabatini
Don't confuse Gabriela Sabatini, whose bizarre hiatus from the tennis winner's circle has dragged on for more than two years, with Rip Van Winkle.
She is definitely not sleeping her career away; it just looks that way.
Sabatini can't remember exactly when she realized that her results had begun to resemble the same long, restless night she has had almost every night for months on end.
And now Sabatini's perennial coach, Carlos Kirmayr, back to rescue her from tennis limbo after a yearlong separation, can't sleep either.


Calendar: Mothers And Plants
Landmark Events  Landmarks Preservation Commission; (212) 487-6800.
Tours, lectures and exhibitions will be offered by various historic house museums and neighborhood associations in conjunction with National Preservation Week, which runs from Sunday through May 14.


Bow Valley Energy (BVI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Hires Lawyer to Handle Sex Suit
President Clinton has hired a well-known Washington lawyer to represent him if he is sued by a woman who has accused him of making an unwanted sexual advance in 1991, White House officials said on Tuesday.
The officials said Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House counsel, met with the lawyer, Robert S. Bennett, to ask him to defend the President against the threatened suit.


Harris Steel reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Macedonia Sees Its Albanians as Its 'Biggest Problem'
While struggling with hardships imposed by international sanctions on Serbia and a trade embargo enforced by Greece that cut Macedonia's main links with the world, the Government here is preoccupied by a divisive domestic issue that involves a third neighbor, Albania.
"We have problems on our borders, but our biggest problem is the Albanians living here," said Mira Jankovska, assistant to the Information Minister.


Tough Cops, Not Brutal Cops
Police Commissioner William Bratton put it this way: If police officers conduct themselves appropriately, he will "back them to the hilt." But if they use unnecessary force, "all bets are off."
The Commissioner has it right, and so does Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
Both have reacted calmly and impartially to charges of police brutality on Staten Island.
With crucial facts in dispute, they have an obligation to convey their commitment to fairness -- to the alleged victims and to the police.
So far, to the good of New York City, they have.


In the Upheaval in Rwanda, Few Answers Yet
One month after a plane crash killed the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi and unleashed weeks of massacres, the cause of the crash and the precise origin of the violence are still unknown.
The Rwanda military, which put together a new Government three days after the crash, refuses to allow United Nations experts near the site to find out how it happened.


Millipore Corp.(MIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Raymond James Financial Inc.(RJF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Rigors of Spring Planting
When David Rothermel and his two hired hands began planting corn outside Dwight, Ill., just over two weeks ago, the roar of their tractors contrasted starkly with the silence from neighboring fields, where spring was still a rumor.
Planting corn and soybeans across 2,900 acres in five east-central Illinois counties severely tests the sophistication of Mr.
Rothermel's equipment, his team management skills, his ability to shift plans and repair machinery on the fly and his endurance.
But the first challenge for an operation this big is simply to get planting started as soon as possible.


Books of The Times; Nixon's Last Word on the World
Beyond Peace
By Richard Nixon
Illustrated. 262 pages. Random House. $23.
Of the dead speak nothing but good, it is said.
But a book remains alive, even when published posthumously.
So to any reader impatient with the recent canonization of the 37th President of the United States, the first to be forced to resign from office, let it be said that there is lots to find fault with in Richard Nixon's 10th and final book, "Beyond Peace," which he completed just a few weeks before he died.


Review/Dance; Trisha Brown Choreographs With a Painterly Eye
The opening of the Trisha Brown Company on Tuesday night seemed as much an art-world affair as a dance event.
The gala benefit was packed with many of New York's leading artists and gallery owners.
One of these artists, Robert Rauschenberg, was also part of the show, having designed the costume and the sound score for the highly unusual premiere that Ms.
Brown choreographed for herself.
The solo's title, "If You Couldn't See Me," tells only half the story.
Ms.
Brown dances the entire work with her face averted from the audience.
In effect, she does not see us, although we see her back and, when she twists her torso, an occasional profile of her body below her neck.


European Parliament Backs 4 New Members
The European Parliament, which is directly elected but largely powerless, today endorsed membership in the European Union for Norway, Finland, Sweden and Austria next year.
Rejecting calls for a show of parliamentary independence by voting down treaties worked out by the union's executive commission and haggled over by the existing 12 nations in the union, formerly known as the European Community, more than 80 percent of the deputies present voted to accept the terms for admitting the new memebers on Jan. 1.


Newcomers Revive Old Soccer Haven
Maber Ospina has matched his soccer skills against some of the newest players from Ecuador, Peru, Greece, Croatia and other far-flung lands -- all without leaving Queens.
Instead, he has gone to the Metropolitan Oval, a stadium tucked along the side streets of Maspeth, a modest and unhurried neighborhood of tidy row houses, tailors, bakeries and other mom-and-pop shops.


RABIN AND ARAFAT SIGN ACCORD ENDING ISRAEL'S 27-YEAR HOLD ON JERICHO AND THE GAZA STRIP
Israel and the P.L.O. signed an agreement today that formally begins Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area of the West Bank -- lands occupied for 27 years -- and grants Palestinians a measure of self-government for the first time, though not sovereignty.
The accord, which follows up the agreement in principle signed in September in Washington, opens a new chapter in the Middle East.
It provides for the possibility of Palestinian control of an area whose occupation by Israel has been a focus of Arab anger for decades, and holds out the chance for reconciliation between Israeli and Palestinian.


Standard Motor Products Inc.(SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BE Aerospace Inc.(BEAV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Shift at Salomon on Buffet
Warren E. Buffett can buy more of Salomon Inc. if he wants.
The Salomon board yesterday lifted a contractual restriction, imposed when Berkshire Hathaway, of which Mr.
Buffett is chairman and chief executive, acquired its first stake in the company in 1987.
That barred Berkshire and its affiliates from owning securities with more than 20 percent of the voting power.
The limitation would have expired on Oct. 1 of this year.


Stillborns' Ashes Used in Studies Of Radiation, Documents Show
As part of a national program to evaluate the potential hazards of radioactive fallout from atomic bomb tests, the Government's nuclear weapons industry sanctioned research in the 1950's that involved chemically analyzing the cremated remains of stillborn babies.
The research, in which ashes of the stillborns and of miscarried fetuses were studied for concentrations of radioactive strontium, was conducted at the University of Chicago in 1953 and 1954 under the guidance of Dr.
Willard F. Libby.
Dr.
Libby, a radiochemist and Nobel Prize winner, became a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, the predecessor of the Department of Energy.


Defense Dept. May Postpone Base Closings
Fearful of damaging the economies of scores of communities nationwide, the Defense Department is preparing to seek authority to delay some decisions on base closings until after the 1996 elections, a senior Pentagon official said today.
Congress would have to approve such a plan.
But Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch favor dividing a final round of decisions scheduled for next year into two parts: choosing next year to close some bases and then waiting until 1997 or 1998 to decide the fate of many others, the official said.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about women in Congress who examined semiautomatic assault-style weapons at a Capitol Hill news conference misidentified the Representative at the left.
She was Leslie L. Byrne, not Elizabeth Furse.


WARNACO GROUP INC. (WAC,N)
Although one of its key distribution centers crumbled during the Los Angeles earthquake, the Warnaco Group reported yesterday that its first-quarter net income soared 3,456 percent, to $8.96 million.
But the results included not only a $3 million charge for the earthquake in the 1994 quarter but also a $10.5 million charge in the 1993 quarter for the cumulative effect of post-retirement health benefits.
Without those charges, Warnaco's operating earnings rose 11.2 percent, to $11.96 million.


The Smelt Are Running, and Smelters Following
On an evening when the torrents of spring runoff have calmed down and the icy sting of winter has left the tributaries to the Finger Lakes, the smelt start moving towards their spawning grounds, the dark secluded eddies upstream.
Right about then, somebody turns on the lights.
Most of these lights are Coleman lanterns, wielded by people drawn every spring to central New York streams like Taughannock Creek here in search of sweet, silver-sided smelt.


Wolverine World Wide Inc.(WWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


In Gun Debate, Gun Definitions Matter
The Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms estimates that only one of every 100 guns in this country is an assault-type weapon.
But in the bureau's criminal investigations, seven of every 100 guns its agents trace for law-enforcement agencies across the nation turn out to be such weapons.


U.S. Prepares Plan to Avert New Bosnia Battle
The United States, backed by France and Britain, is preparing a two-step plan -- including the threat of NATO air strikes -- to head off a major battle between Serbs and Muslims that appears to be shaping up around a narrow but strategically vital land corridor near the north Bosnian town of Brcko.
As a first step, the Security Council issued a statement tonight telling both sides to refrain from offensive action over this Serb-controlled corridor, which links the two major Serbian areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The statement also called for deployment of United Nations military observers as well as increased NATO air surveillance.


2 Firefighters Are Suspected in Malibu Blaze
Two aspiring firefighters who helped fight the devastating wildfires in Malibu in the fall are suspected of setting the blaze, officials here said today.
A grand jury has been hearing evidence in the case, Los Angeles County sheriff's investigators said.
No charges have been brought against the suspects.


Hexcel Corp.(HXL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aviation Policy Is Assailed in House
Congressional Democrats and Republicans assailed the Clinton Administration today for lacking a coherent, long-term policy on international aviation agreements.
"Too often we seem to have lurched from crisis to crisis, trying to salvage as much as we can, as foreign governments try to limit opportunities for our carriers," said Representative James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota, chairman of the House Transportation aviation subcommittee, at a hearing on aviation agreements.


Review/Art; Aspects of John Cage, for the Eye
Exhibitions are by definition fleeting, ephemeral events, but in most of them the artworks, once installed, oblige us by staying put for the show's duration.
Not so with "Rolywholyover: A Circus" at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo, a work-in-progress art-show extravaganza whose very title -- part Joyce, part Barnum -- intimates flux.
This extraordinary show fulfills the ancient proverb about never being able to put one's foot twice in the same river.
Mixing such things as Abstract Expressionist paintings with musical scores (and rearranging them at regular intervals), juxtaposing an 18th-century tapestry with Ernie Kovacs television clips, offering books and chess sets for viewer use, "Rolywholyover" is the last major effort of John Cage, the avant-garde composer who died in 1992 at the age of 79.


Macy's Bondholders Submit a Revamping Plan
Bondholders of R. H. Macy &amp; Company proposed a reorganization plan yesterday to get the company out of bankruptcy in an effort to improve their leverage in the case.
Their proposal will be one of three under discussion next week, as Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator in the Macy case, meets with creditors to determine support for and concerns about each plan.


Review/Theater; Comic Survival In 'Sally Marr'
WE'RE approaching that time of year when theater awards are handed out left and right.
So let's bestow an imaginary one right now.
In the category of hardest-working actress on Broadway, the winner is -- drum roll, please -- Joan Rivers in "Sally Marr . . . and Her Escorts."
The play, which opened last night at the Helen Hayes Theater, purports to be the story of Sally Marr, a comic of small repute whose chief claim to show-business fame is that she is Lenny Bruce's mother.
What most people will find far more interesting, however, is that the woman tearing about the stage in a wardrobe resembling an exploded salad bar is, in her more widely publicized incarnations, a finely turned-out talk-show host and the purveyor of her own line of jewelry.


Market Place; Are investors being taken for a ride on the Channel Tunnel?
AMID lavish pomp, the Channel Tunnel will hold its formal opening ceremonies today, but for the project's investors there is still a chance that the 31-mile undersea link between Britain and France is a road to nowhere.
In the last eight years, investors have plunked down $2.9 billion, at current exchange rates, for equity in Eurotunnel, the British-French company that built the tunnel and will operate it.
Banks have lent nearly $11 billion.


Horse Racing; Croll Not Worried About Holy Bull's Speedy Next-Door Neighbor
Holy Bull drew the No. 4 post position and was made the 8-5 favorite today when a field of 15 colts was entered in the Kentucky Derby.
The only intrigue came when the long shot speedball from Panama named Ulises drew the No. 5 lane next door, and his owner, Robert Perez, promptly threw down the gauntlet.
"Holy Bull is el toro and Ulises is the matador," he said.
"And you know what the matador does to the bull. I'm thrilled we drew the gate next to him."


Returning Commuters Find Nightmare in Parking Lot
Suddenly, a glowing orange-yellow ball hung over the New Jersey entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel.
In an instant, sparks cascaded from a writhing high-tension power line as a burning helicopter crashed into the eastbound lane of Interstate 495.
Flames and pillars of black, oily smoke shot up from scores of cars left in a park-and-ride lot by commuters who expected to find them there at the end of the day.


News Corp.(NWS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Consolidated Natural Gas Co.  (CNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Joseph Jett, the ousted Kidder Peabody trader, demanded in court that Kidder release nearly $5 million frozen in his accounts and asserted his innocence against allegations that he created $350 million in phantom trades to conceal trading losses at the firm and inflate his $9 million bonus in 1993.  [ Page D1. ]


TakeCare Inc.(TKCR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Esco Electronics Corp.(ESE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; Dawn Patrol By the Vets Is Good Move
"THE vets have been coming around."
That's what a Derby trainer told me yesterday, in a tone that suggested he was impressed.
We were standing a few feet away from his horse, as daylight started to break, and the trainer was speaking in a hushed voice, which is only appropriate for this magical time at the barns.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gay Games Will Close at Yankee Stadium
The top official of the Gay Games IV said yesterday that the New York Yankees have agreed to allow Yankee Stadium to be used for the closing ceremonies of the sports and cultural festival on June 25.
Jay Hill, executive director of Gay Games, said the deal will be announced at City Hall today by George M. Steinbrenner, the owner of the Yankees, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
An aide to the Mayor, who asked not to be named, confirmed that an agreement had been reached.
Yankees officials could not be reached yesterday.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT CLINTON went to a white-tie dinner for arts patrons on Wednesday evening and urged them to continue to support the arts at a time when the budget deficit is restricting the availability of Federal funds.
In conveying his message, he even had glowing things to say about Republicans, especially WALTER H. ANNENBERG, the billionaire philanthropist, and his wife, LEONORE.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.78
2.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
4.03
2.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.44
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.11
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.33
6.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.16
8.16
7.73
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.41
5.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Topics of The Times; A Chunnel to Bridge a Channel
Britain's Queen and France's President make history today, officially opening the "chunnel" that re-connects Britain and the European Continent.
Britain was part of the Continent thousands of years ago, before the sea cut through and made the British Isles.
The French have had designs on tunneling under the English Channel for more than two centuries.
Not so the British.
For even longer they have valued the channel as God-given protection against armed invaders and other alien intruders -- bugs as well as human beings.
Even now Britain has dug a wire fence into the ground around the tunnel's mouth to snag rabid French dogs and foxes.
And, being British, they have not even started to upgrade their tracks to match those in the tunnel and in France, so that trains can run at high speeds all the way.


BUTHELEZI SEEMS TO BEAT MANDELA IN ZULU PROVINCE
The Inkatha Freedom Party of Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi appeared tonight to have won a decisive victory over Nelson Mandela's African National Congress in the Zulu province, confounding the pundits who had written Mr.
Buthelezi's political obituary.
The apparently insurmountable lead that appeared tonight in a nearly complete tally by the Independent Electoral Commission was tainted by allegations of widespread fraud, including internal memos from commission monitors who argued that the provincial count should be invalidated.
African National Congress officials in the region warned that many of their supporters, regarding the outcome as spurious, would refuse to accept it.


Chrysler, With Misgivings, Will Sell Electric Mini-Vans
In a stark departure from the purple praise that usually accompanies the announcement of a new product, the Chrysler Corporation said today that it would build a new mini-van that customers will surely spurn.
The vehicle is an electric version of Chrysler's next-generation mini-vans.
The No. 3 auto maker said it would build the vehicle to comply with a California law requiring that 2 percent of the vehicles offered there by major auto makers in 1998 emit no pollution.


Do U.S. Files Hold More Atom-Spy Secrets?
To the Editor:
"A new book by a high Soviet intelligence official asserts that the chief Western architects of the nuclear era acted as spies to give Moscow the secret of the atom bomb" (news article, April 19).


Stefan H. Baum; Chemical Executive, 91
Stefan H. Baum, a retired president of Reichhold Chemicals in White Plains, died on Monday at the 3030 Park Avenue Nursing Home in Bridgeport, Conn.
Mr.
Baum, who had lived in Greenwich, was 91.
The cause was a stroke, said his son, Axel H. Baum.


Art in Review
Ken Price
Franklin Parrasch Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 21
The retrospective of Ken Price's work organized by the Menil Museum in Houston in 1992 failed to reach New York City.
So this small 20-year survey of 18 glazed and, more recently, painted objects will have to do.


Police Officers Lie on Stand? You Don't Say
To the Editor:
That police officers "often make false arrests, tamper with evidence and commit perjury on the witness stand," according to a draft report of the Mollen Commission, the mayoral panel investigating police corruption (news article, April 22), is not news to anyone involved in trying a criminal case in New York City.
Prosecutors, defense counsels and judges routinely observe police witnesses testify to information that would test the credulity of a 7-year-old.


McCann-Erickson walks away from 'ILOVENY' after another agency is assigned some creative work.
MCCANN-ERICKSON NEW YORK, after three years of working on an account known by its popular and long-running slogan, "I love New York," has decided not to participate in a mandated review on the account, with billings estimated at $10 million, when a contract with the New York State Department of Economic Development expires on July 31.
The decision followed the production of two television commercials for the account, formally called the New York State travel and tourism account, by another agency, Anderson &amp; Lembke in New York, after the department expressed unhappiness with McCann New York's creative ideas for those spots.


Avia Narrows Its Review
Avia Group International in Beaverton, Ore., has narrowed the review on its account to three agencies.
The account, with billings estimated at $2 million to $5 million, had been handled for two and a half years by Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco, which was excluded from the review.
The finalists are Butler, Shine &amp; Stern in Sausalito, Calif.; Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis, and DDB Needham Chicago.
A decision is expected by early June.


Terreri Comes Out Fighting To Leave Bruins Frustrated
The flailing fists he threw at Brent Hughes were a dangerous embellishment to his performance.
But the feisty Chris Terreri, who played in goal for the Devils tonight, set the tone in a victory New Jersey needed here over Boston.
The veteran Terreri replaced the rookie Martin Brodeur, who Coach Jacques Lemaire said "seemed a little tired," and perhaps had lost some confidence.


Review/Art; El Museo Reopening: Wide Show, Wide Audience
The founding of El Museo del Barrio in a single elementary school classroom in East Harlem 25 years ago belonged to a campaign for wholesale change in the art world that extended well beyond that neighborhood.
The campaign involved a mix of politically minded artists and community leaders.
In part they wanted big institutions like the Museum of Modern Art to create new departments for black and Puerto Rican artists and in general to be more responsive to a wider range of New York City's population.
They also wanted to start community-based museums in poorer sections of the city. (This was a time when the Metropolitan Museum of Art's plans for expansion into Central Park were being strongly opposed by those who thought the museum should disperse its collection through the five boroughs.)
A quarter of a century later much has changed but much has not.
Many of the issues are the same.
In that time El Museo del Barrio has expanded first into storefronts on Third Avenue and in 1977 into the Heckscher Building at Fifth Avenue and 104th Street, where its role has steadily evolved from a largely Puerto Rican organization to one that represents the art of an increasingly diverse Hispanic population to the rest of the city.


CHRONICLE
A rare ray of happy news from the British royal family.
Lady SARAH ARMSTRONG-JONES, the 30-year-old daughter of PRINCESS MARGARET, has become engaged to DANIEL CHATTO, 37, an actor turned painter.
The couple will be married this summer in a low-key private ceremony in front of family and close friends in London.
The announcement of the engagement was made on Wednesday by the royal family.
LORD SNOWDON, Lady Sarah's father, who was divorced from her mother in 1978, said, "I am exhilarated and pleased for both of them because they suit each other so well." He said that Princess Margaret shared his sentiments, the Press Association reported.


Nutrasweet Assigns Work to O'Rielly
Curvin O'Rielly, who has worked for agencies like McCann-Erickson New York, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago and Hal Riney &amp; Partners, has been awarded a creative assignment by the Nutrasweet Company to promote the artificial sweetener as an ingredient.
Billings on the campaign, which includes in-store promotion and network TV commercials through the end of the year, were not disclosed.
The campaign is being produced by Curvin O'Rielly Inc., an agency opened in New York by Mr.
O'Rielly, who worked on Nutrasweet's introductory advertising more than a decade ago at Ogilvy Chicago.
The campaign, which carries the theme "Look for the swirl," referring to the Nutrasweet logo, features the cartoon character Mr.
Magoo, whose previous selling stint, peddling General Electric light bulbs, was last seen in the 1970's.


On My Mind; The Contest of 2 Lobbies
The struggle in Washington on whether the United States should continue to allow Communist China low-tariff privilege involves a skein of American interests -- political, economic, strategic and moral.
But at its center are some simple realities that confront President Clinton, and every American who has hopes for him, as he nears the decision he has to make before June 3.


Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc.(PM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Life Partners Group Inc.(LPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


San Jose Leaps Into Big Leagues
This sprawling city passed San Francisco in population in the last decade and built itself a shiny new downtown.
Yet San Jose remained very much the second city in the Bay Area, a place that many Northern Californians considered dull and charmless and that many residents left when they wanted a night on the town.
But all that has changed because of the success of a new downtown arena, which in eight months of operation has brought San Jose into the big leagues of sports and entertainment.
This, combined with a revitalized downtown and a lively arts scene, has given its citizens something to brag about and persuaded some snooty San Franciscans that there might be a reason to drive 40 minutes down the Bayshore Freeway.


HOUSE APPROVES BILL TO PROHIBIT 19 ASSAULT ARMS
Thanks to a last-minute switched vote, the House of Representatives approved a measure today to ban 19 semiautomatic assault weapons that the bill's supporters said had no purpose other than to kill people quickly without having to take aim.
The vote, which remained uncertain till the end, was a blow to the National Rifle Association and demonstrated what President Clinton called extraordinary courage by the members of the House who he said had stood up for the national interest.


Art in Review
Robert Gober
Paula Cooper Gallery  155 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through June 4
Following his tour de force environment at the Dia Center for the Arts two seasons ago -- which piled allusion on illusion right to the trompe l'oeil forest walls -- Robert Gober has opted for spareness and purity.
His latest show presents five isolated sculptures whose different tensions speak for themselves.


Corrections
A list with the Parent &amp; Child column in The Home Section yesterday, about training sessions for child-care professionals, misstated the cost and telephone number of a newsletter, The Nanny News.
A yearly subscription is $14.95; the telephone number is (800) 634-6266.


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hunt for Schoolgirl Lost on Field Trip


County Prescribes Its Own Cure
In the rural tradition of neighbor helping neighbor this oil-and-farming town of 10,000 on the Wabash River is not waiting for Washington to solve its health care problems.
When the oil industry collapsed a couple of years back, leaving many residents without jobs or insurance, the community opened one of the country's few all-volunteer clinics for the poor.
The Wabash County Medical Volunteers Clinic operates on Tuesday and Thursday evenings at Wabash General Hospital in a wing that had been empty since the last obstetrician left town two years ago.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about Yasir Arafat's momentary refusal to sign the accord on the Gaza Strip and Jericho reversed the identities of two of the leaders shown in discussions with him in some copies.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel was at the center and Foreign Minister Amr Moussa of Egypt was partly hidden behind President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.


Tennis; Sampras, Courier in Cup Play
Tom Gullikson, the United States Davis Cup captain, yesterday announced a surprise-free but only half-formed roster for the team that will face the Netherlands atop a hard-court surface in Rotterdam in the quarterfinal round on July 15-17.
Pete Sampras, ranked No. 1 in the world and, according to Gullikson, "a cool 33-1 on hard courts this year," will be backed up by Jim Courier in singles.
Courier, with a record of 4-1 against Richard Krajicek and 4-0 against Paul Haarhuis, is virtually undefeated against both singles players selected to represent the Netherlands.
Meanwhile, Sampras has been virtually undefeated against everybody this year.
"Pete has expressed a desire to play Davis Cup the rest of the year, and with Courier we think we'll have a strong one-two punch," said Gullikson.


Mayor to Try To Preserve AIDS Unit, Groups Say
The Giuliani administration, facing a political storm over its plans to shrink or eliminate New York City's Division of AIDS Services, has now decided to look for ways to keep the agency intact, AIDS- and homeless-service organizations said after meeting with administration officials yesterday.
Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter held a private meeting with representatives of eight organizations to discuss the agency, which provides individual assistance to AIDS patients too ill to run through the various city welfare offices that handle different benefits.


Calais Journal; French Assess Tunnel, Say the Chasm Still Yawns
Visible on a clear day from the wind-swept beaches of Calais, the white cliffs of Dover have long served to remind the French that their historic enemy, "Perfidious Albion," lies just across the water.
But nowadays, it seems, few French bother to look west.
It may be because the two countries have not battled each other since Waterloo.
It may be that the French have tired of Britain's constant snubbing of moves to unite Europe.
It may simply be that Britain no longer counts: when the French complain about the "Anglo-Saxons," they now mean Americans.





Blockbuster Raises Doubt On Merger
In the strongest sign to date of a breakdown in the merger agreement between Viacom Inc. and the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, the chairman of Blockbuster, H. Wayne Huizenga, sent a letter to his shareholders yesterday saying there "could be no assurance the board could recommend a transaction" with Viacom.
But he made it clear that Blockbuster, even if it wanted to break off the merger, did not have the right to do so until Sept. 30.


A One-Man Jam Session


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


P.L.O. Vows To Restrain Foes of Pact
In the self-rule accord that it signed with Israel on Wednesday, the Palestine Liberation Organization commits itself unequivocally to block attacks on Israelis and Jewish settlements, to disband armed guerrilla groups and to stifle anti-Israel propaganda in the areas it controls.
The commitments are the first of their kind made explicitly and in writing by the P.L.O.
They suggest that it is prepared, at least on paper, to act decisively against Islamic militants who have waged a violent campaign to wreck the agreement, which puts Palestinians in charge of the Gaza Strip and Jericho in the West Bank.


Restaurants
Alison Becker Hurt must be happy that her chef left.
When her restaurant, Alison on Dominick Street, opened five years ago, people began raving about Tom Valenti's food.
Now that he has moved on to Cascabel, they can concentrate on all the other wonderful things about her restaurant.


At the Bar; Are you a million-dollar advocate? To brag about it without tackiness will cost you $300.
In one sense, the walls of lawyers' offices are like the shelves in supermarkets: the competition for space is keen.
What with various degrees, certificates, licenses, letters of praise, awards, clippings, photographs and plaques, it is sometimes difficult to see the plaster.
The last thing lawyers need, one might think, is something else to hang.
But this has not discouraged Donald Costello, a lawyer in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He is selling something suitable for framing that he believes impresses fellow lawyers and potential clients more than all the other curriculum vitae combined: membership in an exclusive seven-figure fraternity.


Make Landings Easier At Kennedy Airport
To the Editor:
How many more years are the United States Government, the Federal Aviation Administration and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey going to withhold suitable landing aids for airline pilots at Kennedy International Airport?


Big Board Sets Listing Policy
The New York Stock Exchange announced a new rule yesterday that would make it possible for most companies with differing classes of common stock to be listed on the exchange.
Under the rule, which is subject to approval by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Big Board would have the same standard as the American Stock Exchange and Nasdaq.
"There will be no race to the bottom on listing standards," said James E. Buck, the Big Board's corporate secretary.


Do U.S. Files Hold More Atom-Spy Secrets?; A Coherent Story
To the Editor:
Critics of "Special Tasks," Lieut.
General Pavel A. Sudoplatov's memoir, are historians and journalists who have written or are writing about the American and Russian atomic bomb, and whose work is undermined by Mr.
Sudoplatov's account.
Some physicists are defending the "moral authority" of distinguished scientists against the Sudoplatov charges that they knowingly cooperated in sharing atomic secrets with the Soviet Union.
Yet there is no doubt: some first-rate scientists did exactly that.


Rev. Vincent G. Potter, 65, Dies; Taught Philosophy at Fordham
The Rev.
Vincent G. Potter, a scholar of philosophy and the first holder of the Loyola Chair in the Humanities at Fordham University, died on Tuesday in Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 65 and lived at Loyola-Faber Hall, a Jesuit residence on the Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
The cause was pulmonary failure, Fordham said.


Art in Review
Izhar Patkin
Holly Solomon Gallery  172 Mercer Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Like a kind of loony annex to the Metropolitan Museum's new South Asian galleries, Izhar Patkin's show has at it's center a 14-foot sculpture of a Nataraja or Dancing Shiva.
It is based on ancient bronze models from India, but its departures from the original are what catch the eye.


Topics of The Times; Another Defeat for the N.R.A.
Step by step, it seems, lawmakers are finding the courage to challenge America's outworn infatuation with firearms.
Yesterday they took another step: by the narrowest possible margin, the House of Representatives passed a ban on semiautomatic assault weapons.
The bill's supporters succeeded because they got cooperation where they needed it: from law enforcement organizations, from the intensive involvement of the President and other high Administration officials, and from all the living former Presidents except George Bush.


Senate Refuses to Weaken Bill To Limit Gifts From Lobbyists
Hoping to dispel the notion that members of Congress are in the pocket of lobbyists, the Senate on Thursday rejected efforts to weaken legislation that would limit the gifts and meals senators and representatives can accept and abolish free entertainment and travel for recreational purposes like ski trips.
The House of Representatives passed a similar measure in March.
So once the full bill passes the Senate, as leaders say it certainly will, the restrictions on gifts and travel and new rules on public disclosure by lobbyists that have already been approved by both chambers are almost certain to become law as soon as relatively small differences can be worked out by a conference committee.


Scotts (SCTT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


2 Die as Helicopter Crashes Near Lincoln Tunnel
A small, low-flying helicopter heading toward Manhattan with a flying instructor and his student snagged a power line, cartwheeled in midair and crashed in flames on a busy elevated-highway approach to the Lincoln Tunnel in New Jersey yesterday, killing the two people on board.
No one on the ground was killed or injured, but the crash set off a chain of fires that engulfed scores of cars in a commuters' parking lot under the highway, a shadowland where people returned after the day's work to find singed skeletons where they had left shiny roadsters and getabouts.
Other effects also rippled outward: power failures in 10 New Jersey communities and an interstate traffic jam that affected tens of thousands.


Serv-Tech Inc.(STEC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Count on ANDRE BALAZS, owner of the Chateau Marmont Hotel in Hollywood, and KATIE FORD, co-president of Ford Models, to be up to date on trends.
But yesterday, they encountered something new, even to them.
It was in the delivery room of Mount Sinai Hospital, where Ms.
Ford had just given birth to their second child, a daughter.


Stock Markets Spread in New Russia
Like almost all big enterprises in Russia, Far East Shipping of Vladivostok needs money, a lot of it, to survive and expand in a time of economic and industrial upheaval.
But instead of demanding subsidies from the Government or cheap loans from the central bank, as most large companies in this country have, Far East Shipping wants to raise $100 million or more in a way that until recently had not been possible for Russian companies -- by selling shares to investors.


British Company Will Buy General Cable
Wassall P.L.C., a diversified manufacturing conglomerate, said yesterday that it would buy all the stock and debt of the General Cable Corporation for about $269.8 million.
Wassall, which is based in London and has United States holdings that include the sealant and adhesive maker DAP Inc., said it hoped to increase the profitability of General Cable and benefit from the improving United States economy.


Clinton's Options on Haiti: Ever Harsher Choices Ahead
If the next round of sanctions fails to dislodge Haiti's military leaders, the Administration will face an unpalatable choice between using force to restore democracy and opening the door to Haitian refugees, Administration officials say.
President Clinton and his aides have concluded that time is running out, and they see these as their only options if tighter sanctions do not force the military leaders to yield.


Fresh Del Monte Produce N.V. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Books of The Times; What 6 Women Have in Common: Pete
The Girls
By Elaine Kagan
307 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
What's the recipe for "The Girls," Elaine Kagan's much-talked-about first novel?
Take the premise of "The Big Chill": a tragic death prompts a reunion of old friends, who spend the weekend reminiscing about their youth.
Throw in the sorts of melodramatic subplots -- suicide, abortion, divorce, adultery and cancer -- that used to animate women's films from the 1940's and 50's.
Turn the dead man into a combination of the selfless good Samaritan played by James Stewart in "It's a Wonderful Life" and the charming philanderer played by Cary Grant in "The Awful Truth." Then fill out the cast of characters with an ensemble of women, played by classic Hollywood types.


For Children
Mother's Day Workshops
Staten Island Children's Museum  Snug Harbor Cultural Center  1000 Richmond Terrace  Livingston  (718) 273-2060  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow and Sunday
Has anyone dared to keep track of how many tables a mother sets in a lifetime?
Probably close to a googolplex, and counting.
At one of this weekend's workshops at the Staten Island Children's Museum, mothers will be rewarded with handmade place mats, items they know intimately. (In fact, the term "place mat" came into existence in 1928, so the counting should start from that point.) At this workshop, lead by Diane Matyas, a Staten Island artist, children will be given paper-lace valentines to paint with watercolors and then laminate, so there will be no need to worry about spilled gravy.


Fare Increase for M.T.A. Riders Delayed by Improving Economy
Subway and bus fares will remain at $1.25 at least until July 1995, six months later than previously planned, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced yesterday.
Corporate profits are up because of the improving economy, so the authority's levy on companies in the region, which is about 2 percent of profits, will bring in about $486 million in 1994, up from $460 million last year, said John Cunningham, a spokesman.


Lottery Prize: 3-Digit Phone Numbers
Four Florida newspapers were among the winners of an unusual lottery held here today, in which the Southern Bell Telephone Company chose recipients of some of the handiest telephone numbers.
The three-digit numbers, similar to the 911 that people can call for emergencies, were eagerly sought by companies willing to pay $10,000 a month for easy-to-dial numbers that customers can call for quick information like sports scores, stock quotes, classified ads or movie listings.


CBI Industries Inc.(CBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Returns to Debate Tax, Gun and Budget Bills
The State Senate will return to the Capitol on Friday to open a special session to act on budget, tax and gun-control bills that were pending when time expired on the General Assembly's regular 1994 session at midnight Wednesday.
The regular session, its dates and duration set by the State Constitution, ended much as it began 12 weeks ago, with Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and legislators talking about large tax cuts that would take effect years in the future.


Knicks Hoping To 'Take Care Of Business'
The Knicks spent today feeling disgusted about Game 3, preparing for Game 4 and trying to avoid Game 5.
Disappointed that they still have not eliminated the Nets, the Knicks will try again Friday night, when they tangle in Game 4 of their three-of-five-game opening-round playoff series at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Should the Knicks win, they will advance into a four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series against the Chicago Bulls, beginning Sunday at Madison Square Garden.
But if the Nets win, a decisive Game 5 will take place Sunday in New York.


Triarc Cos.(TRY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fierce Fighting Is Reported In Rwanda as Talks Falter
The fiercest fighting since the Rwandan civil war began last month was reported today in the capital, Kigali, as the beleaguered Government called on its supporters to help fight invading rebels after peace talks broke up in confusion.
After two days of negotiations in the northern Tanzanian town of Arusha, representatives of the Tutsi-dominated Rwanda Patriotic Front, whose forces have now captured half of Rwanda, refused to sign a cease-fire agreement accepted by the Hutu-led interim Government, saying this would amount to recognizing its enemies.


Household International (HI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


'Whispers' Urged Rifkin to Kill, His Laywer Says
Testimony ended in the Joel Rifkin murder trial today with the defense contending that Mr.
Rifkin was driven to kill by whispering voices from deep within his troubled psyche.
His lawyer, John Lawrence, said the whispers were clear evidence that Mr.
Rifkin was a paranoid schizophrenic, unable to separate fantasy from reality and therefore legally insane when he murdered the 17 women he has confessed to killing.


Basketball; Gilliam Is X Factor Remedy
Normally, Armon Gilliam makes his money substituting for Derrick Coleman, and he's most effective at it.
He even had a 4-1 record as a starter at power forward this season.
So why was the 6-foot-9-inch Gilliam being used as a center in place of Benoit Benjamin and as a small forward to replace Chris Morris in Game 3 of the Knicks-Nets playoff series on Wednesday night?


Buffets Inc.(BOCB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 20


Poco Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sounds Around Town
Chuck Mangione
The New Chuck Mangione Quartet, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
When Chuck Mangione came to Manhattan from Rochester in the 1960's, he and his brother Gap (Gaspare), a pianist, were leading a hard-bop group called the Jazz Brothers.
The two brothers soon went their separate ways.
Chuck Mangione played trumpet with Woody Herman, Maynard Ferguson and Art Blakey, and, switching to fluegelhorn, led one of the most popular jazz groups of the 1970's.
For his appearance at the Blue Note, his first there in seven years, he will include a special "Young People's Matinee" tomorrow to which adults will be admitted only if they are accompanied by someone under 21.
Admission is $20, plus a $5 minimum, for shows at 1 and 3:30 P.M.
There are also to be the customary evening shows at 9 and 11:30 tonight, tomorrow night and Sunday night, with a $40 music charge at tables or $25 admission to the bar; there is also a $5 minimum at the tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.
Howard Prince Quintet
Howard Prince Quintet, Iridium, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan (212) 582-2121.
A broad range of influences come to bear on the trombonist Howard Prince's playing.
These include such trombonists as his idol, J. J. Johnson, and his friend Jimmy Knepper, as well as performances on the bass trumpet in the Wagner "Ring" cycle with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra.
But it is the modal jazz emphasized by his mentor, the pianist and composer George Russell, that is, he says, crucial to his playing.
His group, with the pianist Jon Davis, the guitarist Dave Moreno, the bassist Bryce Sebastien and the drummer Victor Jones, is to perform today and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.
There is a $10 music charge at the tables or bar.
Carol Sloane
Carol Sloane, Fat Tuesdays, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Gramercy Park, (212) 533-7900.
Carol Sloane's dark and husky voice burst on the jazz world when she was the unheralded star of the 1961 Newport Jazz Festival.
Since then she has periodically disappeared from public view for several years and then renewed her singing career with a richer, deeper understanding of her art.
She is settled in Massachusetts but makes regular visits to Fat Tuesdays, where she is to perform tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 music charge and a $10 minimum.


Benjamin Post; Professor, 82
Dr.
Benjamin Post, a retired professor of physics and chemistry at New York Polytechnic University in Brooklyn, died on Wednesday at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Janet.


Review/Theater; Fashion, Freud And Frigidity, With 40's Fizz
There is nothing like the revival of a vintage Broadway musical about psychoanalysis to make you realize how far we have come since the days when Freud was God.
In City Center's lavish but bland concert production of the 1941 show "Lady in the Dark," a beautiful but frigid fashion editor named Liza Elliott (Christine Ebersole) rakes through her past for traumas that might explain her inability to make up her mind.
The story revolves around three elaborate dream sequences, stuffed with portentous Freudian imagery, that illustrate her repressed sexuality, her indecisiveness and her sense of shame.
"Lady in the Dark" revels in high-style Manhattan glamour, 1940's style.
Moss Hart's book drips with famous names, chic references and characters gasping "dahling" to each other.
Kurt Weill's delicious tunes, while retaining vestiges of the acerbic angularity of his German operas, well up with a giddy all-American buoyancy.
The lyricist, Ira Gershwin, achieved a racy, Cole Porterish elan with "The Saga of Jenny," Liza's sexy show stopper.
For her self-defining ballad, "My Ship," he tapped into a rich lode of Freudian symbolism.


Fire Department Names First Female Lieutenant
Twelve years ago Rochelle Jones was among the first women to join the New York City Fire Department -- and to face the hostility.
Few firemen spoke to them.
Some found their equipment damaged.
Some found urine in their boots.
But yesterday, the women wanted to celebrate.
Ms.
Jones was promoted to lieutenant, becoming the highest ranking female officer in the department's 129-year history.


Stock Traders Reticent, Awaiting Jobs Data
Stock prices closed essentially unchanged in light volume yesterday, as traders held back purchases in advance of closely watched employment data scheduled for release today by the Government.
Bond prices were little changed, and the dollar gained slightly, while the price of gold plunged.


Brown Has His Pacers Relishing Their Feat
The way Larry Brown remembers it, the first thing he said to Reggie Miller, after Brown had been named head coach of the Indiana Pacers last summer, was, "Reggie, you're not going to want to hear this, but. . . ."
The way Reggie Miller, the star guard and high scorer of the Pacers, remembers it, Brown said, "Reggie, you're going to have to make sacrifices. . . ."


How Representatives Voted On Bill to Ban Assault Guns
Following is the 216-to-214 roll-call by which the House voted today to ban 19 types of assault-style weapons.
A "yes" vote is a vote to ban the weapons.
Voting "yes" were 177 Democrats, 38 Republicans and 1 independent.
Voting "no" were 77 Democrats and 137 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.
There are 2 vacancies in the 435-member House.
ALABAMA
Democrats -- Bevill, N; Browder, N; Cramer, N; Hilliard, N.
Republicans -- Bachus, N; Callahan, N; Everett, N.


Pinkerton's Inc.(PKTN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Arnold Industries Inc.(AIND,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc.(PIOS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trilon Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  A Rain of Upsets  Stefan Edberg, Goran Ivanisevic and Boris Becker were upset at the German Open yesterday, dropping second-round matches on the tournament's rain-drenched clay courts in Hamburg.
Becker fought off two match points against Alex Corretja before the Spaniard dealt the comeback of the three-time Wimbledon winner another blow by defeating him, 6-1, 5-7, 7-5.
Jaime Yzaga of Peru ousted the second-seeded Edberg by 6-4, 7-5, while Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia shocked the third-seeded Ivanisevic, 7-6 (7-1), 6-0. (AP) Navratilova Survives on Clay: Martina Navratilova, seeded second, defeated the Argentine clay court specialist Ines Gorrochategui, 6-2, 3-6, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals of the Italian Open in Milan.
The Argentine woman had beaten Navratilova on clay five weeks ago in Hilton Head Island, S.C. (AP) HOCKEY  Canada Gets Its Shot  Canada gained a chance to avenge the shootout loss at the Lillehammer Winter Olympics two and a half months ago after beating the Czech Republic, 3-2, Wednesday and gaining a berth against Sweden in today's semifinals of the world hockey championships.
Both teams are bolstered by National Hockey League players this time.
Canada won on a goal from Edmonton's Shayne Corson. (AP)


Where P.L.O. Is to Rule, It Is Nowhere to Be Seen
On the day after the signing of the accord on Palestinian rule in Jericho and Gaza, the mood of this sleepy town of 15,000 Palestinians was, to say the least, morose.
"The only thing that has changed in Jericho today is that Israeli Army roadblocks surrounding us have tripled," said Seif Jamil, the owner of Maxim, an outdoor restaurant normally frequented by tourists and travelers to the Jordanian border.
"Most people are banned from entering town, including tourists. So Jericho has really got its independence today -- from the world."


Kansas City Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On Stage, and Off
McKellen's 'Knight Out'
During the Stonewall riot in Greenwich Village in 1969, Ian McKellen, then a 30-year-old actor, was at the Edinburgh Festival in "Edward II," Christopher Marlowe's 16th-century play that is, in part, about the 14th-century king's obsessive infatuation with another young man.
"We had two men kissing onstage, and some local politicians were trying to get the play banned," the actor, now Sir Ian, recalled this week.
"It is ironic that at precisely that time I was doing a gay play that was causing a big fuss, but that I wasn't doing it as an openly gay man."


A Jury's Sympathy for Suicide
It should be no surprise that a Michigan jury cleared Dr.
Jack Kevorkian this week of charges that he illegally helped a terminally ill patient commit suicide.
While legislatures, courts and special commissions dither over whether to sanction doctor-assisted suicide, desperately ill patients are taking matters into their own hands.
The jury's eagerness to find any loophole to exonerate Dr.
Kevorkian suggests an underlying belief that patients have a "right to die" with dignity and to be assisted in their suicides by a willing doctor.
That right got another legal assist this week when a Federal district judge in Seattle ruled that a Washington State ban on assisted suicide was a constitutional infringement on individual liberty.
The issue, which is also being contested in the state courts of Michigan, may be headed ultimately to the U.S.
Supreme Court.
Some 30 states currently have laws against helping people kill themselves.


Abroad at Home; Help From Outside
Nelson Mandela will become president of a new South Africa because of what he and other South Africans did.
It was mainly an internal struggle that led to the extraordinary denouement we have been seeing.
But outside pressure did help.
That is worth remembering at a time when we are called upon to consider the effectiveness and the desirability of economic sanctions against governments that violate human rights, from Haiti to China.
Until quite recently the outside world cared little about South Africa.
From the beginning of apartheid in 1948 through the bannings and detentions and killings of the 1950's and 1960's, South Africa did not register on the Richter scale of American politics.


Cambodian King Accuses Rebels of Atrocities


K N Energy Inc.(KNE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jazz Sends Spurs Back to San Antonio
Jazz 95, Spurs 90
Karl Malone scored 34 points, including a 20-footer with 42 seconds to play, and the host Utah Jazz held off a late San Antonio rally to win, 95-90, last night, eliminating the Spurs from the National Basketball Association playoffs.


Artists Are Tougher Than Other People
To the Editor:
Dr.
Joseph J. Schildkraut describes a link between mental instability and creativity in "Depression and Art" (letter, April 18).
But he misses what I believe is a crucial point: the extraordinary day-to-day stresses most artists face.
These are caused by, first, the essentially subjective criteria for judging the merit of art, influenced (particularly today) by the whims of fashion; and, second, the virtual absence of the usual rewards, financial or otherwise.


Minolta Selects Lois/U.S.A.
The Minolta Corporation in Ramsey, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Lois/U.S.A. in New York to handle its consolidated account, which had been divided between Bozell New York, which handled the business and imaging equipment accounts, and Campbell Mithun Esty in New York, which handled the photography division account.
Billings were estimated at $7 million to $10 million.


Apparel Account To Butler, Shine
Millers Outpost in Ontario, Calif., a retail apparel chain specializing in Levi's jeans and other casual attire, said yesterday that it had selected Butler, Shine &amp; Stern in Sausalito, Calif., to handle the creative portion of its estimated $8 million account, which had been at Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates in Los Angeles for the last three years.
Butler, Shine, was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to that agency, Asher/Gould in Los Angeles and Lois, Colby Los Angeles in Santa Monica, Calif.
A radio campaign is expected to begin next week.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Arthur Rhodes, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 2.
Purchased the contract of Tom Bolton, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Frank Viola, pitcher, on the 60-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Carlos Rodriguez, shortstop, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Moved Scott Hatteberg, catcher, from New Britain of the Eastern League to Pawtucket.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Claimed Bob Zupcic, outfielder, off waivers from the Boston Red Sox.
National League FLORIDA MARLINS -- Announced Benito Santiago, catcher, will not appeal his four-game suspension and will begin serving the pnalty immediately.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Activated Tom Pagnozzi, catcher, and Mark Whiten, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Eric Pappas, catcher, and John Maybry, outfielder, to Louisville of the American Association.
Football  National Football League CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Dan Wilkinson, defensive lineman, to a six-year contract.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Earnest Byner, running back.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Named Clyde Powers director of pro player personnel and George Boone director of college player personnel.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Lake Dawson, wide receiver.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Jerry Ellison, running back.


Trudeau Becomes Jet Backup
The Jets ended their quest for a veteran backup quarterback yesterday when they agreed to terms on a two-year contract with Jack Trudeau, who played the last eight seasons with the Colts.
The deal, which includes an option for a third year, includes an $800,000 signing bonus and a salary of $300,000 this season and $625,000 the following season.


Remember Stonewall! But How?; Gay Groups Clash Over Commemoration of a Riot in 1969
It was intended to be the ultimate celebration of gay pride, the zenith of a movement that began with a police raid and riot at the Stonewall Inn in Greenwich Village 25 years ago.
But less than two months before the giant march and rally planned to mark the anniversary, the event is mired in a bitter debate among gay New Yorkers over how best to commemorate the historic night.
Some leaders of gay groups complain that the event's political significance has succumbed to commercialism, and they say the people who were at the Stonewall on the night of the raid, many of them transvestites, have been excluded from the planning so as to make the event more palatable to mainstream gay marchers.


Magnificient Hybrid: A Rockefeller Aerie
FORGET Bill Gates, never mind Leslie Wexner; no name in American history connotes money like Rockefeller.
Public enough to have a consistently high profile, private enough to have an aura of mystery that never entirely disappears, this family has symbolized American wealth for most of the 20th century.
So it should not be at all surprising that the public opening of Kykuit, the Rockefeller family estate at Pocantico Hills, N.Y., has been greeted with an interest more or less akin to that surrounding the start of public tours of Buckingham Palace.
Historic Hudson Valley, the nonprofit organization (and Rockefeller creation) that is managing the tours of Kykuit (rhymes with high cut), reports that May and June visits were largely sold out, as were most summer weekends, long before the first tour group passed through Kykuit's iron gates the day before yesterday.


In a Salute, Duke Law School Will Make Peace With Nixon
Duke University would not give him an honorary degree decades ago, or let his Presidential library be built on campus.
But on Sunday, at a graduation ceremony, Richard M. Nixon will receive some measure of honor from the university: Duke Law School, from which he graduated third in his class in 1937, will publish in the commencement program a tribute by Dean Pamela Gann.
The memorial salute, which Dean Gann wrote on April 26 to send to Mr.
Nixon's family, will serve as an alternative to the moment of silence that was sought in a petition from 105 (not counting the prankster who signed Henry Kissinger's name) of the 190 students graduating from the law school this weekend.
An Uneasy History
Four decades ago, shortly after he became Vice President, the university offered Mr.
Nixon an honorary degree, then rescinded the gesture because of an uprising by faculty members angered at what they saw as his history of nasty campaigning.
Then, in 1961, Mr.
Nixon turned the tables, rejecting a degree when the offer was renewed.
And in 1981, seven years after he was forced from the Presidency by the Watergate scandal, the university decided against allowing his Presidential library to be built on campus.
Against that backdrop of strain, the law school's faculty met yesterday to discuss whether to honor the school's most famous alumnus and, if so, how.
There was no vote, Dean Gann said in a statement issued later; publication of the tribute was her decision.
"The law school does not recognize the deaths of faculty, alumni or friends of the law school at its graduation," the dean said.
"An exception was made in this case because of the students' request and because President Nixon's death occurred so close in time to the graduation weekend. This particular method was chosen because the in memoriam statement provides a useful summary of Mr. Nixon's associations with the law school and his particular interest in foreign affairs in China, including the special efforts of the Duke Law School in the last 10 years to educate Chinese students about law and legal institutions."
Although the issue had not been the hottest one on the Duke campus, Kate Bartlett, senior associate dean of the law school, said some opposition to honoring Mr.
Nixon had remained.
"It puts the law school in an awkward position," she said, "where the failures of his life bear directly on our mission: the rule of law and the highest standards of ethics and accountability."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about a $2 billion takeover bid by LDDS Communications Inc. misidentified the acquisition target.
LDDS is seeking to buy the entire Wiltel telecommunications subsidiary of the Williams Companies, not just the Wiltel Communications Systems division.
In addition, the article characterized the LDDS offer incorrectly.
It is not a hostile takeover bid.


Ann Taylor Stores Corp.(ANN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


A Grief-Stricken Brazil Buries Car-Racing Hero
Subway trains stopped on bridges, trucks parked on expressways and South America's largest city ground to a halt today as hundreds of thousands of mourners turned out for the largest funeral in Brazil's history.
This flood of public grief in a gray, workaday city was not for a President, but for a taut, tense 34-year-old with a boyish smile -- Ayrton Senna, the Sao Paulo resident who was a three-time champion of Formula One car racing, the pinnacle of the sport.


Kiss in Havana Causes Storm in Miami
Magda Montiel Davis went to Havana late last month a respected lawyer and political figure, but she returned a pariah -- all because she planted a kiss on the cheek of Fidel Castro and called him "a great teacher." Angry callers to Spanish-language radio stations here have called it an act of betrayal comparable to Judas's kiss.
Ms.
Montiel, who in 1992 ran unsuccessfully for Congress as a Democrat in a primarily Cuban-American district here, was one of some 200 Cuban exiles who took part in a three-day conference in Havana last month to discuss relations between the exile population of 1.5 million and the Cuban Government.
At a reception that Mr.
Castro attended, she was one of several participants who greeted the Cuban leader cordially as Cuban state television recorded the encounter.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro section yesterday, about subway crime, reversed the figures for reported felonies in the first two months of 1993 and 1994.
The correct figures were 1,799 for 1993 and 1,558 for 1994, representing a decrease of 13.4 percent, not an increase of 15.5 percent.


Review/Film; Love Is Blind, The Least Of Its Problems
When Ray Reardon (James Spader) meets Lena Mathers (Madchen Amick) she behaves hatefully, which is really the sort of thing he ought to notice.
But Ray is understandably distracted by Lena's good looks.
A debonair yuppie architect, he has a fine eye for the beautiful edifice, and he is also impressed by some of Lena's other talents.
When they go out for dinner at a sushi place, it's a tossup over which one speaks better Japanese.
Dazzled by Lena, Ray begins to see her as the perfect mate, which is how he finds himself at the center of the ingeniously contrived waking nightmare that is "Dream Lover." As written and directed suspensefully by Nicholas Kazan, this film delves deep into the mysteries that lurk behind romance, and it pulls no punches about its characters' capacity for malice.


Volunteers Search Park For Girl, 14
Hundreds of volunteers from Hasidic communities in Brooklyn and upstate New York came to Connecticut's most rural corner today to help the police and firefighters search for a 14-year-old Brooklyn girl who disappeared on Wednesday when a stop on a school field trip went badly awry.
Authorities said 237 students from a Hasidic school in Brooklyn, Tomer Devorah High School, were on their way to Old Sturbridge Village in Massachusetts when they stopped at the 1,500-acre Bigelow Hollow State Park here.
The stop was intended to last two hours and give the students a chance to eat lunch and walk in the woods.
Many Became Lost
But many of the students became lost.
One group returned to the bus almost two hours later than expected.
Two girls wandered miles away, ending up on Interstate 84, where a motorist picked them up and drove them to the park.


Softening Sports' Culture Shock
Boomer Esiason, a local hero with a cause, and Billie Jean King, a name for the ages, were honored yesterday at a March of Dimes lunch at the Waldorf.
It was the kind of worthwhile, heart-warming event that could have been held any time in the past 20 years, and so it was a kind of comfort in these days of sporting culture shock.
Very soon now, the Rangers and the Knicks are going to make us even crazier, perhaps a prelude to our meltdown when we find out that not only is the baseball "juiced," but they have been tampering with the homer-levels for years.
And if we survive all that, we can look forward to the collision of two of the most important sporting events of our time -- the World Cup and the Gay Games.


S. L. Kirloskar, 90, Industrialist in India
S.
L.
Kirloskar, the patriarch of one of India's largest industrial empires, died on April 24 in a hospital in Pune, India, after a stroke.
He was 90 and lived in Pune, 75 miles southeast of Bombay.
At his death, he was a director of various companies and chairman of Kirloskar Brothers Ltd.


Ousted Kidder Trader Goes to Court for Assets
Joseph Jett, the dismissed managing director of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, asserted his innocence in court filings yesterday and demanded that the firm release nearly $5 million frozen in his accounts.
Kidder has refused to release the money since accusing Mr.
Jett last month of creating $350 million in phantom trades to conceal trading losses and inflate his 1993 bonus of $9 million.


Diplomatic Therapy for an Edgy Russia
There are confusing, sometimes contradictory signals from Moscow about foreign policy now that the period President Boris Yeltsin's spokesman called the "romantic embrace" of the West has been proclaimed at an end.
The one repeated message is that Russia's "national interests" must be served and that Russia must be treated with the consideration to which it is accustomed as a great power.
But it is evident that its leaders, in office or in opposition, haven't reached a clear definition of national interest, strategy or doctrine.
The essential guideline is emotional, psychological -- a demand for recognition of what Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoly L. Adamishin called "full-fledged partnership" in world affairs.
This gives the West a chance to help shape Moscow's concept of the role it wants to play.


U.S. Aide Admits North Korea Nuclear Policy May Not Work
The Administration's top official handling the dispute over North Korea's nuclear program said today that he was not confident that a diplomatic solution could be reached, and that the United States had not yet won China's support for economic sanctions.
The stark admission by the official, Robert Gallucci, the Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs, that Washington's strategy of using diplomacy and economic sanctions may fail comes at a critical moment in the negotiations aimed at persuading North Korea to allow full inspections of its nuclear sites.


MNX Inc.(MNXI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Supreme Court Search Said to Narrow to 2
Senior Clinton Administration officials said today that a Federal appeals judge in Little Rock, Ark., Judge Richard S. Arnold, and Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt were emerging as front-runners for nomination to the Supreme Court.
Mr.
Clinton and his senior aides are scheduled to meet on Friday to discuss the search for a candidate to fill the seat vacated when Justice Harry A. Blackmun retires at the end of the current term.


New U.S. Peacekeeping Policy De-emphasizes Role of the U.N.
The Clinton Administration announced today a long-awaited policy on peacekeeping that rejects many of the ways the United Nations could be used for that role, a sharp departure from Bill Clinton's campaign vision of the United Nations as the global policeman.
The policy directive, signed by President Clinton on Tuesday and released today, reflects concerns after ill-fated peacekeeping operations in Somalia and Haiti and comes after more than a year of fierce interagency feuding.
It defines strict conditions for setting up peacekeeping operations and for committing United States troops to take part in them.


Topics of The Times; Pay as You Go
After a revealing if not terribly uplifting few hours of debate, the Senate yesterday beat back a bipartisan attempt to derail an ethics bill that would sharply limit the ability of special interests to curry favor with members of Congress by providing fancy meals, resort vacations and other corrupting gifts.
The 59-to-39 vote showed a dismaying number of senators standing up for the dubious perks.
They voted for the gutting substitute amendment offered by Republican Senators Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and the minority leader, Bob Dole, along with Democratic Senators Bennett Johnston of Louisiana and Daniel Inouye of Hawaii.
Supporters of the substitute sought to trivialize the issue, talking as though what was at stake was just fruit baskets and doughnuts rather than a potentially profound change in the culture of influence-peddling.


Prosecutor Subpoenas All Files on Foster
The special prosecutor investigating President Clinton's Arkansas land dealings today served a broad subpoena on the White House, demanding "any and all documents" relating to Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who killed himself last July.
The prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., has said he would investigate Mr.
Foster's death.
But today's subpoena indicated for the first time that he intends to conduct a wide-ranging inquiry into the paper trail left by Mr.
Foster and the conduct of White House officials shortly after his death.


Accounts
SAP America Inc., Philadelphia, to Ciociola &amp; Co., New York, to handle the software company's account in North America, Mexico and Australia, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Specialized Communications, New York.
Billings were estimated to exceed $6 million.


F. Scarfiotti, 53, Film Art Director
Ferdinando Scarfiotti, who won an Academy Award in 1988 for the art direction of Bernardo Bertolucci's film "The Last Emperor," died on Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 53.
The cause was liver failure, said Henry Penner, a spokesman.


Rangers Are Within Kissing Distance of a Sweep
One of these weeks, some team is probably going to give the Rangers a good series.
Or, perhaps, one of these nights, some team might give the Rangers a close game.
But it wasn't the Washington Capitals, not this game, not this night, not this series, not this week.
After taking an early lead on two goals from their rejuvenated power play, the Rangers coasted to a 3-0 victory tonight at the USAir Arena, taking a 3-games-to-0 lead in the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.


National Western Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treasury Securities Mark Time
Prices of Treasury securities meandered in light trading yesterday and finished little changed ahead of today's release of April's employment data.
Traders said a stronger dollar helped underpin Treasuries as the 30-year bond finished unchanged at the close of the New York cash market at a price of 87 to yield 7.33 percent.
Shorter-maturity bills and intermediate notes were all up or down a couple of ticks.


Art in Review
Jock Sturges
Laurence Miller Gallery  138 Spring Street  SoHo  Through May 28
Three years ago Jock Sturges's photographs of nude adolescent girls made him the target of an F.B.I. raid in which agents, acting on suspicions that the photographer was producing child pornography, seized equipment, prints and negatives from his San Francisco apartment.
In the end, prosecutors refused to charge him, but Mr.
Sturges achieved a measure of celebrity as a victim of government attacks on sexually charged art.


Ivaco Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Zippos in Vietnam
To the Editor:
The Zippo lighters on display in Hanoi (pictured in "Vietnam: Memorabilia of a War Best Forgotten," The Week in Review, April 24) were not dropped by careless G.I.'s as they scuttled home from Vietnam.
In most cases, the obverse of each lighter contains the engraved name of its owner.
Most of those names are also engraved on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington or are the names of former prisoners of war.


The Morning After: Few Hopeful Illusions Remain
The original screenplay called for a happy ending: two old enemies reconciled at last, emerging from long, hard negotiations arm in arm, imbued with a mutual trust once unimaginable.
But as Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel observed a few months ago, the problem with this movie called the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks is that the happy ending came at the beginning, or near it at least, with the celebrated handshake in September at the White House by the two leaders, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $85 million of notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 7.14 percent through Nationsbank.
The issue is callable in two years.  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of debentures due in 1997 at 100 to yield 6.53 percent through BA Securities.
The issue is callable in one year.


Hawaii Is a Health Care Lab As Employers Buy Insurance
The toughest question in the health care debate is whether to require employers to buy insurance for their workers.
But if members of Congress could overcome their fears of being accused of junketeering and actually visit Hawaii, they would find compelling evidence about how such a system actually works, and they would not have to rely on a range of absolute, if uninformed, opinion.


Southwestern Energy (SWN,N) reports earnings for 12mo Mar 31


Star's Father Kidnapped
The father of ROMARIO, a star on Brazil's national team, has been kidnapped and his abductors are demanding $7 million, the police said yesterday.
EDEVAIR SOUZA DE FARIA, 62, was abducted Monday night as he left a bar he owns in Rio's Penha district, HELIO VIGIO, head of Rio's anti-kidnapping division, said.
The newspaper Jornal do Brasil reported Romario was expected to fly home from Spain, where his club team, Barcelona, had two games remaining. (AP)


Rookie Team Chosen
CHRIS WEBBER and ANFERNEE HARDAWAY, the first and third overall picks in last year's National Basketball Association draft, were unanimous choices of the league's 27 coaches for the N.B.A. all-rookie team announced yesterday.
Each had 52 points; coaches were not allowed to vote for their own players.
The other three members of the first team were VIN BAKER of Milwaukee, JAMAL MASHBURN of Dallas and ISAIAH RIDER of Minnesota. (AP)


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL AND POWER SYSTEMS, Schenectady, N.Y., a unit of General Electric Co., received a $50 million contract from Raytheon Construction Inc., Lexington, Mass., to provide power generation equipment for a combined-cycle co-generation facility.


INSIDE
Israeli-P.L.O. Accord: Is It a Happy Ending?
The screenplay called for a happy ending, two old enemies reconciled at last.
But by the time the Israeli-P.L.O. accord was signed, there were few illusions left about the state of relations.
News analysis, page A14.
Hard Choices Loom on Haiti
If sanctions fails to dislodge Haiti's military leaders, the United Statesmay face the choice of using force or admitting refugees.
Page A10.
Fight Over Custodians' Deal
Mayor Giuliani said he "could not possibly approve" a contract deal with school custodians that the Chancellor hailed the day before.
Page B1.


Palestinians in Gaza Wait, Wait, and Wait Some More
The agreement on limited self-rule for the Gaza Strip and Jericho may have been heralded as a new beginning for many Palestinians.
But the Palestinian police officers who were to arrive here today did not appear, senior Palestinian posts remained vacant and transfers of Israeli military posts were postponed.
The delay was caused in large part by a request from Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, for three or four weeks more to organize his police force and civil administration.


Boxing; Lennox Lewis Is Man on A Mission
Lennox Lewis seemed to be searching the crowd today as he weighed in for Friday night's heavyweight title fight with Phil Jackson.
For Lewis knows that Michael Moorer is in town, not only to observe but maybe also to talk a deal.


Louis F. Branco; Art Dealer, 43
Louis F. Branco, an international art dealer who also was an adviser to the New York Public Library, died on Tuesday in the Whitehall Gallery in Manhattan.
Mr.
Branco, who lived in Manhattan, was 43.
The cause was a heart attack, said his sister, Fran Crescenzo.


Review/Film; Waste Not, Want Not: MGM's Outtakes Are a Movie
On the left side of the split screen, Cyd Charisse looks slinky and sophisticated, lip-synching to the song "Two-Faced Woman" in a scene cut from "The Bandwagon." That 1953 film was a high point and a last gasp for the long reign of MGM musicals, and in those studio days very little went to waste.
To prove it, the right side of the screen in "That's Entertainment! III" shows what happened to the song, recorded by a ghost singer named India Adams, later that year.
In the now forgotten film "Torch Song," Joan Crawford, wooden and broad-shouldered in a short black wig and a baby-blue spangled dress, tries to slither down a staircase while lip-synching.
She is wearing what the narration in "That's Entertainment!" kindly calls "tropical makeup," though it might more accurately be called blackface.
As she vamps in her role as a Broadway star, she resembles nothing so much as a bad Crawford impersonator in drag.
This is entertainment, all right, but of a different sort from the unsurpassed musical numbers that filled the first "That's Entertainment" 20 years ago and made a good case for the genius of the MGM musical.
A sequel, "That's Entertainment! Part 2," followed two years later.
By now the archivists have made their way far back into the vaults.
With the best material used up, "That's Entertainment! III" cleverly focuses on outtakes, unfinished numbers and behind-the-scenes glimpses of the old musicals.
This results in a lively and funny compilation of curiosities suggesting what might have been.
The clips have been wonderfully restored and are shown in wide-screen, dazzling color at the Ziegfeld, where "That's Entertainment! III" opens today.


Northwestern Public Service Co.(NPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TNP Enterprises Inc.(TNP,N) reports earnings for 12mo Mar 31


Cytec Industries Inc.(CYT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tidewater Inc.(TDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devon Group Inc.(DEVN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TV Weekend; Breaking Free of Handouts
"Making Welfare Work," which might more pointedly be titled "Making Welfare Recipients Work," is a report on several experiments -- in New York; New Jersey; Riverside, Calif.; Racine, Wis., and Denver -- to reform a system that no one says is working particularly well.
The popular approach these days is to put pressure on single mothers to find jobs.
Tonight's hourlong program is mainly given to case studies of young women existing on Aid to Families with Dependent Children.
Their lives seem to be changing for the better, and they may yet break out of a generational history of early pregnancy and prolonged reliance on the state.


TV Weekend; A Plague and Its Effects
Stephen King, master of supernatural shtick and Armageddon horrors, is recklessly flirting with terminal bloat.
After an extraordinary string of best sellers and assorted movies based on his stories, the writer is obviously a power broker.
Whatever Stephen wants, Stephen gets.
This time around, with his own script, he gets "Stephen King's 'The Stand,' " a television production on ABC that over four nights, beginning on Sunday and skipping Tuesday, runs for eight hours.
Well, O.K., six and a half minus commercials.
Taking a cue from Legionnaire's disease, Mr.
King first wrote "The Stand," a story about a planet-destroying super flu, in the mid-1970's.
Later, charging that the publisher "arbitrarily cut" his manuscript, he did an unabridged edition, adding about 500 pages.
That was published in 1988 when, of course, the most prominent of what Mr.
King calls "disease vectors" had become AIDS.
It now lurks ominously in the interstices of this television mini-series.


Court Rejects Requirement Of Financing For Abortion
Rejecting the arguments of abortion-rights advocates, New York State's highest court ruled today that the state is not obligated to finance abortions for low-income women.
The decision by the Court of Appeals leaves intact an unusual two-tiered policy in New York State that requires the state to help pay for the abortions of poor women on Medicaid but not for low-income women who earn just enough money to rise above the poverty line but qualify for state-financed prenatal care.


Baseball; Saberhagen Keeping Bullpen Out of Trouble
John Franco went to lunch with Bret Saberhagen today, and before the meal was over, Franco made a little request.
"Show us vintage Saberhagen tonight," Franco told the man who is his best friend on the Mets.


Hartford Bails Out Gun Exchange Program Hartford Bails Out Gun Swap Program
State officials approved $281,065 today to bail out Operation Guns for Goods, the gun exchange that proved so successful it immediately broke the bank.
Planned by state officials and the Connecticut Retail Merchants Association as a monthlong program, Guns for Goods was shut down in its fifth day last February after 4,181 guns were turned in at police departments.


Inside Art
The Tate Across the Thames
What was once called the Temple of Power will now become the Temple of Art.
That, at least, is what the Tate Gallery in London hopes will happen when it completes a $120 million transformation of the Bankside Power Station into the Tate Gallery of Modern Art.
The Tate's choice of that site for its new museum, announced last week, ended a four-year search.
The gallery will be the city's first new international museum since the 19th century.
The 100,000-square-foot building on the South Bank of the Thames, just opposite St.
Paul's Cathedral, has been empty for 13 years.
It was built in two phases, from 1948 to 1963, by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, the architect who designed London's red telephone booths.
The Tate plans to buy the building and eight and a half acres surrounding it from Nuclear Electric, using public and private financing, possibly including money generated by the National Lottery.
The Tate plans to build a bridge across the Thames connecting St.
Paul's to the South Bank and a pier at the Tate at Millbank so that boats can run between the two museums.


Change of Goaltenders Puts Devils Back Into It
The goalies changed and so did the fortunes of the Devils tonight as Chris Terreri made his first appearance in the playoffs and got New Jersey back on track in its playoff series against Boston.
Playing solidly after being displaced by the rookie Martin Brodeur in goal since April 12, Terreri gave the Devils the kind of spirited effort that sparked them to a 4-2 triumph over the Bruins at Boston Garden.
It gave the Devils their first victory after two losses in this four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series.


National Pizza Co.(PIZA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 29


Strangling Is Suspected In S.I. Death
A lawyer for the family of a Staten Island man who died in police custody last week said yesterday that a doctor hired by the family to perform an autopsy suspects, based on preliminary findings, that the man was strangled.
The lawyer, John Murphy Jr., cautioned that the findings by Dr.
Mark Taff, a forensic pathologist, were not final and that he still needed to review the results of tests by the city's Medical Examiner's office before reaching any definitive conclusions.


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Burnett Acquiring Stockholm Firm
Leo Burnett Worldwide said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Nord &amp; Company in Stockholm and merge it with Burnett's office there.
Terms were not disclosed.
The merged agency, which will begin operations next January, will have combined billings estimated at $40 million from clients like Kraft General Foods, Procter &amp; Gamble and Tropicana.
Jan Nord, 39, who headed Nord &amp; Company, will become managing director of the merged agency, which has not been named.


Critic's Notebook; New Germany's State of Mind
UNDER the title "Germany After the Wall," the Museum of Television and Radio in Manhattan is showing 11 recent television films commissioned by ZDF, a national German television network founded in 1963 and based in Mainz.
Seeing these films -- on a big screen until June 25, with a Thursday-through-Sunday schedule, or on a video console any time during museum hours -- does not provide the shocking revelation that German film making has been reborn from its doldrums.
But many of the films are pretty good; most offer first-rate acting, and all of them provide, for anyone interested in Germany as opposed to German cinema, telling insights into what present-day Germans are fretting about.
Some of the Germans' concerns are specific to them: the reunification of their country and the difficulties that Easterners ("Ossis") and Westerners ("Wessis") have in comprehending one another; former terrorists coming in from the cold (a special interest of the post-1968 generation that now dominates German film), and the festering problem of neo-Nazi skinheads' violence and the hatred of foreigners.
Americans have their share of violence, too, on the street and on the screen.
But German violence triggers so many horrific memories that it takes on an entirely different dimension.


Presidential Life reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Portrays Sheik as Head Of a Wide Terrorist Network
Prosecutors will argue in their case against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman that various terrorist acts dating back to 1991 were all part of a single, overall conspiracy led by the sheik to punish the United States for its support of Israel and Egypt, according to court papers.
The effort, the papers say, was undertaken by a "jihad organization" that had "headquarters" in several American cities and ties to similar groups in other countries.


The Law and Murderous Drivers
How to keep murderous, drunken drivers off the road?
New York State made a good start last fall with a tough new law allowing police to arrest and seize the automobiles of people who drive with suspended licenses.
But the killing of three people this week by just such a driver -- one with an extensive history of arrests and suspensions -- underscores an obvious point: Tough new laws are meaningless without vigorous enforcement.
His victims were Cathy, Marie and Concetta Vaccarello, all run down at a crosswalk in the Howard Beach section of Queens.
The Vaccarellos were killed by Abraham Meyers, a drunken driver who had received 26 citations, which were technically called "suspensions" -- even though Mr.
Meyers has been without a valid license since 1967.


The Fed Goes Ghostbusting
The Federal Reserve Board has been spooked by the ghost of inflation.
In its panic, the Fed has raised interest rates three times, taking everyone by surprise.
Long-term bondholders have lost billions and international currency markets have been rattled.
Yet the Fed's economists admit they can't point to even a hint of inflation in the current numbers.
They are missing the obvious: the 90's are likely to be an inflation-free decade, and their interest rate hikes will squash the current economic recovery.
The 70's and 80's were inflationary times.
The failure to raise taxes to pay for the Vietnam War led to slowly accelerating inflation that exploded with the oil and food shocks of the 70's.
Inflation stubbornly receded in the 80's.
If the effects of surging health care costs are subtracted from inflation figures, it is clear that more prices have fallen than risen this spring.


Singapore Carries Out the Caning of a U.S. Teen-Ager
A punishment of four lashes on the bare buttocks with a rattan cane was carried out today on an 18-year-old American who had pleaded guilty to vandalism but now insists he is innocent.
The Singapore Prisons Department said the American, Michael P. Fay, "was examined by the prison's doctor after the caning and found to be in satisfactory condition" at the prison where he is serving a four-month sentence for spray-painting cars and other acts.


American Teen-Ager Caned in Singapore
After rejecting his final plea, the Singapore Government flogged an 18-year-old resident from Ohio who had confessed to vandalism but later said he was innocent.
The prison said he was "in satisfactory condition" after the sentence was carried out.
Article, page A3.


Reviews/ Film; Annals of Everybody, by Bill Forsyth
In "Being Human," his idiosyncratic history of mankind ranging from the cave to the car phone, Bill Forsyth ("Gregory's Girl," "Housekeeping") magically finds an 11th-hour way to bring his material into focus.
Magic may be nothing new for a film maker who once casually revealed (in "Local Hero") that one of his characters was a mermaid.
But it stands out sharply here, if only because it is otherwise in short supply.
Set against lovely verdant scenery but structured as a series of rambling vignettes, the stories in "Being Human" don't entirely mesh.
Though they all concern a man named Hector (Robin Williams), sound similar themes and are strung together by the same voice-over narrator (Theresa Russell), they don't have the fundamental coherence to justify this narrative format.
Mr.
Forsyth works best in simpler and more mysterious ways than are possible here.
Much of the time, a smaller film seems to be trying to escape the overpowering ambitions of this large one.


Plan Would Replace Higher Education Dept.
An advisory panel of state college and university presidents today gave Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman the political tool to dismantle the Department of Higher Education.
If the plan becomes law, as expected, it will make New Jersey one of the few states in the nation to free its public colleges and universities from almost all state supervision.
The panel, with Mrs.
Whitman's approval, released a detailed plan to revise the state's system of higher education, proposing that each state-supported college and university be given an autonomy that would place it on the same footing as private institutions.


Baseball; Officials Decide To Discuss Fights
After a flurry of early-season brawls at the pitcher's mound, officials representing management and the players have decided to explore the reasons behind the melees to try to prevent them from becoming as routine as the seventh-inning stretch.
Gene Orza, associate general counsel of the Players Association, said yesterday that he and Len Coleman, the National League president, have agreed to hold discussions with players to find out why hitters are charging the mound so often.


Mexican Aide and Rebels Talk About Talks
In a small cabin deep in the Lacandon rain forest, the Government's chief peace negotiator, a Roman Catholic Bishop acting as mediator and the masked leaders of an Indian rebel army met for eight hours on Wednesday to discuss the resumption of talks to end the peasant uprising that began on Jan. 1 in southern Mexico.
By the time they left the woods, no date had been set for the latest round of talks to begin.
But in a statement today, the negotiator, Manuel Camacho Solis, said that in a few days the rebels would respond to a list of 32 proposals made by the Government two months ago.


China Protests to the U.S. On Taiwan Arms and Tibet
The Chinese leadership summoned the American Ambassador today to complain that the United States is reversing policy on the sale of arms to Taiwan while also supporting the independence movement in Tibet.
"It is indeed shocking to see such a contempt for the basic norms governing international relations, such open infringement of China's sovereignty and attempt to split China," the Deputy Foreign Minister, Tian Zengpei, was quoted by the official New China News Agency as saying.


American Premier Underwriters Inc.(APZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
HELICOPTER CRASHES NEAR LINCOLN TUNNEL A small, low-flying helicopter heading toward Manhattan with a flying instructor and his student snagged a power line, cartwheeled in midair and crashed in flames on a busy elevated-highway approach to the Lincoln Tunnel in New Jersey, killing the two people on board.
A1.
Suddenly, a glowing orange-yellow ball hung over one entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel.
B4.
BOMB PLOT NOT ISOLATED, U.S.
WILL ARGUE Prosecutors will argue in their upcoming case against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman that terrorist acts dating back to 1991 were all part of a single, overall conspiracy led by the cleric to punish the United States for its support of Israel and Egypt, according to court papers.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  IMPROVING ECONOMY DELAYS FARE INCREASE Subway and bus fares will remain at $1.25 at least until July 1995, six months later than previously planned, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced, citing higher revenues from the improving economy.
B2.
PLAN FOR AIDS UNIT REVERSED, GROUPS SAY The Giuliani administration, facing a political storm over its plans to shrink or eliminate the Division of AIDS Services, has decided to look for ways to keep the agency intact, AIDS- and homeless-service organizations said after meeting with administration officials.
B3.
WOMAN ENTERS FIRE DEPARTMENT HISTORY Twelve years ago Rochelle Jones was among the first women to join the Fire Department -- and to face the hostility of male colleagues.
Now the women have cause to celebrate.
Ms.
Jones was promoted to lieutenant, becoming the highest ranking female officer in the department's 129-year history.
B3.
STRANGLING IS SUSPECTED IN S.I.
DEATH A lawyer for the family of a Staten Island man who died in police custody last week said a doctor hired by the family to perform an autopsy suspects that the man was strangled.
B3. 4 ACQUITTED OF EXTORTING CONTRACTORS A jury in Brooklyn acquitted four black and Hispanic construction workers charged with extorting money and jobs from construction firms.
A fifth was convicted on two counts.
B3.
A jury awarded $41 million to the family of a woman who sued the Health and Hospitals Corporation and Emergency Medical Services over her death.
B7.
REGION  WOODS SEARCHED FOR MISSING GIRL Hundreds of volunteers from Hasidic communities in Brooklyn and upstate New York went to Connecticut's most rural corner to help the police and local firefighters search for a 14-year-old Brooklyn girl who disappeared during a stop on a school field trip.
B5.
DISMANTLING SUPERVISION OF COLLEGES An advisory panel of New Jersey college and university presidents gave Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman the political tool to dismantle the Department of Higher Education.
If the plan becomes law, as expected, it will make New Jersey one of the few states in the nation to free its public colleges and universities from almost all state supervision.
B5.
The Connecticut Senate will open a special session to act on budget, tax and other bills.
B5.
Joel Rifkin's defense contended he was driven to kill by whispered voices from within.
B6.


Corrections
An article and a caption yesterday about people said to be under consideration for the Supreme Court referred to Judge Amalya Kearse incorrectly in some editions.
She is a member of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, not the Federal District Court.
In some other copies, the caption reversed the identifications of Judge Kearse and Federal District Judge Jose Cabranes.


Reviews/ Film; A Sleuth Who Forgets
On the surface, "Clean Slate" is a "Groundhog Day" clone, played in reverse.
Instead of Bill Murray waking up every morning doomed to repeat the day before, in "Clean Slate" Dana Carvey wakes up with no memory of the previous day at all.
But the new film is not a slavish copy; it is an amiable movie with its own ambitions, and too many missteps to duplicate the comic sweetness of last year's hit.
Mr.
Carvey's character leaves a tape recorder by his bed at night.
Each morning he turns it on and listens to his own voice remind him that he is a detective named Maurice Pogue.
Or as he tells himself, "You're a small-time gumshoe" in Venice, Calif.
The film has a 1930's or 40's story, and sometimes style, trapped in a 90's comedy.
A woman named Sarah Novak (Valeria Golino), dressed in a 40's suit and hat, comes dashing into Pogue's run-down office, saying: "They're following me. They're trying to kill me." Soon Pogue learns that Sarah is supposedly dead, and that they are both being hunted by a thug looking for a coin worth $7 million.


New Yorkers in Congress at War With a Lawyer
In the world of law, few things draw so many sniffs as the contingency fee, with its enduring image of the advocate in hot pursuit of the ambulance.
And in the world of government, the same goes for lobbying, with its whiff of cigar smoke and influence-peddling.
Now a debate over the nexus between the two is riling Congress.
As usual, there is money at stake.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Monday about the conversion of Russian military industries misidentified the Russian manager shown.
He was Gerbert A. Yefrimov, not Viktor Pavlenko.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SPOT NEWS AND STREET PHOTOGRAPHY BY ANDREW SAVULICH," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly; $1 for those under 12.
Information: (212) 860-1777.


A Health Fair Focuses Its Message on AIDS


I.B.M. Set To Recast Marketing Stress on Solutions Instead of Machines
I.B.M. is beginning the most significant overhaul of its marketing force in decades to try to recast the company as mainly a supplier of solutions for specific industries instead of just a seller of machines, industry executives said yesterday.
The reorganization, to be announced to all I.B.M. employees today, will create 13 different industry groups within the company's worldwide marketing force.
The industry units will focus on providing information-processing products and services tailored for different businesses like finance, petroleum, insurance, health and travel.


Baseball; Gallego Goads the Yankees With His Serious Thoughts
When Don Mattingly addressed his Yankee teammates last Friday in Oakland because their play had occasionally lacked desire, Mike Gallego was happy to hear the critical words.
Someone else had noticed.
Maybe, Gallego thought, Mattingly's comments would have an impact and help to insure that this season would be memorable.
Gallego is an intelligent infielder who has a World Series ring from his days with the Athletics and he has passionate opinions about the Yankees.
He thinks the Yankees can win the American League East, but he is wary about their plodding along and missing opportunities because of a tepid approach.
He has observed instances of lackadaisical play this season and these bother him.


Home Video
Out With the Old  This spring, video stores are weeding their shelves.
With games becoming a hot commodity, space is needed, and at such chains as Tower and West Coast Video slow-moving cassettes are becoming expendable.
"The computers show when a title has died," said Steven Apple, a vice president of West Coast Video, the country's second largest chain, after Blockbuster.
"We saw hundreds that had stopped renting and were collecting dust, so we got rid of them."


Ready the Plows! Snow Is in the (Eventual) Forecast


It Was Nothing, Richter Says of Shutouts
The goaltender almost sounded guilty.
"Our forwards are hustling," Mike Richter said after the Rangers stifled the Washington Capitals, 3-0, for their third consecutive victory in the four-of-seven-games series.
"And our defense is hustling to the point where it gives the opposing forwards less time. If they have less time, they're not going to be able to move around as much, and you're going to be able to keep track of them a lot easier. If that's the case, your job is made easier.


Giuliani Wants Better Contract Deal With School Custodians
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani refused yesterday to accept a tentative labor agreement between the school system and the union for its custodians, saying the deal that the Schools Chancellor hailed as a "revolution" just the day before did not go nearly far enough.
The Mayor, whose office must approve any contract with the custodians' union, said that many of the provisions cited by the Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, as union concessions were in fact nonbinding agreements that must still be worked out with the custodians.
Although the Mayor did not say outright that he would veto the agreement, he strongly suggested that he wanted some or all of it renegotiated.
That would set up the possibility of a renewed confrontation between City Hall and the Chancellor.


Large Retailers Report 3.3% April Sales Growth
While the weak sales figures for April reported by the nation's major retailers yesterday do not appear to reflect the percolating economy, they do not necessarily suggest consumers have stopped shopping, leading analysts say.
April sales by major retail chains grew only 3.3 percent last month, according to a Salomon Brothers monthly index that measures same-store sales, or purchases at stores open at least a year.
That gain was considerably less than the 11 percent growth in March, but was slightly higher than the 2.6 percent improvement in April 1993.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc.(EBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Theater; A Family As Metaphor, Set to Music
A subtle spirit of restlessness permeates even the most melodic phrases in the score of "Christina Alberta's Father," Polly Pen's ambitious musical adaptation of the H. G. Wells novel at the Vineyard Theater.
Set in England in the early part of this century, the social fable portrays a nation finally unfastening the corset of Victorian mores, and there's a growing sense of both apprehension and liberation behind the work's winning tunefulness.
Ms.
Pen, the show's librettist and author as well as composer, brought a similar aura of beguiling tension to "Goblin Market," the 1985 work based on Christina Rossetti's narrative poem.
A nearly perfect chamber musical, which explored sexual repression through fairy-tale imagery, it set a standard by which its creators will always be measured.


Review/Film; Another Sly, Dizzy Romp With Pedro Almodovar
Pedro Almodovar continues to give new meaning to the phrase screwball comedy with his antic, gleefully fashion-conscious bedroom farces, each of which has its own lovingly developed kinky streak.
Mr.
Almodovar's new "Kika" finds the film maker working in a relatively innocent vein, which means only voyeurism, self-flagellation, a slapstick rape sequence, and an orange section used as a sexual device.
Orange section?
Don't ask.
Viewers familiar with the full Almodovar oeuvre probably won't have to.
"Kika" is actually one of this film maker's more buoyant recent efforts, a sly, rambunctious satire that moves along merrily until it collapses -- as many Almodovar films finally do -- under the weight of its own clutter.
Like "High Heels," its dourer 1991 predecessor, this film insists on incorporating a darker murder plot that weighs down its giddier aspects.
As such, the murder story is superfluous.
Mr.
Almodovar invests even his films' zanier elements with serious meaning, and those lighter ingredients are a lot more fun.


J. Czechlewski, 85; Led Polish Groups
Joseph F. Czechlewski, a retired New York lawyer who was active in Polish-American political and cultural affairs, died on Wedneday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 85 and had homes in Manhattan and Wainscott, L.I.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Diner's Journal
Outdoors and Tranquil
Looking down, you can see the entire length of Fifth Avenue; if you squint, you can even make out Washington Square.
Looking across, the hidden tops of buildings come into view: the ornate penthouse of the St.
Regis, done up with curtains and flowerboxes and looking like the home of a French dowager, and the top few floors of Takashimaya, hovering like a temple in the sky.
Looking up, bigger buildings fill the horizon, dwarfing this terrace on the 23d floor.
Above it all floats a wide expanse of sky and sunshine.
The Peninsula's Pen-Top Bar and Terrace has an extraordinary view.


Titan Wheel Int'l(TWI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jury Rejects Extortion Charges Against 4 Construction Workers
A jury in Brooklyn yesterday acquitted four black and Hispanic construction workers charged with extorting money and jobs from construction firms.
A fifth was convicted on two counts but acquitted on several more.
The five were the first to go on trial from a group of 31 people who were indicted last year on Federal charges of extortion and conspiracy.
The Government charged that the defendants led organizations of minority construction workers that used threats of labor unrest and violence to coerce firms into giving their members jobs, and also demanded payoffs, no-show jobs and subcontracts.


Consoltex Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Salant Corp.(SLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Spartan Motors Inc.(SPAR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CONTINENTAL AIRLINES INC. (CAI.A,N)
Continental Airlines Inc., blaming bad winter weather and problems in starting its new short-haul service, said yesterday that it lost nearly $71.6 million in the first quarter.
The loss, however, was substantially less than that incurred in the corresponding period a year earlier, when the company lost $109.5 million.


2 Stars to Compete
CARL LEWIS, the three-time Olympic long jump gold medalist, and JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE, the world record-holder in the heptathlon, have entered the Reebok New York Games May 22 at Columbia University. (AP)


Only the Law Protects Medical Consumer
To the Editor:
Your April 25 front-page article on the fear of liability suits by suppliers of medical device materials does a disservice to hundreds of thousands of victims of untested, unsafe medical devices.
While Dow Corning and DuPont complain about "fear of lawsuits," you do not mention that product liability actions are almost the consumer's only protection from dangerous, defective medical devices.


Art in Review
Laurie Simmons
Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through May 28
Sure, ventriloquists' dummies can talk, but can they think?
In Laurie Simmons' new color photographs, they can, although their thoughts turn out to be as dumb as one might expect.


Bengals Sign Wilkinson To Rich Six-Year Deal
Just 11 days after they drafted him despite a contract impasse, the Cincinnati Bengals made defensive lineman DAN WILKINSON the highest-paid player in their history yesterday.
Wilkinson, the first player taken in the April 24 draft, signed a six-year, $14.4 million contract.
Before the draft, the sides were at odds because of money and because General Manager MIKE BROWN was offering no "voidable years," a shortening of the contract that would allow Wilkinson to become a free agent after four years.


No Headline
"It hit the wire and just came tumbling down right in front of my car. I just slammed on the brakes so I wouldn't hit it. It just kept burning. Vehicles were zig-zagging all over the place, trying to get out of the way." FRANK DePINTO, who dodged a helicopter on a highway in New Jersey.  [ A1:4. ]


Pioneering Bronx Plant To Recycle City's Paper
In the first inner-city project of its type in the nation, one of the country's leading environmental organizations, two paper companies and a community development group are expected to announce a proposal today for a $100 million plant in the South Bronx to produce recycled paper from New York City's trash.
Proponents say the project is intended to take advantage of what environmentalists call the "urban forest" -- the vast amounts of paper discarded by offices every day.
But for residents of the South Bronx, the plant would also be intended to create perhaps 300 new jobs and bring other economic benefits, including housing, training, day care and health care services for the workers.


Kmart
The Kmart Corporation, the No.2 retailer in the country behind Wal-Mart Stores, reported that its same-store sales fell by 1.6 percent in April, although sales includig stores not open for a full year rose by 2.9 percent, to $2.62 billion.
Kmart attributed the shortfall to curtailed shopping activity because of severe winter weather.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
RETHINKS PEACEKEEPING  The Clinton Administration announced a long-awaited policy on peacekeeping that rejects many of the ways the United Nations could be used for that role.
The directive is a sharp departure from Bill Clinton's campaign vision of the United Nations as the global policeman.
A1  Two unpalatable choices may loom on Haiti if sanctions fail.
A10


Interprovincial Pipe Line reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Bumpy Ride for Investors


Israel Improved Health Care in Gaza Strip
To the Editor:
With Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip imminent, it is appropriate to rectify reports relying on sources hostile to the Israeli administration that have given a distorted picture of health care in Gaza.
At one point you called the health system a "shambles" because of "Israeli neglect and the six-year Palestinian uprising." The facts are otherwise.


Caned Youth Gets Visit In Singapore
An American diplomat was permitted today to see Michael P. Fay, the 18-year-old American who was flogged here for vandalism, and reported to his family that the jailed teen-ager was sedated and still in pain, with deep slashing wounds on his buttocks.
"They drew blood and got the skin off," his father, George Fay, said in a telephone interview after being briefed on his son's condition.
"I don't know the difference between a light caning and a severe caning. But let's put it this way, if this was a light one, I'd hate to know what a severe one is like."


Mother and Boyfriend Held In Disappearance of Girl, 4
The mother of a missing 4-year-old Queens girl and the mother's boyfriend were arrested yesterday, after the boyfriend told investigators that the mother killed the girl and that he disposed of the body, the police said.
The two suspects, Richard Morales and Maria Ortiz, were charged with endangering the welfare of a minor.


No Headline


Digital Equipment Will Cut 20,000 More to Reduce Costs
Fulfilling analysts' predictions, the Digital Equipment Corporation has said it plans to cut at least 20,000 more employees in an effort to reduce costs and return to profitability.
Robert B. Palmer, the president and chief executive, told employees this week that the company would make the cuts over an unspecified period based on achieving a higher level of revenue per employee.


Legg Mason Inc.(LM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bridge
The prestigious Cavendish Pairs begins its 20th annual running today at Loews New York Hotel, 569 Lexington Avenue at 51st Street.
The warm-up event, the Cavendish Teams, played at Honors club, 42 East 74th Street, ended yesterday in a victory for Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif., Bob Goldman of Highland Village, Tex., David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J.
The diagramed deal, played Thursday evening, helped Andy Goodman of San Francisco, John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Mike Albert of Omaha and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., to take the lead.
At both tables East opened three diamonds, trading on favorable vulnerability.


Home Beneficial Corp.(HBENB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Gun Vote, An Odd Hero For Liberals
Representative Henry J. Hyde, the conservative Illinois Republican, politely demurred when the invitation came for an office chat with Senator Dianne Feinstein.
Ms.
Feinstein, the chief architect of a ban on assault weapons that had passed the Senate, had noticed that Mr.
Hyde had not taken a position on a similar ban pending in the House and thought he might be persuadable.


Mets Look Fine Until Franco Walks In
Pete Smith did exactly what the Mets asked of him.
He took the game through eight innings tonight at Busch Stadium, out-dueling the St.
Louis starter Bob Tewksbury, the winningest pitcher in the National League.
He left the game with the Mets ahead by one run in the ninth inning, and then waited patiently for reliever John Franco to seal the victory.
Smith's wait was in vain.
Instead of closing down the Cardinals for what would have been his eighth save of the season, Franco put in a nightmarish one-hit, four-walk performance that even he couldn't explain.
Franco's failure to get the job done gift-wrapped a 3-2 victory for the Cardinals.


Weston (George) Ltd.(WN) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Up Against a Mighty Wind


A Mixed Message From City Hall
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's capital budget for New York City includes a sensible shift from politically popular new construction to cost-efficient refurbishing and rentals.
But he muddies this good move by shortchanging schools and mass transit, and then allocating $128 million for an unnecessary new prison kitchen in the Bronx.
The budget message covers 10 years, through the year 2003.
Ten-year planning is a sound concept, but beyond the first few years the dollar estimates are always soft.
It is, therefore, neither certain nor significant that this plan is, as Mr.
Giuliani contends, "the largest in the city's history." Indeed, boasting about its impressive size -- $46 billion in all -- tends to obscure the fact that he would cut new commitments by the city and he hopes for a bigger share of funding from Albany and Washington.


Padres' Bell Is Suspended
Derek Bell of San Diego yesterday became the latest player to make the National League suspension list.
Len Coleman, the league president, suspended the Padre outfielder for five games for charging the mound last Saturday after Pedro Martinez of Montreal struck him out.
Bell immediately appealed the suspension, thus staying it until the appeal is heard.
The outfielder, who had objected to the proximity to his chin of the pitch before strike three, was also fined $500, becoming the seventh player Coleman has fined this season.
At this time last season, no player had been suspended.
Now, Benito Santiago of Florida is serving a four-game suspension, and Bell and Reggie Sanders of Cincinnati have appealed five-game suspensions.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


More Fraud Accusations by Ex-Rockwell Workers
Officials of the Rockwell International Corporation say they were baffled last week when the Justice Department announced that it would back a whistle-blower in a lawsuit accusing the company's Downey, Calif., machine shop of overcharging NASA for space shuttle parts built during the 1980's.
But the officials became outright angry this week when two former employees of machine shops in Houston and Canoga Park, Calif., called The New York Times and said that they, too, had observed supervisors at their shops falsely billing accounts and had seen Rockwell machinists either sitting idle for most of the day or working on personal projects while their hours were charged to NASA.
Sewing and Welding
Perhaps most startling of these latest accusations are charges that Rockwell employees who were assigned to make sleeping bags and other gear for the space shuttle were making dresses and clothing for their families and friends, and that welders who were supposed to be making equipment for the shuttle were making parts for a racing car or doing their homework for outside classes.


METRO DIGEST
GIRL LOST IN WOODS IS FOUND ALIVE Displaying survival skills that impressed local people familiar with the outdoors, a 14-year-old Hasidic girl from Brooklyn who disappeared during a school outing in a Connecticut state park was found by the police in dense, swampy woods, frightened and tired but praying by the side of a tree.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY GIULIANI OFFERS NEW PLAN ON HOMELESS Mayor Giuliani announced a new homeless plan that for the first time would deny shelter to homeless families who refuse to participate in treatment and training programs.
The Mayor sketched out what he called a new philosophy for the city's homeless policy, emphasizing the responsibility of the homeless to help themselves, in exchange for the shelter and social services the city offers.
Page 1.
INVESTIGATORS SPLIT ON TOXICS REPORT The Department of Investigation said that the city had no legal obligation to give the state a report on toxic contaminants found at a site where the city wants to build a trash incinerator.
At the same time, investigators said the city should have turned over the report "to comply with the spirit of full disclosure." Page 26. 2 ARRESTED IN GIRL'S DISAPPEARANCE The mother of a missing 4-year-old Queens girl and the mother's boyfriend were arrested after the boyfriend told investigators that the mother killed the girl and that he disposed of the body, the police said.
Page 26.
TEEN-AGER FOUND GUILTY IN PARK SLAYING A Brooklyn teen-ager was convicted of killing ateacher who resisted a group of youths trying to steal his bicycle in Prospect Park.
Page 27.
SMALLER KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL URGED A panel set up to determine the future of the botched Kings County Hospital reconstruction project recommended building a smaller hospital, with significantly fewer beds, and establishing a system of community clinics.
Page 27.
ANGER AND SOLACE AT FUNERAL FOR 3 There was a search for solace amid anger among the 1,500 mourners who filled Our Lady of Guadalupe Roman Catholic Church in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, as Mass was said for a mother and her two daughters, run down and killed by an unlicensed driver who had twice the legal limit of alcohol in his blood.
Page 27.
AIDES SAY GIULIANI SEEKS NEW SAVINGS Mayor Giuliani is examining ways to refinance the city's debt, hoping to save millions of dollars to help close a $2.3 billion deficit.
Page 29.
DETECTIVE AMONG 3 CHARGED IN RAPE A police detective and a city social worker vacationing together in southern California were arrested and charged with a third man in the rape of a 26-year-old woman.
Page 29.
REGION COALITION TO BACK SHARPTON A large coalition of black and Hispanic elected officials, including half the black members of the State Legislature, plans to endorse the Rev.
Al Sharpton this weekend in his campaign to unseat Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Page 28.
LIFE TERM IN YOUTH'S STRANGLING A Clifton, N.J., man convicted of ordering four teen-agers to kill another boy, who was strangled after reciting the Hail Mary, was sentenced to life in prison.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Dan Howitt, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.


New Venture in Cyberspace By Silicon Graphics Founder
James H. Clark, the former Stanford University professor who founded Silicon Graphics Inc. and turned it into a leader in the work station market, has formed a new company aimed at what he sees as computing's next big trend: navigating cyberspace.
Mr.
Clark is the co-founder of the company with Marc Andreessen, a 22-year-old computer designer who helped create a program called Mosaic for retrieving information from the Internet, a global web of computer networks used by an estimated 20 million people.


Review/Film; The Three Ninja Siblings Are Back at Work, in Japan
The film "3 Ninjas Kick Back," the sequel to the hit 1992 children's movie "3 Ninjas," is as frantically disjointed as its forerunner was unnervingly slick.
In the follow-up, the same three plucky brothers -- Rocky, Colt and Tum Tum -- trained by their grandfather (Victor Wong) in the martial arts, travel all the way to Japan to outwit a slew of cartoonishly bumbling bad guys.
The incoherent story concerns a cave of gold that can be unlocked only with a dagger belonging to the boys' grandfather.
Koga (Sab Shimono), their teacher's embittered old enemy, dispatches his nephew's heavy-metal band to steal the weapon.
But neither the young musicians, who look and act like rejects from "Wayne's World," nor a gymnasium full of sumo wrestlers can deter the resourceful boy ninjas from keeping the dagger out of his hands.


INSIDE
Clinton Sued in Arkansas
A former Arkansas state employee sued President Clinton, accusing him of making a sexual advance while he was Governor in 1991.
Page 9 Colombia Legalizes Drug Use
A high court in Colombia has legalized personal use of cocaine, marijuana and other drugs.
Page 3.
Knicks Eliminate Nets
With a 102-92 victory in New Jersey, the Knicks won the series, 3-1, and next face the Chicago Bulls.
Page 31.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


North Korea Rebuffs U.S.
In a rebuff to the Clinton Administration, North Korea said today that it intended to hold to a plan to remove the nuclear reactor fuel at Yongbyon, a step that could add to its potential supply of bomb-grade material.
The North Korean rebuff came today in letters to Hans Blix, the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and Robert Gallucci, the top Clinton Administration official who handles North Korea.
Some Clinton Administration officials, who asked not to be identified, said that the North Korean letters might be a bargaining tactic and that it was too soon to say that negotiations over North Korea had collapsed.


CHRONICLE
Happy Mother's Day, PRINCESS STEPHANIE of Monaco.


Sithe Energies Inc.(SYT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Atlanta Gas &amp; Light Co.  (ATG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fed Nominee Pledges He'll Fight Inflation
President Clinton's nominee to become vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan S. Blinder, sought today to reassure financial markets worried about inflation that he would not squander the gains made in the last decade in holding down price increases.
Mr.
Blinder, who has a reputation for fretting less about inflation than most of the Fed's current members, expressed concern at his Senate confirmation hearing that while inflation was low now, the current economic expansion could push prices up again, unless growth slowed in the next two years.
Mr.
Blinder, an economist from Princeton University, is a member of the White House's Council of Economic Advisers.


Anger and Solace for 3 Hit by Car
There was a search for solace amid roiling anger among the 1,500 mourners who filled Our Lady of Guadalupe Roman Catholic Church in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, yesterday morning as Mass was said for a mother and her two daughters, run down and killed Sunday night by an unlicensed driver who had twice the legal limit of alcohol in his blood.
For 15 minutes, the bell above the Spanish-style church on 15th Avenue tolled slowly as the mourners filled the pews and spilled onto the steps outside the church door.
They sat in somber silence until, shaken by the sight of 18 pallbearers bringing three white-draped coffins down the aisle, their muffled communal sob rippled toward the altar.


Critical Freedom
When the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington ruled in February that a book critic's use of the phrase "sloppy journalism" could be the basis of an author's libel suit against a newspaper, the news and publishing businesses were alarmed.
The court revived a lawsuit by the author Dan E. Moldea against The New York Times, finding that the phrase and some supporting examples could be proved defamatory and false.
This newspaper, joined by other news organizations and even by publishers whose product is frequently the target of barbed critiques by reviewers, petitioned the court for reconsideration.
In a rare and gratifying turnaround, the court has reversed itself and ordered the lawsuit dismissed.


Patricia M. King, 56, Women's Historian
Patricia Miller King, director of the Radcliffe College library devoted to the history of women, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
Dr.
King, who lived in Cambridge, Mass., was 56.
The cause was lung cancer, a Radcliffe announcement said.


Review/Dance; Immortality And Horror With AIDS
Neil Greenberg's new "Not-About-AIDS-Dance," presented on Thursday night at the Kitchen, manages to convey, without sentimentality, not only the horror of death, illness and disappointment but also the meaningful ways in which life does doggedly continue.
But Mr.
Greenberg is not into uplift.
By integrating dance, snatches of music and sentences projected on the back wall of the stage, he has simply created a spare replication of a life.
In the process, he has also created an important, moving and very beautiful work about the experience of living in the age of AIDS.


Ogden Corp.(OG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ailing Smokers Sue the Tobacco Industry
A group of smokers suffering diseases like lung cancer and emphysema has sued the tobacco industry in a Florida state court, contending that addiction to cigarettes has caused their health problems.
In a broad assault that seems to include every accusation of impropriety ever made against the industry, six plaintiffs are asking for $200 billion in damages for themselves and all other smokers affected in the same manner.


Review/Pop; Turning 50's Rock On Its Ear
In alternative rock, even the primitives are professionals.
Jad Fair, who has led Half Japanese since the late 1970's, performed at the Knitting Factory on Wednesday night with his own band, sharing a bill with Kicking Giant.
Both bands are unpolished on principle.
Kicking Giant consists of just a guitarist and a drummer; Mr.
Fair leads a more conventional four-piece lineup, including Sheena Fair, his wife, on drums.
But he regularly smudges the music with skittering, gnashing guitar noise.
For both bands, anything slicker would get in the way of the music's emotions.
Mr.
Fair is the kind of rocker emancipated by punk rock: a nerdy, bespectacled guy with a nasal tenor voice and a determinedly innocent optimism.
His songs seesaw between utopian love and childlike misadventures.
In "Silver and Katherine," he sang, "Everything I thought was right turned out to be so good, so true and so right." In another song, he becomes upset that his girlfriend doesn't answer the door, then finds her tied up by a monster he has to slay.
At times, as in "The Last Straw," Mr.
Fair does get angry: "There's only so far you can push me/And buddy, that was it." But he's a lover, not a fighter.


Classical Music in Review
Vivaldi's Venice  Alice Tully Hall


Selective Insurance Group (SIGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Detective Among 3 Men Charged in Rape
A New York City Police Department detective and a city social worker vacationing together in southern California were arrested on Thursday and charged with a third man in the rape of a 26-year-old woman, the authorities said.
Thomas J. Kid, 27, who has been on the police force for seven years and is assigned to the narcotics division in the Bronx, John J. Calimano, 27, a caseworker for the Child Welfare Administration, and Richard D. Haime, 28, were being held in a Burbank jail on $1 million bail each, a spokesman for the Burbank Police Department said.


Check-Cashing Outlets Show Savings Falloff
To the Editor:
You miss the major reason for the rapid growth of check-cashing outlets in your April 18 news article about a report on the phenomenon in New York City released by the Public Advocate, Mark Green.


Career Horizons Inc.(CARH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about efforts by companies to reduce packaging waste misidentified the company that introduced toilet paper rolls without cores.
It is the James River Corporation, not Scott Paper.


Corrections
An article last Saturday about severance offers for municipal employees in New York City misstated the total number of workers at the city's Commission on Human Rights, where 52 workers accepted the severance offer.
The agency has a total of 197 employees, not 112.
The additional 85 positions are financed by state and Federal money.


Cineplex Odeon Corp.(CPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Q &amp; A
Bonds Retired Early  Q. Can I claim a tax loss on bonds called by the issuer?
If I make a profit on called bonds, will I be taxed on it?
CONSTANTINE MELINTE, Manhattan  A. Many bonds are issued with a call provision that lets an issuer retire all of the debt or a portion of it at a set price before the stated maturity date.
The call date usually is 10 years from the date of issue and provides for a premium to be paid.
This call provision gives the issuer flexibility and the ability to reduce debt costs.
"Any premium paid cannot be deducted, nor can it produce a loss, because the Government views any premium paid as an offset to the tax-free interest on the bond," said Heather L. Ruth, president of the Public Securities Association.
"However, profit produced on a call will be taxed."
If you acquire a bond when it is issued at its par value and the bond is called at a premium, you must report this premium as a capital gain.
The maximum tax rate on a long-term capital gain, or an investment held more than one year, is 28 percent.
If you acquire the bond when it is issued at a discount to its face value and the bond is later called, any excess over your adjusted basis price will be the capital gain.
Trusts for Children  Q. How can I establish a trust for my children by making an initial contribution and subsequent annual contributions?
R.M.
GIULIANELLI, Maplecrest, N.Y.
A.
The most popular -- and least expensive -- way to set aside money for a young child is to open a bank or brokerage account under the Uniform Gift to Minors Act.
A possible drawback is that the money in this account must be paid to the minor at the age of 18 or 21, depending on state law.
An alternative is a Section 2403(c) trust, which allows you and your spouse to make contributions of up to $20,000 a year without having to pay a gift tax.
"The trustee holds the property until the minor reaches 21," said Robert W. Benjamin, a partner in the New York law firm of Esanu Katsky Korins &amp; Siger.
"There is then a window of opportunity for the child to withdraw trust assets or the property may remain in trust until a specified later age."
Inheriting an I.R.A.
Q.
What rules govern an individual retirement account that has been inherited by someone other than a spouse?
SEYMOUR YUSEM, Manhattan
A.
A nonspouse beneficiary is not permitted to treat an inherited I.R.A. as his or her own.
This means the beneficiary cannot make additional contributions or roll over the account.
Taxes are owed when distributions are made to the beneficiary.
"If the I.R.A. owner dies before the April 1 following the year he would have reached age 70 1/2, the entire I.R.A. balance would have to be distributed to the beneficiary by the end of the fifth year following the owner's date of death," said James DeJesus, a partner in the Deloitte &amp; Touche accounting firm.
But if the I.R.A. owner had already begun withdrawals, distributions must continue at least as rapidly as under the previous schedule.


SURGE IN NEW JOBS REKINDLES WORRIES OF MORE INFLATION
In an unexpectedly vigorous performance, the economy generated 267,000 new jobs in April, showing that it was more than regaining the ground it had lost to harsh winter weather.
Today's employment report jolted the stock and bond markets as it raised new concerns about the possibility of a surge of inflation from a rapidly growing economy.
Interest rates jumped.


Borg Shows His Moves
The 1994 Champions Tour doesn't begin until next week in Las Vegas, Nev., but BJORN BORG, one of the stars of nine-event, over-35 tour, was in crack form in New York yesterday, delivering a dazzling array of payoff strokes.
His forehand was impressive as he signed autographs with a flourish, and he went back deep to pose against the logo of the tour sponsor, the U.S.
News &amp; World Report.


Two Founders of Microsoft Buy a Biotechnology Stake
William H. Gates and Paul G. Allen, co-founders of the Microsoft Corporation, have invested $10 million in Darwin Molecular Technologies Inc., the company reported today.
Darwin, based in Bothwell, Wash., is a biotechnology company that hopes to use DNA sequences in the human genome to create novel drugs for cancer, AIDS and autoimmune disease.


The Calais Coach Was Never Like This


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8  EMBARGO IMPOSED ON HAITI
The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to impose a near-total trade embargo on Haiti to try to force its military rulers to permit the return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President.  1


Geographic Returns to Its Beginnings
After 20 years on public television, the National Geographic specials are to return to commercial network television next year as NBC begins a two-year deal to broadcast five specials a year.
The specials ran on CBS for 10 years beginning in 1965, then switched to PBS, where they have been among that network's most popular programs.
But National Geographic, seeking the widest possible audiences and concerned about what a spokeswoman called "tight funding" on PBS, asked all the commercial networks if they would like to buy the series.
NBC responded.


Experimental Drugs Linked To Gulf War Veterans' Ills
Some of the unexplained illnesses suffered by veterans of the Persian Gulf war may have been caused by drugs given to protect them against anticipated chemical and biological warfare, according to a Senate committee's investigation that was released today.
Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, chairman of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee, said his panel's staff had spent six months looking into possible causes of the ailments reported by the veterans and had found a link with drugs given experimentally to more than 400,000 of the 700,000 troops who served in the war.


Stocks Drop on Report Of Additional New Jobs
Bracing for days for a blow from the Government's employment data, traders nonetheless flinched yesterday and sent stock prices plummeting when the Labor Department announced especially welcome news on job creation.
To Wall Street professionals, the good news that the economy is producing more jobs than anticipated has the darker side of implying either future inflation or a brake on the economy as the Federal Reserve Board fights expected inflation with higher short-term interest rates.


Are the Capitals Now Out of Time? Yes, They Are
To and from practice today, the Rangers traveled in a bus that had a vanity license plate on its rear.
Printed as a single word, its message was "OUTATIME."
It was the appropriate thought, but for the wrong team.
It would have been better to tag it to the backsides of the Washington Capitals.
They lost to the Rangers, 3-0, on Thursday night and now trail them by 3 games to 0 in the Eastern Conference semifinals, the second round of the four-round Stanley Cup tournament.
Game 4 is Saturday night at USAir Arena; a defeat ends the Capitals' season.


Special Session of Connecticut General Assembly Is Called


Review/Dance; Pierrot, With All the Other Usual Suspects
Thea Musgrave provided Jennifer Muller with the scenario as well as the score for "Pierrot," which Jennifer Muller/The Works presented on Thursday night at the Kaye Playhouse.
This New York premiere was by far the most taut of the program's three dances.
Because it was also the only one in which Ms.
Muller worked within confines established for her by a collaborator, it suggested that she may sometimes need an editor to prevent her inventiveness from becoming garrulousness.
Donna Marie Larsen designed 20th-century costumes for the cast.
Nevertheless "Pierrot" was firmly based on traditional commedia dell'arte characters.
Ricardo Sarcos was sad and droopy in the title role.
Leda Meredith made Columbine a pert minx.
And Marcelo Pereira was sinister as well as suave as Harlequin.
Both men courted Columbine and, as tradition dictated, Pierrot was spurned.


Nagle Cut By the Jets; Giants Let Jackson Go
A day after the agreement with Jack Trudeau made Browning Nagle one quarterback too many, the Jets shed Nagle and his $825,000 salary yesterday.
The release of Nagle, which had been expected after the Jets came to terms with Trudeau on Thursday as the backup to Boomer Esiason, came as the Giants attempted to get their payroll in order by waiving Mark Jackson, the highly paid wide receiver they signed a year ago, plus kicker David Treadwell and offensive lineman Clarence Jones.


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


3 Family Members Run Down by Unlicensed Driver Are Buried


Terreri Suddenly Has Devils Thinking Positive Thoughts
What have you done lately?
That principle, so important in the Stanley Cup playoffs, lofted goaltender Chris Terreri from anonymity to the man of the moment for the Devils.
The Devils needed a lift on Thursday night and Terreri provided it with a splendid performance in New Jersey's 4-2 victory over the Bruins in Game 3 at Boston Garden.
The victory put the Devils back into this four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series, which Boston leads, 2-1, heading into Game 4 here Saturday night.


No Headline
I can't remember the first thing I said when I saw her.
I was too excited.
But when I heard I just said, 'Thank God.' I am a pessimist.
I don't believe in miracles but I do believe in God. -- ERNEST FELDMAN, whose daughter was found in swampy woods two days after she disappeared during a class outing.  [ 28:1. ]


Treasury Yields Surge, With 30-Year Bond at 7.54%
Investors, afraid of both inflation and the Federal Reserve, scurried for cover yesterday, sending Treasury bond yields up nearly a quarter of a percentage point and stock prices tumbling.
The yield on the 30-year bond jumped to 7.54 percent, from 7.33 percent on Thursday, its highest close since Dec. 3, 1992, when it was 7.56 percent.
The surge in yields was larger than last week's 16-basis point jump on Thursday and the largest single-day jump since just after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990.
By late in the day the price, which moves in the opposite direction, was off 25/32 to 8427/32.


North Korea Yields a Bit
American officials voiced pessimism this week about the chances for a diplomatic deal on North Korea's nuclear program.
But Pyongyang has actually taken two welcome and essential steps to allay the world's concern that it is bent on developing a nuclear arsenal.
North Korea will allow international inspectors to complete an inspection they began in mid-March to assure other nations that no nuclear material has been diverted from the reactor over the past year.
And it has invited inspectors to witness the refueling of its nuclear reactor at Yongbyon this month.
That should prevent any immediate diversion of nuclear material to make nuclear weapons; the reactor and its spent fuel could contain enough plutonium to make up to five bombs.


Showboat Bid Wins Sydney Casino
The license to build and operate the first casino in Sydney, Australia, was awarded yesterday to a group made up of the Atlantic City gambling company Showboat Inc. and an Australian developer.
The winning bid, $275 million, exceeded by at least $80 million a rival offer from Australia's richest man, Kerry Packer, and the casino operator Circus Circus Enterprises Inc., based in Las Vegas, Nev., according to one industry analyst.


IIC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sex Harassment Suit Based on 1860's Law
As a vehicle for bringing her suit in Federal District Court in Little Rock, Ark., Paula Jones and her lawyer have chosen two sections of a Reconstruction-era Federal civil rights statute enacted to protect former slaves from mistreatment by local officials and the Ku Klux Klan.
The two parts of the law, Section 1983 and Section 1985, have become a powerful tool for challenging a variety of official actions that have nothing to do with race, the statute's original purpose.


No Headline
The Right Rev.
Harold Barrett Robinson, Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Western New York from 1970 to 1988 and Assisting Bishop of the Diocese of New York from 1989 to 1993, died on Thursday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
Bishop Robinson, who lived in Manhattan, was 71.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


LDDS Communications Inc.(LDDS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Again Rebukes an Envoy For Yielding to Bosnian Serbs
For the second time in a week, the United States issued an extraordinary public rebuke to Yasushi Akashi, the United Nations' special envoy to the former Yugoslavia, this time for agreeing to let seven Serbian tanks enter the exclusion zone around Sarajevo.
Christine Shelly, a State Department spokeswoman, said the United States vigorously objected to this violation of the 20-kilometer exclusion zone -- about 12.4 miles, suggesting that letting the tanks enter the area sent out mixed messages about international resolve.
No Call for Resignation
Ms.
Shelley said the Clinton Administration had conveyed its displeasure about Mr.
Akashi's decision to senior United Nations officials, adding that the decision to permit the tanks to enter the zone was "extremely troubling."


No Headline


Smaller Hospital Advised By Kings County Panel
A panel set up to determine the future of the troubled Kings County Hospital reconstruction project yesterday recommended building a smaller hospital, with significantly fewer beds, and establishing a system of community clinics.
But the new plan pared its nearly $1 billion budget by only $16 million.


Business Digest
The Economy
The economy generated 267,000 new jobs in April, in an unexpectedly vigorous performance, showing that it is more than regaining ground lost to harsh winter weather.
The report jolted the bond and stock markets as interest rates rose amid new inflation fears.
Government figures showed that the gain would have been 73,000 higher had it not been for a strike in the trucking industry.
The nation's unemployment rate edged down one-tenth of a point, to 6.4 percent.  [ Page 1. ]  The jobless rate edged up slightly in New York State, even though it fell modestly in New York City and New Jersey.  [ 51. ]
Alan S. Blinder sought to reassure financial markets that if he became the Federal Reserve's vice chairman, he would not squander the gains made in holding down inflation.  [ 39. ]
Consumer credit shot up 11.1 percent in March, the biggest jump in three months.  [ 49. ]
Markets
The bond market was jolted by fears of inflation and the Federal Reserve after the Government reported an unexpectedly large increase in jobs in April.
The yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond soared to 7.54 percent, from 7.33 percent.  [ 39. ]
Stock prices fell sharply as interest rates surged.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 26.47 points, to 3,669.50.  [ 40. ]
Gold prices surged amid concerns that the Federal Reserve was not moving swiftly enough to head off inflation.  [ 47. ]
The dollar tumbled against most currencies as selloffs in the bond and stock markets eroded confidence in the currency.  [ 47. ]
Companies
Nomura America has begun discussions about a possible bid to get R. H. Macy out of bankruptcy.  [ 39. ]
More accusations of false billing have been raised by employees of Rockwell International, angering company executives.  [ 39. ]
Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco kept secret its research about the hazards of cigarettes, company documents show.  [ 1. ]
The former head of Tenneco died of a brain tumor.  [ 30. ]
Navigating cyberspace is the basis for a new company that hopes to profit by commercializing the Internet.  [ 39. ]  Two lawyers formed a company to make ads pervasive on the Internet.  [ 51. ]
I.B.M. sold its New York headquarters building to a joint venture run by Edward J. Minskoff and Odyssey Partners.  [ 41. ]
Digital Equipment plans to cut at least 20,000 more employees in an effort to reduce costs and return to profitability.  [ 41. ]
Southwest Airlines may overhaul how it sells tickets.  [ 38. ]
Boatmen's Bancshares agreed to acquire National Mortgage for $160 million in stock.  [ 41. ]
Microsoft's co-founders have invested $10 million in Darwin Molecular Technologies.  [ 51. ]
International
Sydney, Australia, awarded a license for its first casino to an Atlantic City gambling company and an Australian developer, which made a bid of $275 million.  [ 41. ]
The Channel Tunnel opened between Britain and France.  [ 6. ]
Your Money
Mutual fund buyers need to beware when stockbrokers promote funds with no sales charge.
Usually, these funds have a level load, which means there are hidden fees that reduce returns.  [ 37. ]
The markets' steep drop in March took a big toll on investor confidence, a national survey shows.  [ 37. ]
The I.R.S. is cracking down on taxpayers who don't provide adequate substantiation of their tax deductions.  [ 37. ]


COMPANY NEWS
CRESCENT AIRWAYS INC., Lawrenceville, Ga., signed a letter of intent to purchase Papillon Hawaii Ltd., a helicopter tour company, from Papillon Airways Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.
MEM CO., INC., Northvale, N.J., a fragrance and toiletries manufacturer, agreed to acquire the assets and trademark of British Sterling from Textron Inc., Providence, R.I., for $8.75 million.
VALLICORP HOLDINGS INC., Fresno, Calif., plans to acquire Mineral King Bancorp, Visalia, Calif., a bank holding company, for nearly $34 million.


Editors' Note
An article on April 29 described the formal nomination of Silvio Berlusconi, a conservative Italian politician, to assemble the country's next government.
Because of an editing error, one party in Mr.
Berlusconi's alliance, which won national elections last month, was described as fascist.


Homeless Plan Would Require That Families Accept Services
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced a new homeless plan yesterday that for the first time would deny shelter to homeless families who refuse to participate in treatment and training programs.
At a City Hall news conference, the Mayor sketched out what he called a new philosophy for the city's homeless policy, emphasizing the responsibility of the homeless to help themselves in exchange for the shelter and social services the city offers.
He also said the city would begin denying shelter to families who turn down more than three apartments offered by the city.


A's Are for Sale
The Oakland Athletics' owner, WALTER HAAS JR., said yesterday his family intends to sell the team, setting in motion a lease agreement that gives officials seven months to find a local buyer.
The Haas family, which purchased the team from Charlie Finley on Nov. 3, 1980, is seeking $85 million from any owner who would keep the franchise in Oakland, Calif.
If a buyer isn't found within seven months, the Haas family could sell the team to any buyer, including one who could move the franchise.
Haas, honorary chairman of Levi Strauss &amp; Co., said the team's market value probably was higher than $85 million.
The family said they set the price in an effort to keep the team from moving. (AP)


D&amp;K Wholesale Drug Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Separating Out the Puff In Mutual Fund Reports
WEDGED in the mailbox this time of year between the Victoria's Secret and the Harry &amp; David catalogues are annual reports from mutual funds.
Most often, investors toss the dense documents aside, preferring to linger over the latest lingerie or the new choices for the "Fruit of the Month."
It makes sense, though, to give the annual report a closer look.
Some fund managers let the numbers speak for themselves.
Others produce lyrical, heart-warming documents that make you proud to have put your money in such good hands.
And then there are the funds with wretched performance that fill their reports with euphemism in an attempt to put the best face on a bad year.
The reader's task is to cut to the heart of the matter.
If a fund did much worse than others with a similar investing style and objective, it may be time to sell.


Cambior Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fred Sadoff, Actor And Director, 68
Fred Sadoff, an actor and director whose 50-year career included productions on Broadway and the West End in London as well as films and television, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 68.
The cause was AIDS, said Adam Rodman, a friend.


Israelis Fear a Return of Displaced Arabs
A dispute broke out here today over one of the more emotion-laden issues in the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks: the fate of possibly hundreds of thousands of Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip who were displaced by the 1967 Middle East war.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said the future of those who had fled the war would be discussed within a month by a committee made up of Israel, the Palestine Liberation Organization, Egypt and Jordan, the country where most of those Palestinians went after leaving the West Bank.


Classical Music in Review
Cheryl Studer Soprano Carnegie Hall


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Man Is Fatally Shot In Midtown Robbery
A 30-year-old trade school student was fatally shot yesterday on a busy midtown Manhattan corner in what appeared to be a robbery attempt by two assailants, the police said.
The shooting occurred at 2:20 P.M. at 19th Street and the Avenue of Americas, the police said.


Hungary Sheltered Jews in World War II
To the Editor:
Re your report on the 50th anniversary of the holocaust of Hungarian Jews, "Hungary and the Jews: Looking at 1944 Is Difficult" (news article, April 18): Prime Minister Peter Boross and Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky did not decline an invitation to speak at a ceremony at the Opera House.
They were simply not invited to speak.
The Government made its position clear in a statement on the 50th anniversary of Hungary's military occupation by Nazi Germany and the ensuing deportation of Jews from the provinces.


American Re Corp.(ARN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ogden Projects Inc.(OPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Faster Licensing Path Lured Helicopter Occupants to U.S.
It was a faster and cheaper path to their pilots' licenses that brought Anthony Grau and Jose Hermosilla to this country, and ultimately to their deaths in the crash of a helicopter training flight near the Lincoln Tunnel on Thursday.
American aviation law allows pilots to get their instructors' credentials in less than half the time that European countries require.
Like many others seeking the licenses and flight time that will win them the jobs they covet back home, Mr.
Grau, an instructor at Titan Helicopter Academy here, and Mr.
Hermosilla, an advanced trainee, had come to this country from Andorra, a small country near Spain, and from Madrid, respectively.


Video Artist Is Chosen For the Venice Biennale
Bill Viola, the video artist, has been chosen to represent the United States at the Venice Biennale next year.
Mr.
Viola, who is based in Long Beach, Calif., was selected by a standing committee of the National Endowment for the Arts.
His work, which has been shown internationally, received high praise at the 1992 Documenta, the major art show that takes place every five years in Kassel, Germany.
The choice of a video artist follows what seems to be a pattern of alternating between traditional painting and sculpture and less conventional kinds of art.
In 1988, the painter Jasper Johns was the American entry; in 1990, it was the installation artist Jenny Holzer, and at the last Biennale, in 1993, the sculptor Louise Bourgeois.


Montrouis Journal; Across the Mist, Haiti's Solution May Lie Offshore
It is barely visible through the thick shroud of haze that hangs in the Caribbean air this time of year.
But just 11 miles off the coast from here lies a nearly forgotten part of Haiti that is being increasingly seen as the key to a peaceful solution of this country's long-running political crisis.
United States policy is seemingly frozen between two options for restoring democracy to Haiti -- a reinforced international embargo or some form of military intervention -- that critics call either ineffective or politically unpalatable.
As a result, many experts in Haitian affairs are turning their attention to Ile de la Gonave, seeing it as both an ideal refuge for fleeing boat people and as a stepping stone toward the Haitian capital for the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Check-Cashing Outlets Show Savings Falloff; When Banks Withdraw
To the Editor:
Re your April 18 article on check cashers: A check-cashing service provides only part of the service of a bank, and the neglected services they do not offer have widespread economic and social ramifications, which deserve attention.
First, banks have traditionally provided a means by which poor people could accumulate the capital to climb into the middle class, by building personal wealth, providing in advance for children's educations, amassing money for the purchase and repair of houses or eventually bankrolling savings into business investment.


John P. Roche, 70, Scholar And Counselor to Presidents
John P. Roche, a political scientist, counselor to Presidents and emeritus professor at Tufts University, died yesterday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
A resident of Weston, Mass., he was 70.
The cause was complications after a stroke, a Tufts announcement said.
He had taught at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts since 1973.


Review/Dance; Ballet Theater Plays to Its Art's Many Strengths
American Ballet Theater celebrated the joy of dancing in several of the works it presented on Wednesday afternoon and evening at the Metropolitan Opera House.
All of them revealed that the company is in fine shape this season.
Harald Lander's "Etudes," which concluded the evening program, is an ode to ballet training that begins with dancers doing exercises at the barre, then offers a multitude of demanding scenes that exemplify various aspects of style.
Knudaage Riisager's orchestral score is, appropriately enough, based on the pedagogical exercises that Carl Czerny composed to challenge piano students.


CHRONICLE
The guest list has hit 1,000, the dais will hold 42 people, and there will be nine speakers when the New York Friars Club honors BARBARA WALTERS this evening at its 1994 Tribute Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Considering the logistics involved in putting it together, DAVID TEBET, the chairman of the event, and Ms.
Walters were sounding pretty relaxed yesterday.
"The biggest challenge is not to antagonize anyone as you can do when you're dealing with important people," Mr.
Tebet said.


Sequa Corp.(SQA.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bally Mfg. Corp.(BLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cabinet Members Address Concerns of Indians


Houston Abortion Protesters To Pay Damages to Clinics
A jury has ordered abortion protesters to pay $204,000 in damages to Planned Parenthood for conspiring to disrupt operations at Houston abortion clinics during the 1992 Republican National Convention.
The jury, which awarded the damages on Thursday, today began deliberating Planned Parenthood's request for $1 million in punitive damages.


Redskins Sign Safety
The Washington Redskins have signed the free-agent strong safety KEITH TAYLOR to a two-year, $1.3 million deal.
The team contacted Taylor, 29, who had been playing for the New Orleans Saints, Wednesday afternoon, flew him in Thursday morning, worked him out in the afternoon and agreed to terms Thursday evening.
He will replace the retired DANNY COPELAND. (AP)


Fruehauf Trailer (FTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
John Weaver, McNeil Robinson and Gerre Hancock Organists St. Thomas Church


Boxing; Lewis Scores A Knockout, Moorer Yawns
The heavyweight division gained nothing tonight, exposing Lennox Lewis as a champion who can, clumsily, take out mediocre fighters.
Tonight, it was Phil Jackson's turn to fall.
But at least he regained his pride while on the canvas.


Brooklyn Girl Is Found Safe In Woods in Massachusetts
Displaying survival skills that impressed local people familiar with the outdoors, a 14-year-old Hasidic girl from Brooklyn who disappeared on Wednesday when a school outing in a Connecticut state park went awry was found today by the police in dense, swampy woods, frightened and tired but praying by the side of a tree.
Suri Feldman had carefully rationed her sandwiches so that they sustained her for the two days and two nights she was lost.
She found ledges to keep her dry during occasional drizzles.
When search helicopters flew overhead, she tried to signal them with the flash on her camera.


British Petroleum Co. P.l.c.  (BP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Many Unanswered Questions As Nets Start Their Vacation
Even though they were eliminated from the playoffs tonight, the Nets felt a sense of pride in what they had accomplished in the hard-fought series.
"We fought them," said Derrick Coleman, who had 31 points in New Jersey's 102-92 loss to the Knicks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"They definitely knew they were in a war. We didn't get enough stops when we had to. It was very disappoining. The turnovers hurt us. I thought they executed down the stretch. They played great. We played great."


Smaller Hospital Advised By Kings County Panel
A panel set up to determine the future of the troubled Kings County Hospital reconstruction project yesterday recommended building a smaller hospital, with significantly fewer beds, and establishing a system of community clinics.
But the new plan pared its nearly $1 billion budget by only $16 million.


Doskocil Cos. (DOSK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Shorter-Term Bonds Seem a Better Bet
The 119 funds that invest in high-quality corporate bonds vary mostly in maturities and expenses.
The Vanguard Long-Term Corporate Bond Fund leads the pack in terms of three-year performance, with both factors having worked in its favor.
The average expenses for the group are 0.75 percent, while the Vanguard fund keeps its expenses to 0.31 percent.


Progress, Not Victory, on Great Lakes Pollution
After many toxic compounds were banned in the 1970's and tens of billions of dollars were spent on pollution equipment to control others, the concentrations of the chemicals in people's bodies and in the environment across the Great Lakes region have dropped sharply, according to findings made public at a scientific conference here.
Canadian scientists reported that the levels of the insecticide DDT in the milk of nursing mothers have fallen nearly 90 percent since 1972, when the compound was outlawed by the United States.
American scientists reported that the concentrations of PCB's in Lake Michigan trout have fallen nearly 90 percent since 1973.
PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, industrial chemicals once used in electrical equipment, were banned five years later.


Memo Cites Possible Rostenkowski Charges
Federal prosecutors have sent a memorandum to the Justice Department outlining possible criminal charges against Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who has been under investigation for two years, law-enforcement officials said today.
The discussion of evidence and possible charges in the case were included in a memo from Eric H. Holder Jr., the United States Attorney here, to officials at the Justice Department, who are routinely notified when a public official faces the prospect of criminal charges.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.(PLAA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Rock; Music's Essential Manhood Distilled by Jerry Jeff Walker
Jerry Jeff Walker's music is a litany of Texas towns: Amarillo, Luckenbach, Vernon, Austin.
He talks with a Texas twang and dresses like a modern-day cowboy.
If only he hadn't been born and brought up in upstate New York.
On Thursday night at Tramps in Chelsea, Mr.
Walker often sounded more like a travel agent than a musician.
"This is a song about how it is up in Texas these days," he explained between numbers.
In a low, slightly gruff voice, he sang tales of drinking beer, brawling, drinking wine, rambling and drinking whisky.
He distilled popular country music themes to their essential manhood, and the audience responded accordingly, hollering enthusiastically, raising their glasses at every mention of beer and, during some anthems, singing so loudly that they drowned out Mr.
Walker.


'Testilying'; Investigations Bring an Old Police Practice New Scrutiny
On June 22, 1993, Justice Jeffrey Atlas of State Supreme Court in Manhattan asked John Rossi if he had anything to say before the Justice announced his verdict.
Mr.
Rossi, a New York City police officer, chose to say nothing.
What followed was a 56-word decision concluding that Mr.
Rossi was guilty of perjury in the first degree for lying to a grand jury over an arrest he had made for illegal gun possession -- in part to cover a lapse in police procedure.


Savin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


How Mexico City Wants to Reward Enterprise of the Mayans
To the Editor:
Your April 19 "Tulum Journal," on the seacoast town and fortress of Tulum, Mexico, 100 miles south of Cancun, pits the splendor of this Mayan ruin against a large number of local Mayan shopkeepers who support their families by selling mostly genuine copies of Mayan artifacts, carpets, gods and beautiful hand-sewn dresses and blouses.
These items sell at half the price of their counterparts in smart Cancun shops.


Public &amp; Private; Q. and A.
In a suite at the Waldorf as big as all outdoors, Hillary Rodham Clinton sits on a sofa and talks about Whitewater, commodities trading, her daughter, her friends, why most men favor long hair and whether she should give regular press conferences at the White House.
"I can see people saying, 'Who does she think she is, having press conferences,' " said Mrs.
Clinton, whose conversation is now liberally larded with anticipated objections to the way she leads her public life.


U.S. Judge Bars Colorado Limits On Public Money for Abortions
A Federal district judge in Denver, upholding a Clinton Administration order, has barred the State of Colorado from enforcing any state restrictions on the use of public money for abortions.
The ruling, issued on Thursday by the judge, Edward W. Nottingham Jr., is the first court decision on the Administration policy requiring states to pay for abortions for low-income women in cases of rape or incest.
Previously, state Medicaid programs had to pay for abortions only when the procedure was needed to save the life of a pregnant woman.


Joint Military Games Supported in Russia
The Russian Defense Minister, Pavel S. Grachev, said today that he strongly supported a plan for the first joint military exercises with the United States, scheduled to be held in Russia.
President Boris N. Yeltsin had thrown the plan in doubt last month when the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bombed the Bosnian Serbs without what Russian officials regarded as sufficient consultation.
The idea of American troops operating on Russian soil has caused a furor among nationalist groups here, many of which appear to be gaining power.


CHRONICLE
Disturbed by continuing rumors that they are headed for divorce, RICHARD GERE and CINDY CRAWFORD took out a full-page advertisement in The Times of London yesterday, costing about $30,000, to proclaim the stability of their marriage.


Before Beauty Fades


Review/Pop; Exciting, but With Control
Junko Onishi opened her first set at the Village Vanguard (178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village) on Tuesday night, where she is to be through tomorrow, with "Eulogia," a piece that hurtles forward with a walking-bass introduction.
She joined in on piano, slapping notes in the lower register.
Herlin Riley, the drummer, started a persistent tapping on his cymbals.
Ms.
Onishi and the bassist, Reginald Veal, played a bass line in unison, and the group was off.
The group spent the rest of the set making smart and interactive music, exciting yet controlled by Ms.
Onishi's careful arranging.
It's hard not to regard this young pianist with a bit of suspicion at first.
Because of the economic power the Japanese jazz establishment wields, American record companies and clubs are often on the receiving end of campaigns pushing Japanese musicians of questionable talent.
But Ms.
Onishi is the real thing.
And she swings.


Parodists of Correctness Strike Back
Zak Penn still remembers his first class at Wesleyan University in 1986.
"It was a psychology class, and this guy got up and said Freud was not only racist, misogynist and classist, but also irrelevant," Mr.
Penn recalled.
"I thought, 'Whoa, who is this guy?' This is the same guy who said he was a black lesbian trapped in the body of a white male oppressor."
Adam Leff, one of Mr.
Penn's college classmates, recalled: "I remember being told early on that you were supposed to walk in a nonthreatening way at night. Suddenly I was possessed. Every night I walked home from the library I asked myself, 'Is my walk nonthreatening?' How do I do this goofy, nonthreatening walk and not appear to be coming on to a girl. I mean, woman."


Use of Drugs Is Legalized By Colombia
Startling officials of both the United States and Colombia, a high court in Colombia, the source of most of the world's cocaine, has legalized the personal use of cocaine, marijuana and other drugs.
The ruling, which can only be reversed with a constitutional amendment, does not affect the business of large-scale production and shipment of drugs around the world.
But it exacerbates tensions between the United States and Colombia over what officials in Washington see as attempts by some Colombian Government officials to undermine the war against drugs.


Sports of The Times; Coleman's Pursuit of High Ground
EXACTLY what do we want from Derrick Coleman?
Ask that question in New York these days and it often leads to a heated debate about the All-Star forward.
You either defend the man who signed one of the richest contracts in sports history or you indict him as a player who lacks the work ethic and charm to match.


Conspiracy Of Mothers In Wartime
THIS is a story about the solidarity of three mothers.
The first is Jasminka Beslic, a 33-year-old engineer from Zenica in Bosnia.
"Life used to be good," said the large-eyed woman in an English that has improved during the four months she has been here with her 6-year-old twins, Denis and Dino.
"Then came war. There was bombardment and little food.


United Healthcare Corp.(UNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Prepares to Begin Releasing 400 Haitians From Detention
Showing an unexpected preference for more lenient treatment of Haitian refugees who reach shore here, the Immigration and Naturalization Service is preparing to release a group of more than 400 Haitians who have been detained since the Coast Guard rescued them from an overcrowded boat late last month.
The release promised today, plus another one promised soon, is the latest sign that the Clinton Administration has begun modifying the Haitian and refugee policy it inherited from the Bush Administration and left largely unchanged.
Immigration officials, however, say there has been no formal policy change.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Daly, Using His Head and His Irons, Leads  John Daly posted an eight-under-par 64 to build a two-shot lead over Brian Henninger, a Nike Tour player, at the halfway point of the BellSouth Classic in Marietta, Ga.
"I played it smart yesterday and played it smart today," Daly said of his strategy to use his irons, not his driver, off most tees.
Daly has a a 36-hole score of 133, 11 under par, on the hilly 7,018-yard Atlanta Country Club course. (AP)


Youth Is Guilty in Murder of Drama Teacher
A Brooklyn teen-ager was convicted yesterday of killing a 42-year-old drama teacher as he resisted a group of youths trying to steal his bicycle in Prospect Park.
The fatal shooting, which occurred on a sun-soaked afternoon last June 1, stirred fear among many who use the park, one of the largest and most popular in the city, and led the police to intensify patrols there.


Trident NGL Holdings (NGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City Agency Rejects State Over Report On Toxics
The New York City Department of Investigation, concluding a six-week inquiry, said yesterday that the city had no legal obligation to give the state a report on toxic contaminants found at a site where the city wants to build a trash incinerator.
At the same time, investigators said the city should have turned over the report "to comply with the spirit of full disclosure."
When the city finally gave the report to the state in March, six years after it was written, Langdon Marsh, the acting Commissioner of Environmental Conservation in Albany, ordered the city to conduct an investigation of the 13-acre site, within the 260-acre Brooklyn Navy Yard.
The city and state are still negotiating over that order, and it is not clear whether a study, or a cleanup, would be needed before work could begin on the incinerator.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric Co.(MDSN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


10 Lawyers Switch Firms
Three partners in the New York office of Winston &amp; Strawn, a Chicago-based law firm, joined Dewey Ballantine in New York yesterday as partners.
In addition, seven associates who practiced with the former Winston &amp; Strawn partners joined them at Dewey Ballantine.
The 10 lawyers made up the entire asset securitization department at Winston &amp; Strawn.
When companies securitize assets, they create securities that are backed by such receivables as mortgages, home equity loans and credit card loans.


Grey Advertising Inc.(GREY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.77
2.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.02
2.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.43
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.34
7.10
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.33
6.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.16
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.48
6.37
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Looking for Hidden Fees in Mutual Funds
Your stockbroker is pitching you a mutual fund with no sales charge? Watch out.
He is almost certainly talking about a fund with a level load.
Gaining rapidly in popularity, level loads look like no loads to many investors.
But don't be fooled.
These funds have sales fees, albeit hidden ones, that reduce returns over time.


Japanese Aide Apologizes for Calling Nanjing Massacre a Fabrication
As Japanese diplomats raced to quell outrage around Asia, the country's Justice Minister today recanted his comments made this week that the massacre of hundreds of thousands of Chinese by Japanese forces at Nanjing in 1937 was a "fabrication."
"I recognize it is an undeniable fact," the Justice Minister, Shigeto Nagano, a former general, said at a news conference today, just hours after Chinese and South Korean officials summoned Japanese diplomats and told them that Mr.
Nagano had reopened wounds that Emperor Akihito and top Japanese politicians have been struggling to heal as the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II approaches.


Suit Accuses President Of Advance
A former Arkansas state employee sued President Clinton today, accusing him of making an unwanted sexual advance while he was Governor in 1991.
Lawyers for the former employee, Paula Corbin Jones, filed the lawsuit in Federal District Court here with great fanfare this morning, accusing Mr.
Clinton of making the advance in a Little Rock hotel room during a state-sponsored conference.
In her lawsuit, which included a graphic and detailed account of what she called a "repugnant" episode, Ms.
Jones said she spurned Mr.
Clinton's advance and was later transferred to another state job as punishment.


Mesa Inc.(MXP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tobacco Company Was Silent on Hazards
Internal documents from a major tobacco company show that executives struggled with whether to disclose to the Surgeon General what they knew in 1963 about the hazards of cigarettes, at a time when the Surgeon General was preparing a report saying for the first time that cigarettes are a major health hazard.
The executives of the company, the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, chose to remain silent, to keep their research results secret, to stop work on a safer cigarette and to pursue a legal and public relations strategy of admitting nothing.


Officials Say Giuliani Seeks New Savings
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is examining ways to refinance the city's debt, hoping to save millions of dollars to help close a $2.3 billion deficit.
The administration has also told the Health and Hospitals Corporation to cut another $50 million from its budget in the next fiscal year, officials said yesterday.
The search for more savings came as Mr.
Giuliani prepared to announce his first formal budget to the City Council Tuesday, a budget of more than $30 billion that envisions a reduction of 15,000 jobs in the city work force by July 1995 and proposes deep spending cuts in many city agencies.


Revere and the Patriots
To the Editor:
"Myths of the Midnight Rider" (Op-Ed, April 18), which is intended to set the record straight on Paul Revere, stumbles on the date of Patriot's Day.
It is not April 18, but April 19, and it commemorates the battles of Concord and Lexington, fought that day.
ELMER L. SULLIVAN  Trenton, April 25, 1994


Cabs and the Blind
To the Editor:
One thing more New York City's Taxi and Limousine Commission should monitor: Drivers are forbidden to refuse to take a seeing-eye dog accompanying a blind person.
But that is what two out of two cabbies did today, saying, "I don't take dogs." I think they took advantage of a disabled person, who could not see their medallion numbers and report them.
I write on behalf of the blind person.
JACQUELYN K. SCHWIMMER  New York, April 25, 1994


Bosnians Angry at U.S. and U.N. as New Battle Looms
A Bosnian Army officer, Mevludin Hasanovic, stood today in the small mosque here close to the most sensitive front line in the Bosnian war and delivered an impassioned message to the kneeling throng.
"Clinton won't help you, Boutros-Ghali won't help you," Dr.
Hasanovic declared, as the local mullah stood beside him.
"After Gorazde, we know that we must fight for victory alone, and Mohammed wants you all to give all you can for the battle."


A Mother's Embrace


St. Joe Paper Co.(SJP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Observer; The Joys of Rome
The high-school flavor of the Washington news was more than the spirit could bear, so I took Rome off the shelf.
Not always admirable, those Romans, but they wrote a muscular prose far more bracing than the wheezing, whining, hyper-inflated, empty-headed, tongue-twisting, death's-door English of Washington.
Here is Cicero, for instance, reminding us that "lustful pleasures . . . cloud a man's judgment, obstruct his reasoning capacity and blind his intelligence."


Michael H. Walsh, Executive, Is Dead at 51
Michael H. Walsh, who struggled to complete the turnaround of Tenneco Inc., one of the nation's largest companies, as he battled a brain tumor, died yesterday.
He was 51.
Mr.
Walsh resigned in February as chairman and chief executive of the conglomerate based in Houston whose products range from natural gas to Monroe shock absorbers and J. I. Case farm and construction equipment.


Religion Notes
Prayer at Commencements
With graduation time just around the corner, both sides in the debate over the legality of prayer at public school commencements staked out their positions this week.


Ramsay-HMO Inc.(RMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Louise Troy, 60, an Actress Who Starred on Broadway
Louise Troy, a tall and elegant actress who was praised for performances in Broadway musicals, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 60.
The cause was breast cancer, said Larry Keith, a friend.


Looking for Hidden Fees in Mutual Funds
Your stockbroker is pitching you a mutual fund with no sales charge? Watch out.
He is almost certainly talking about a fund with a level load.
Gaining rapidly in popularity, level loads look like no loads to many investors.
But don't be fooled.
These funds have sales fees, albeit hidden ones, that reduce returns over time.


Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc.(DRYR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


A Fine Line Between Tax Error and Fraud
When a certain businessman received a strongly worded letter from the Internal Revenue Service demanding that he substantiate the travel and entertainment deductions on his tax return, he set about gathering evidence, but not just from his files.
He went to a parking garage and picked up the numbered pieces of cardboard that garage attendants put under windshield wipers and that patrons often drop as they get into their cars.
He figured he could use them to show he had been in town on the evenings he claimed to have entertained clients, recalled Martin R. Pollner, now a senior partner in Loeb &amp; Loeb, a New York law firm, and a former director of law enforcement for the Treasury.


Body Shop reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Knicks Cancel Nets' Weekend Trip to City
The Nets refused to leave quietly, but the Knicks had the final word.
Ending their first-round series and eliminating a bitter rival, the Knicks outlasted the Nets, 102-92, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and won their three-of-five-game quarterfinal series, 3-1.
The victory sent New York into a four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series against the Chicago Bulls, beginning at 5:30 P.M.
Sunday at Madison Square Garden.


I.B.M. Sells Its Building In New York
I.B.M. sold its 43-story New York headquarters building yesterday to a joint venture run by the developer Edward J. Minskoff and Odyssey Partners, a New York investment group.
Neither side would divulge the selling price for the million-square-foot building at 590 Madison Avenue, at 57th Street.
But people close to the deal say that once the costs of customizing space for new tenants are included the investors will probably have spent close to $320 a square foot, or $320 million.


Strike One! Key Quiets the Bats From Boston
The craftsmanship of Jimmy Key transformed his game into a very simple one last night.
By making a basic but challenging adjustment, placing a greater emphasis on his first pitch to each hitter, Key established a subtle dominance over the team with the best record in baseball.
It seemed to matter more in the stands than the clubhouse that the team was the Boston Red Sox, who came into Yankee Stadium with a seven-game winning streak that turned out just like some of Key's pitches -- you thought it was there, and then it wasn't.


U.N. COUNCIL VOTES TOUGHER EMBARGO ON HAITIAN TRADE
The Security Council voted unanimously today to impose a near-total trade embargo on Haiti to try to force its military rulers to permit the return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power as President.
The sanctions imposed on Haiti were those long demanded by Father Aristide himself but rejected for months by the Clinton Administration out of concern that they would deepen the economic hardship of ordinary Haitians with no guarantee that the steps would persuade the military to change its position.


Mandela Picks Old Comrades To Fill His New Government
Nelson Mandela, his election landslide validated today as "substantially free and fair," hastened to put his stamp on the new Government, naming a vice president who became his heir apparent and a list of Cabinet ministers dominated by war horses of the struggle against white rule.
Mr.
Mandela, who is to be inaugurated as President next Tuesday, selected Thabo Mbeki as his first executive deputy president, making him instantly the leading candidate to succeed the 75-year-old liberation movement patriarch.


Chandler Joins Rams
Quarterback CHRIS CHANDLER, an unrestricted free agent, signed a one-year contract yesterday with the Los Angeles Rams.
Chandler spent the past two seasons with the Cardinals.
He appeared in four games with two starts last season, completing 52 of 103 passes for 471 yards with 3 touchdowns and 2 interceptions.
Chandler, 28, is expected to back up another unrestricted free-agent quarterback signed during the off season, CHRIS MILLER from Atlanta. (AP)


Geico Corp.(GEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


England and France, Now a Train Trip
In a half-hour journey that changed the map of Europe, Queen Elizabeth II of Britain and President Francois Mitterrand of France crossed beneath the gray waters of the English Channel by train today, inaugurating the 31-mile long rail tunnel that opens the first land link between England and the Continent since the Ice Age.
There were speeches, fanfares and guards of honor on both sides of the Straits of Dover to celebrate the completion of a $15 billion engineering triumph that is being compared to the Panama and Suez Canals.
But today's opening was wholly ceremonial.
Ordinary fare-paying travelers will not be able to use the tunnel until the fall, after the tunnel's safety systems are installed and tested.


Masco Corp.(MAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Survey Shows Toll On Market Confidence
WHEN the financial markets nose-dived earlier this year, novice investors got their first real taste of volatility.
Some market doomsayers had long predicted such a move would cause inexperienced investors -- who had plowed billions of dollars into stock and bond mutual funds in recent years -- to dump their holdings in a wholesale dash for cover.
Small investors, it turns out, did not liquidate their portfolios.


Israel Improved Health Care in Gaza Strip
To the Editor:
With Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip imminent, it is appropriate to rectify reports relying on sources hostile to the Israeli administration that have given a distorted picture of health care in Gaza.
At one point you called the health system a "shambles" because of "Israeli neglect and the six-year Palestinian uprising." The facts are otherwise.


Partial Deal Over Budget In Albany
State legislative leaders have reached broad tentative agreements on two major sticking points in a $33 billion state budget that is now five weeks late: how to cut business taxes and how to allocate aid to local schools.
The agreements, whose survival will depend on the lawmakers' reaching accords on several smaller but important issues, call for a relatively modest tax cut of at least $410 million this year.
However, once the proposed reductions are fully phased in over three years, they would be worth well over $1 billion a year.


William Hale Ferguson, Club Executive, 77
William Hale Ferguson, an executive of resort and beach clubs in Queens and Long Island, died on Thursday at his second home in Lawrence, L.I.
He was 77 and lived in Sanibel Island, Fla.
The cause was cancer, said Thomas P. August, a business associate.


Hadson Corp.(HAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coalition of Minority Officials To Endorse Sharpton for Senate
A large coalition of black and Hispanic elected officials, including half the black members of the State Legislature, plans to endorse the Rev.
Al Sharpton this weekend in his campaign to unseat Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Mr.
Sharpton is still given little chance of defeating Mr.
Moynihan in the Democratic primary on Sept. 13.
But he said the endorsements, to be announced at a Manhattan hotel on Saturday, will demonstrate his growing influence among black New Yorkers.
Several of Mr.
Sharpton's supporters said their decisions also reflect extreme dissatisfaction in their districts with Mr.
Moynihan, despite his immense power as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
Effect on Cuomo
Mr.
Sharpton said he hoped the endorsements would encourage Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and other Democratic leaders to persuade Mr.
Moynihan not to challenge the thousands of signatures he must collect on nominating petitions to get on the ballot.
He also suggested that Mr.
Cuomo, who may need enthusiastic black support to win re-election this year, should invite him to address the state Democratic convention in Buffalo in June.


Liuski International Inc.(LSKI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arizona Lawyers Form Company for Internet Advertising
In a move that is certain to increase the turmoil on global computer networks, two Arizona lawyers said yesterday that they had formed a company with the goal of making commercial advertising pervasive on the Internet.
In doing so, they shunned a plan, announced earlier this week by two other companies, to create specific advertising zones on Usenet News, a popular network that is connected to the Internet, a global web of computer networks.
The advertising zones, which would require advertisers to pay a fee to place their messages on the network, would theoretically allow the estimated 20 million Internet users to choose to view ads.


Rain, Unknown Factor, Complicates the Derby
On the morning before the shootout, Jimmy Croll watched Holy Bull step out of Barn 41 at Churchill Downs for his final workout, peered at the overcast sky and said that not even rain could keep his horse from streaking through the 120th Kentucky Derby.
But rain began to fall on the barns this afternoon, and all 15 colts entered in the Derby were warned to prepare to get their feet wet on Saturday.
The forecast called for a cool and damp day, with showers all day and temperatures in the 60's.


Nomura Unit in Talks on a Possible Macy Bid
In a new twist in the battle for R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the Nomura America Corporation, the United States investment banking affiliate of Nomura Securities, has begun tentative discussions about a bid to get Macy out of bankruptcy protection.
Although Nomura has not made a concrete offer, it has discussed a ballpark figure of as much as $3.9 billion with people involved in the case.
Nomura, which began expressing an interest in joining the fight for Macy about two weeks ago, is still conducting its financial analysis of the company, and that number is subject to change, people familiar with the case said yesterday.


TPI Enterprises Inc.(TPIE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 17


4-Minute Celebration
It was 40 years to the day that ROGER BANNISTER became the first runner to break the four-minute barrier in the mile.
Some 700 athletes have done it since, but a who's who of mile world record-holders gathered at a celebration dinner yesterday in London to salute the man, now a 65-year-old neurosurgeon, who achieved it first.


Prominent New Yorkers Try Their Hands at Educating


Universal Corp.(UVV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Art; Drawings of Genius From Florence
At the moment there are two good reasons for anyone interested in art to visit Vassar College.
The first is permanent: the new Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center, designed by Cesar Pelli and inaugurated last fall, which enables the college to display a much greater proportion of its exceptional art collection than before, and under far better viewing conditions.


Filling the Gap Between College Costs and Financial Aid
Glen and Sharon Hitchens of Southampton, N.J., never set aside money for college for their sons, Chip, 18, and Wes, 16.
The couple said teachers, guidance counselors and others told them that Chip, who was always at the top of his class, would certainly qualify for a full scholarship, and his brother would do well, too.
But the family has learned that college costs well exceed most scholarships.
"I guess we were very naive," Mrs.
Hitchens said.


Employers May Get Reprieve In Reporting Health Coverage
Bowing to complaints from thousands of businesses across the country, the White House today asked Congress to delay or do away with a 1993 law requiring employers to report information on the health insurance coverage of their employees.
Presidents Clinton and George Bush both asked Congress to impose the requirement, which took effect on Jan. 1.
But it has caused major problems for employers, who say they must gather large amounts of data never collected before.


Review/Music; Staying True to a Truly Esoteric Mission
The fringes of avant-garde experimentation are said to be a zone where trends burn bright and then vanish.
The nearly 30-year career of AMM, a British improvisational group that has been on a rare American tour the last few weeks, shows otherwise.
Rooted in free jazz, AMM was famous at first for its association with Cornelius Cardew, one of the wild innovators of European composition in the 1960's and 70's.
Its extraordinary first album ("AMM Music," now reissued on ReR Records) came out on Elektra, with production help from associates of Pink Floyd.
The group outlived its initial hype, survived Cardew's death in 1981 and has stuck to its esoteric avant-garde mission.
The core members remain Eddie Prevost, a drummer of extraordinary energy and inventiveness, and Keith Rowe, who draws the most unearthly sounds from an electric guitar laid out on a table.
Their set on Tuesday night at Context Studios on the Lower East Side lasted about an hour; it ranged from minimal whispers of timbre to grinding, buzzing onslaughts.
Mr.
Rowe bent over the vibrating corpse of his guitar, manipulating metal implements and electronic gizmos.
His favorite trick is to bring a transistor in proximity to the strings so that random radio transmissions show up like aural ghosts.
Cardew's role has passed on to John Tilbury, a new-music pianist who seems to draw inspiration from sources as various as Cage, Feldman and Cecil Taylor.


'Bawk-Bawk, Shut Up!'
Throbbing music may be popular among some humans, but it's just bad vibrations for parrots.
At Urban Bird, 177 West Broadway, the owner, Nancy Chambers, says her 150 parrots used to pair off happily and lay clutches of eggs.
Planned parrothood, she calls it.


Engine Talk To Dominate Indy Practice
The biggest question as practice opened at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway yesterday seemed to be this: Would more smoke be blown around by Roger Penske's new Mercedes-Benz Indy engines or by the pitside debate that the engine has created?
Penske announced on April 13 that he would use the 209-cubic-inch push-rod racing engines, which came off the drawing board at Ilmor Engineering in England last January.
The engines, eligible only at Indy, are rumored to produce over 1,000 horsepower.
That would give Penske's three drivers at least a 150-horsepower edge over any other driver.
The advantage is a result of rules allowing push-rod engines to be bigger and use more turbocharger pressure.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEEmily Ann Drew, Andrew F. Morey
Emily Ann Drew, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rollin E. Drew of Oklahoma City, was married there yesterday to Andrew Finch Morey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin N. Morey of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
John H. Marlin performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel at the Casady School.


For the Lone Diner, A Range of Rooms
Dark, moody nightspots for romantic pairs; chummy, cheerful restaurants for family dining; discreet havens for trysts; brazenly entertaining tourist meccas -- Manhattan has a range of restaurants for every mood and dining ambition.
A few even meet the special criteria of the lone diner: respectful treatment and diverting surroundings.
Here is a rundown of some of the best.
ASIA


Q. &amp; A.
Assessing Assessment By a Co-op Q. When I bought my co-op apartment in 1988 I was informed that the board of directors would vote an assessment whenever some improvement had to be made in the building.
What I was not told is that suddenly we would have an assessment every year.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on April 24 about George Bush incorrectly quoted a saying by Branch Rickey, the president of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1940's.
It is "Luck is the residue of design," not "of desire."


How Fedfellas Will Watch Cash And Calamari
Sometimes, in the restaurant and bar business, cash . . . well, you know . . . just disappears.
The money doesn't quite reach the register.
A check gets torn up.
Booze in the basement is sold out of view.
You know.
It's the kind of thing that got Matthew (Matty the Horse) Ianniello, a reputed capo in the Genovese crime family, and eight others thrown in prison.
The crime: skimming $2 million from Umberto's Clam House and other restaurants and bars.


Habitats/Lyme, Conn.; Metamorphosis of a Barn
FOR nearly a century, the huge wooden plank barn halfway down the rolling hillside overlooking the inlet of Hamburg Cove in Lyme, Conn., had grown gradually more decrepit, but increasingly scenic.
It was much photographed by tourists and reportedly captured on canvas by several artists of what art historians call the Old Lyme School.
In 1987 it was joined by another gigantic barn when the owner, Christopher Crowley, had the beams and rafters of an 1850 Massachusetts barn trucked down and set up about 50 feet away from it, at more or less a right angle.


INSIDE
Japanese Minister Dismissed
Japan's Justice Minister was dismissed over his remark that the Rape of Nanking did not occur.
Page 12.
Capital Turnabout
With a different accuser and a different target, Washingtonians change camps on sex harassment.
Page 16.


Avoiding Buyer's Remorse
THE fuel bill for the spacious house you just bought suggested the sellers were paying only $1,500 a year to heat the place -- part of its energy-efficient appeal.
What was not mentioned on the listing sheet was that the sellers regularly traveled abroad in the winter, which you learn from neighbors only after you move in.
The street you selected seemed like a quiet backwater on the Sunday afternoon you looked at the house.
Only after living there for a few days do you discover that it serves as a short-cut to the highway on weekdays.


Where There's Smoking, There's Controversy
To the Editor:
There is a certain nobility in being an advocate for an unpopular cause.
However, after reading Michael Janofsky's article about Brennan Dawson, spokeswoman for the Tobacco Institute ("Anti smoking Forces at the Barricades? Bring 'em On!," Profile, April 24), I would like to invite her and members of the tobacco industry to make hospital rounds with me or any other physician to meet the beneficiaries of her so-called advocacy.
I suspect she might feel differently about her job after meeting patients disfigured by surgery for head and neck cancer, speechless from the loss of their larynxes or dependent on artificial ventilatory support because of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, clinging to the last vestiges of dignity and life.
The question is not what she will tell her children about smoking when they are older but whether she, as a smoker, will be there to tell them anything.
History is replete with individuals who, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, hold stubbornly to their views.
Instead of a profile, Ms.
Dawson deserves only our pity.
RICHARD H. MOSELEY  Ann Arbor, Mich., April 27  The writer is chief of the gastroenterology section at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Ann Arbor and an associate professor of medicine at the University of Michigan Medical School.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEJ. A. Montag, M. A. Freedman
Jennifer Alison Montag, a psychotherapist in New York, was married last evening to Michael Alan Freedman, the president of Pacific Media Holdings, an advertising company based in Tokyo.
Rabbi Alexander Schindler performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Freedman, 29, graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work and psychology from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Montag of Bronxville, N.Y.
The bride's father is a partner in the Richard E. Jacobs Group, mall developers, in Cleveland.


Clement Greenberg Dies at 85; Art Critic Championed Pollock
Clement Greenberg, the art critic who propelled the career of Jackson Pollock and helped to establish Abstract Expressionism as a major artistic movement, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 85 years old.
He died of complications from a four-year bout with emphysema, his daughter, Sarah Dora Greenberg, said.
He had been taken to the hospital from his apartment in Manhattan on Monday because he had trouble breathing.


Someone Loves Parking Signs
With their convoluted directions and frowning demands, parking signs are hardly the most popular of civic accouterments.
Except in the beach communities of Rockaway Park, Belle Harbor and Neponsit.
Residents there have won a two-year battle with the city's Department of Transportation to have hundreds of signs installed.
Some of the old signs are faded; some were stolen by people trying to park illegally, and others were removed during construction projects.


Unlikely Reformer Coaxes India Toward a Market Economy
WHEN Manmohan Singh was a primary school student in western Punjab in the 1930's, he took his examinations in a town 20 miles from the village where his family worked as subsistence farmers.
Each year, he covered the distance on foot, a journey of 8 to 10 hours, out and back, under a beating Indian sun.
Now, at 61, with an economics doctorate he received 30 years ago from Oxford University, Mr.
Singh is India's Finance Minister, but he is still engaged in long-distance travail.
Since 1991 he has been the principal architect of market-based reforms aimed at pulling India from the stagnation into which it fell during the four decades after gaining its independence from Britain in 1947, when its governments hewed unswervingly to the doctrines of socialist economics.


Commercial Property/The SoHo District; Grit to Glamour: The Evolution of SoHo
OVER the last few decades, SoHo has changed from a district for light manufacturing to a haven for artists to a home for the poshest of galleries.
Now it is steadily marching into the realm of the uncharacterizable, an area where furniture stores and art galleries and funky fashion shops -- and lately, even a soupcon of mainstream stores like Armani A/X and Lechters Housewares -- coexist.
"What was once just an art gallery place has become an international marketplace for style and design, a place that foreigners routinely include on their New York itinerary," said Louis E. Sagar, owner of Zona, a store at 97 Greene Street that sells expensive, handcrafted items.


THE LITTLE-PEOPLE PROBLEM
I so enjoy Maureen Dowd's insights that those weeks her articles are missing I feel cheated.
As usual, her essay on Washington was right on the mark.
She displays that unique ability to perceive and present facts clearly.
FLORENCE BONANNO Danville, Pa.


WESTCHESTER GUID
DIPLOMAT TO SPEAK
"Israel Struggles for Peace" is the title of a talk to be given by Colette Avital on Tuesday at 8 P.M. in Temple Israel of New Rochelle.
Ms.
Avital is Consul General of Israel in New York and her country's highest ranking woman diplomat.


Where There's Smoking, There's Controversy
To the Editor:
It may be too late for Brennan Dawson to discuss what advice she will give her 8-month-old twins about smoking when they are 6, or 16 or 21.
Unless she quit smoking during pregnancy, she has already exposed her children to the numerous poisons found in cigarette smoke: something she would have known had she read the labels the Surgeon General mandates on the product she pushes.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


If the Truth Be Told
Uptown -- In the Celeste Bartos Forum of the New York Public Library on April 28, Steven Brill's three children were eating chateaubriand with their babysitter at the 15th-birthday party for The American Lawyer, the muckraking magazine founded by their father.
Since Mr.
Brill is also the founder of Court TV, the trial-oriented cable station, his daughters speak with the candor of children who have heard the phrase, "Do you promise to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth . . ." many times in their young lives.
Sophie, 9, said her favorite Court TV case was the trial of Erik and Lyle Menendez, who claimed to have murdered their parents in self-defense.
"I think they are guilty," she said with conviction.
"If their parents really did abuse them, they can only claim self-defense if they were threatened right on the spot when they killed them."


THE LITTLE-PEOPLE PROBLEM
Maureen Dowd is one of our more informed Washington observers, but can't she find something more important to comment on than what she herself acknowledges is the "upstairs-downstairs department" in the White House (On Washington: "The Little-People Problem," April 17)?
In addition to her trivialization of matters of state, she brings little actual evidence to bear on her conclusion that "the President conducts his life expecting others to clean up after him." Of the eight factoids pertaining to the current Administration, only two involve actions of the President himself (rather than actions in concert with the First Lady or by the First Lady herself).
One is the infamous haircut.
The other involves the relationship between the President and his political aides, who are responsible in every Administration for cleaning up after the President.


New Climate Spurs Birth Mother Search
ARMED with only a few sketchy facts, George S. became his own private investigator five months ago.
Like many other adoptees who search through phone books, birth and death records and other documents that could yield genealogical clues to their past, Mr.
S. said his quest to find his biological mother followed years of wondering about his roots.
Now 27, he said the time had come to put some questions to rest.
"I was always asking myself, 'Who is she and what does she look like?' I'd scan the faces in crowds looking for her," said Mr.
S., who works in a boat yard and insisted that his name be withheld to prevent embarrassment to his adoptive mother.
"It never sat well with me that I was adopted."


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINESuzy Forster, Claude Cernuschi
Lynn Susan Forster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner E. Forster of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Claude Richard Cernuschi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alberto C. Cernuschi of New York.
The Rev.
Ralph Ahlberg, a Congregationalist minister, officiated at the Garden City Community Church.
Cantor David Benedict took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Forster, 33 and known as Suzy, is keeping her name.
She is a fine art appraiser in Durham, N.C., and a scholar-in-residence at Duke University.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and she and her husband received master's degrees in art history from New York University.


James M. Grossman, Author and Lawyer, 90
James M. Grossman, an author and lawyer who practiced in New York for more than 50 years, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Mr.
Grossman, who lived in Manhattan, was 90.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Elsa.


Medium Rare
Lately there has been an outbreak of naked men on billboards, in magazines and on the sides of buses.
I know this because my men friends have called it to my attention.
"Would you get a load of the pecs on that guy?" my lunch date asks, as he stops in his tracks in front of a giant poster of Marky Mark in Calvin Klein underwear.
Like the rest of the perfect specimens on display these days, Marky Mark bears about as much resemblance to the men of my acquaintance as, say, Claudia Schiffer bears to me (and, as if to make the disparity even more obvious, the guys in the ads have lots of hair on their heads and none on their chests).
"Well," my lunch date says, a little nervously, "I guess I'd better start going to the gym." He and others like him seem to see these images as cause for anxiety, upping the standards for masculine good looks beyond the easy reach of the normal American male.
Other men find in all this the confirmation of what they've long suspected, that women get turned on by glimpses of a bare male body -- a notion that, if true, might absolve men from any guilt they've been feeling about their own fascination with pictures of breasts, buttocks and other body parts of total strangers.
For some time now, feminists have been predicting that greater respect for women would sooner or later lead to men being seen as sex objects, as instruments of a woman's satisfaction.
So it is with a sense of duty, if not enthusiasm, that I approach these images of anonymous, godlike men, determined to do my part to usher in the age of sexual equality. . . .


Panhellenic


Shopping in Xian
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article on Xian ("Chinese City on the Move," March 13), but noted some omissions.
The writer refers to some articles that can be purchased there, notably rubbings mounted on scrolls, but states that "there are no steals" in the stores and at the stalls.
When I was last there in early 1993, it was still possible to buy paintings and drawings on rice paper, embroidered animals and jackets and "farmer" paintings very reasonably.


Business Diary: May 1-6
THE ECONOMY Would Bread Lines Make the Financial Markets Happier?
In the perverse financial world, no good news goes unpunished.
The markets hate job numbers that are too strong, because they're afraid the inflation bells will go off -- though no one's actually seen any inflation -- and the Federal Reserve will clamp down again.
So on Friday's surprising report that unemployment fell to 6.4 percent and 267,000 payroll jobs were added in April (to top it off, without the truckers' strike that would have been 73,000 higher), the stock and bond markets went into mourning.
The Dow industrials, off more than 50 at one point, lost 26, while 30-year Treasury bond yields hit 7.54 percent, an 18-month high. . . .
Even as the job numbers soar, though, there are dark spots: New York State has lost 97,000 jobs in 12 months, a worse performance even than California.
And last week Digital Equipment said it would cut at least 20,000 more jobs.


Science Fiction
If John McPhee wrote science fiction, the result might read like GREEN MARS (Spectra/ Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper, $12.95), by Kim Stanley Robinson.
Grand in scope, meticulous in detail, "Green Mars" continues the story of the settling of Mars -- and its transformation into a more Earthlike planet -- that the author began in "Red Mars."
Once again the principal character is the planet itself.
Mr.
Robinson seems to have swallowed whole the vast amounts of information about the Martian atmosphere, surface and internal composition that NASA's space probes have amassed over the last two decades.
And like John McPhee's California books, which give new currency to the phrase "inside story" with their painstaking geological reportage, "Green Mars" takes the reader on a guided tour of a world whose potential for sustaining life can be awakened by a scientific undertaking known as "terraforming."


Cuomo Calls Budget Deal Too Costly
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo doused a tentative budget agreement between legislative leaders with icy water today, saying it would result in spending at least $150 million more than the state could afford this year and would leave a $500 million budget gap next year.
But legislative aides said their budget package would spend little more than Mr.
Cuomo and legislative leaders had agreed to allocate in a pact reached on April 1.


The Nation; Life's Hard? Blame the Market
IN the 1970's, inflation outran wages, and you blamed Jimmy Carter and the Arabs.
In the 1980's, Wall Street hustlers dined on beluga while the Department of Agriculture declared ketchup a vegetable, and you blamed Ronald Reagan and Michael Milken.
Then came the recession, the first to take a whack at white-collar jobs, and you blamed George Bush and the Japanese.
Now the recession is over, the Democrat in the White House says he feels your pain -- and yet you're worried as ever about paying the bills.
In fact, the corporate downsizing that began in the 1980's seems to be gaining momentum, leaving even privileged Americans to ponder a future life in the slow lane.
Who's left to blame?


Boot Camp for Yuppies
SNAPSHOTS FROM HELL The Making of an MBA.
By Peter Robinson. 286 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $22.95


Mexico Clears Minister in Election Case
The Federal Attorney General has dropped charges against a Cabinet minister who had been accused of using public resources to support the governing party's presidential candidate.
After a brief investigation, which opposition parties criticized as being biased, the Federal Attorney General said Thursday that no further action would be taken against the minister, Carlos Hank Gonzalez, who was the Agriculture Secretary and one of the most influential old-line members of the Institutional Revolutionary Party.


Correction
The Sunday View theater column on April 24, reviewing the musical "Beauty and the Beast," misidentified the composer of the score.
He is Alan Menken; Howard Ashman was the lyricist for the film version and for eight of the songs in the show.


Newport Summer: Historic and Nautical
The commissioning of the Trident submarine Rhode Island on July 9, the first summer season of a new history museum and the first designer showhouse in seven years highlight the coming summer season in Newport, R.I.
Several events have been planned by the Navy in connection with the submarine's commissioning.
An Open House on July 2 will include a firsthand look at the War College, the Naval Education and Training Center, the Surface Warfare Officers' School and at least one surface ship.
On July 4, there will be a Navy Band Concert at Dewey Field, timed to coincide with the town's annual fireworks.
All events except the commissioning ceremony are open to the public and free.
Information: the U.S.S.
Rhode Island Commissioning Committee, (401) 848-2740.


Little Slices of Suburbia, a la South Bronx
Since the early 1980's, more than 1,000 one- , two- and three-family homes have sprung up in the South Bronx, changing the landscape of the community that was devastated by arson and neglect in the late-1960's and 1970's.
These days, the community has an almost surreal quality as homes with picket fences share blocks with trash-strewn vacant lots and dilapidated buildings.
At a time when housing developments, like Melrose Court, are moving back toward higher densities to accommodate growing populations, here is a look at five important small-scale developments in the South Bronx.
L.
H.


Symbols/The New South Africa; The First Emblems of Unity: A Little Something for Everyone
At 11 A.M.
Tuesday, guests at the inauguration of Nelson Mandela as the President of a new South Africa are to stand for the singing of the national anthems, both of them, and the raising of the national colors, all six of them.
Thus even before Mr.
Mandela begins his inaugural address, the national symbols will have announced to attentive guests his likely themes: reconciliation and consensus.
A negotiated revolution requires negotiated decoration, and South Africa's new heraldry, like its Constitution, shows the labor of trying to include everybody.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MILITARY BIOGRAPHY  PARATROOPER  The Life of Gen.
James M. Gavin.
By T. Michael Booth  and Duncan Spencer.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEJennifer Spiegler, Edward Houser
Jennifer Lee Spiegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace G. Spiegler of Rehoboth, Mass., is to be married today to Edward Charles Houser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham A. Houser of Brooklyn.
Rabbi James E. Ponet is to officiate at the New Haven Lawn Club.


Orioles' Smith Fools Naysayers and Batters
Lee Smith has a look about him these days.
A mischievous look worn by those who not only think but are certain they are enjoying a hearty last laugh.
"I'm fooling all these people," Smith says, his eyes twinkling, his words cascading out in a good-hearted chuckle.
"Got 'em thinking I'm doing something special here."


In America; Romeo And Juliet In Bosnia
If you watch "Frontline" Tuesday night on PBS you will see the story of two ordinary young people, Bosko Brkic, an Eastern Orthodox Serb, and Admira Ismic, a Muslim, who met at a New Year's Eve party in the mid-1980's, fell in love, tried to pursue the most conventional of dreams, and died together on a hellish bridge in Sarajevo.
The documentary, called "Romeo and Juliet in Sarajevo," achieves its power by focusing our attention on the thoroughly human individuals caught up in a horror that, from afar, can seem abstract and almost unimaginable.
It's one thing to hear about the carnage caused by incessant sniper fire and the steady rain of mortar shells on a city; it's something quite different to actually witness a parent desperately groping for meaning while reminiscing about a lost daughter.


Martha Graham: Beyond Mere Brilliance
MARTHA GRAHAM WOULD have been 100 years old on Wednesday.
When she died in 1991, she was five weeks short of her 97th birthday -- and three years short of a centennial.
What is there to say about Martha Graham that has not been said before?
The answer, of course, is that enough can never be said about so great and innovative an artist.


George Eliot, Dorothea and Me: Rereading (and Rereading) 'Middlemarch'
VIRGINIA WOOLF'S famous remark about "Middlemarch," that it is the only novel meant for grown-ups, has the inevitable appeal of all flattery, but it is, I think, only half true.
This is also the case for Russell Baker's opinion (delivered from the well-upholstered Alistair Cooke comfy-chair as he introduced the first of the six episodes of the Masterpiece Theater version now on the air) that "Middlemarch" is a page-turner.
The fact is that "Middlemarch," like all great novels that happen to be very long, is a hybrid creature, made up of elements that do not always blend with perfect evenness.
It is a mix of earnestness and breathiness, wisdom and pontification; it has the scope and grandeur of a Russian epic and the panting necessities of a schoolgirl romance.
The first two times that I read it I was still, in fact, a girl, and I was Dorothea.
I read it first when I was 15, a "Silas Marner" fan, impressed with myself for such an undertaking.
I don't think I paid much attention to Bulstrode, Raffles, Mr.
Brooke and the Reform Bill or the state of Victorian medicine.
I wanted Mary Garth to marry Farebrother rather than Fred Vincy; I would have died if anything had happened at the last minute so that Dorothea could not find happiness with the dashing and passionate Will.
It was the fairy tale of my own yearnings, and I read it, not to grow wiser, but to be reassured.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEBetsy Perry and Richard Ravitch
Betsy F. Perry, a consultant on television programming, was married yesterday to Richard Ravitch, the former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Judge Robert W. Sweet of Federal District Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at a private home in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Ravitch, who works in New York, was formerly a senior editor at Cosmopolitan magazine in New York and a producer and movie critic for "Good Day New York" on WNYW-TV.
She graduated from Barnard College.


When Number Is Up, Starters Step Aside
Andre Dawson, the ageless veteran of the Boston Red Sox, was talking about finesse and power: the finesse of Jimmy Key, who stymied the Red Sox on four hits Friday night, and the power of Roger Clemens, who was about to pitch against the Yankees.
"With Clemens being a power pitcher, he can set the tone early," Dawson said.
"But he may have a tendency to tire earlier. Key doesn't throw as many pitches. It can make him effective longer."


May 1-7: The Rape of Nanking; And Now for Another Japanese History Lesson
It almost never fails: Japan assembles a new Cabinet, and one of its ministers declares that American imports carry poisons, that blacks don't pay their credit card bills or that some wartime Japanese atrocity was a fiction of the West.
Last week the new Justice Minister, Shigeto Nagano, chose category three.
He declared that the Nanjing Massacre -- also called the Rape of Nanking, in which more than 150,000 Chinese were killed in 1937 -- was a "fabrication."


Up From the Tube, but Then Down the Drain
DANA CARVEY IS DOING WHAT he does best: impressions, characters, voices, faces -- anything for a laugh.
He's like a human remote control.
Zap, and he's Cary Grant arguing with Alfred Hitchcock on the set of "Suspicion." Zap, and he's a droning high school valedictorian.
Zap, and he's Uncle Charlie from "My Three Sons" if he were a therapist: "You think you got problems? I got three kids at home!"
He has been doing this all day -- 45 television interviews in six hours -- and he's still at it in the back of the limousine transporting him from his New York hotel to Newark Airport.
Mr.
Carvey spent seven years on "Saturday Night Live," popularizing his political impersonations (Bush, Perot) and a repertory of characters: the Church Lady; Wayne's intense sidekick, Garth, in the Wayne's World sketches; Hans, of the Schwarzeneggerian duo Hans and Franz.


The Nation; Clinton th Outsider Turns Again for Help From the Insider Club
FOR someone who ran as an outsider, President Clinton has been making a remarkable habit of turning to the capital's insider culture when he or his Administration is in trouble.
After the suicide of Vincent W. Foster, Mr.
Clinton's deputy White House counsel and Arkansas family friend, the President turned first to David Kendall, a respected newcomer to the fraternity of superstar lawyers.
But when things kept getting worse, he sought out the inner circle of a select club -- lawyers who have turned the practice of defending important people into an art form that has vaulted the lawyers themselves into the ranks of television news celebrities, political consultants and network commentators.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Gratuities: Vote on an amendment to weaken legislation that would limit the gifts and meals senators and representatives can accept and abolish free entertainment and travel for recreational purposes.
Rejected 59 to 39, May 5.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Assault Weapons: Vote on passage of a bill to ban 19 semiautomatic assault weapons.
Approved 216 to 214, May 5.
2.
Abortion Clinic Access: Vote on a compromise bill making it a Federal crime to block access to abortion clinics.
Approved 241 to 174, May 5.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Y . . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y . . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y . . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . Y . . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . N . . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y . . . Y New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y . . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y . . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y . . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . Y . . . N
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y . . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y . . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y . . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N . . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . Y . . . Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y . . . Y
3. King (R) . . . Y . . . N
4. Levy (R) . . . Y . . . N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y . . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y . . . Y
7. Manton (D) . . . Y . . . N
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y . . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y . . .
A  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N . . .
A  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N . . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y . . .
N  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N . . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N . . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y . . .
N  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y . . .
N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Auto Slaughter
To the Sports Editor:
The auto racing news has been grim.
Roland Ratzenberger, 31, hit a concrete barrier and died of brain damage followed the next day by the death of 34-year-old Ayrton Senna from head injuries suffered when he hit a wall going 200 miles an hour.
How can this slaughter of young, talented men be allowed to continue in a civilized society?
As a manifestation of our decline and our need for excitement, has callous indifference to death developed to the extent that we must witness these "live" events to escape from being jaded?
HENRY N. FLANSFIELD  Danbury, Conn.


Korea's DMZ Opens New Areas to Tourists
THIS may seem like an odd time to visit Korea's Demilitarized Zone, the fiercely armed no man's land of barbed wire and mines that separates South and North Korea.
With tension rising over North Korea's nuclear-arms project, and the Pentagon shipping in Patriot missiles to defend the South, not much about Korea looks tourist-friendly these days.
In fact, for all the fearsome-sounding news the DMZ is probably safer, at least for now, than most American cities.
Still, South Kore an officials grimace and complain every time they see another headline about the nuclear standoff between North and South: This was not their idea of how to promote Visit Korea Year.
Now, in an attempt to make a virtue out of a menace, they are opening up new sections of the Demilitarized Zone to tourists -- in hopes that those seeking a glimpse of the cold war will venture to one of its last and biggest outposts.
Last year, more than 22,000 tourists, mostly Japanese, visited previously opened sections of South Korea's Demilitarized Zone on tours offered by the Korean Tourist Bureau and the U.S.O.


A THAI-HIGH AMERICAN
THE FIGHTERS PUNISH EACH OTHER WITH FISTS, FEET, knees and elbows, yet they wound without cruelty.
Blood drips to the mat and eyes glaze from the force of the blows, yet they thank God for the honor.
To be Thai, to stand inside a ring surrounded by hundreds of adoring, screaming, wildly wagering fans, is to reach for the sky and touch it.
To be American, to be an outsider in the ring, is a feeling Steve Milles struggles to form into words.
"I could hear him hit me," he says, trying to describe his battle with a Thai kick-boxer on Ko Samui, an island in the Gulf of Thailand.
"I couldn't feel it."


This Time Around, Jones Collects His Shutout Against the Cardinals
Bobby Jones shows no emotion on the pitcher's mound.
He doesn't grimace when he gives up a home run, and he doesn't smile when he strikes someone out in a key situation.
Dallas Green could tell, though, that Jones was feeling very confident tonight.
He could tell by the way Jones was tackling the Cardinals, inning after inning, never allowing any hits to fluster him and never allowing any runs to score.


A SURPRISING SILENT MAJORITY IN SOUTH AFRICA
I was grateful to see Bill Keller rescue, from serious journalistic neglect, the story of the growing influence of the Zion Christian Church on social and political development in South Africa ("A Surprising Silent Majority in South Africa," April 17).
But I was disappointed that he vacillated between taking the church seriously and planting his tongue in his cheek, thereby preserving the posture of a liberal sophisticate reporting on the simple beliefs of the peasants of darkest Africa.


A Fresh Air Fund Convert to Rural Life
Every summer and almost every weekend the rest of the year, Judy, Bill and 8-year-old Seth Weiss leave Manhattan for their country house in Ghent, N.Y., to tend their 80 animals: the chickens, goats, horses, sheep and others that roam their 67-acre farm.
And now they are joined by 8-year-old Theron Grinage of Far Rockaway, Queens, who goes along with the Weisses to be part of their life on the farm for two weeks.


Assessing the Nitty-Gritty of Fertilizers
FERTILIZER bags and boxes are piled high at the garden centers and hardware stores.
Which one?
First, of course, read the label.
A good bit of information is available there and gardeners should be familiar with what it says, fine print as well as big print.
An important part of a fertilizer's label is the numbers.
They tell what the fertilizer's grade is, and the numbers may be any sort of combinations.
Some examples are 5-10-5, 10-10-10, 6-12-6, 4-3-2 or 0-10-0.
These numbers tell what the percentages are by net weight of total nitrogen (first number), available phosphoric acid (second number) and soluble potash (third number).
These are the primary elements needed by all plants for good growth and if a product has all three, it is what is known as a complete fertilizer.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Hail, Columbia
For the past six years the Statue of Liberty has been walking the streets of Manhattan.
And taking the occasional taxi.
Her name is Jennifer Stewart.
She's 36 and got her start by winning a Statue of Liberty look-alike contest in 1986, the statue's centennial year.
After that she practiced statuary only intermittently until she began performing over the July 4, 1988, weekend in a Greenwich Village restaurant.
One day when she tried walking through Washington Square Park in costume after work, her cup got filled with donations within one half-hour.
A professional statue was born.


Some Wealthy Parents Prefer Public Schools
The article on private schools lacked balance and perspective.
What might have made the article more useful to the general public would have been parallel interviews with parents in this region who clearly could afford private school tuitions but chose to keep their children in the public schools.
What you might have discovered is that there are many parents for whom education means more than having class sizes of less than 10 or universal participation in athletics or other extracurricular activities.
For many parents, there is much to be gained from public school attendance -- not only the larger number of academic options typically available in a public school setting but also the opportunities students have to interact with a broader range of peers.


Give Italy Time
To the Sports Editor:
I've followed Italian First Division soccer for many years and in that time Arrigo Sacchi, the current Italian national coach, has not only proved that he can win on the national and international scene, but more important he has also attained the best results when working under pressure.
Most Italians criticize Sacchi ("A Controversial World Cup Coach Keeps Them All Guessing," The Times, May 1) because it is their nature to do so and because they want the team to do well.
Many do not understand Sacchi's system of evaluating players because it is set up to destroy the individual and replace it with a unified-team work ethic.
Surely, Sacchi has set a team formation up in his mind, and most likely the fans and the press will uncover this later on this month.
CLEMENTE ANGELO LISI  New York


Hey, Rosie! It's No Dream. It's Broadway, And You're On.
AS BETTY RIZZO, LEADER OF THE Pink Ladies pack at Rydell High, Class of '59, Rosie O'Donnell is pure attitude -- all snapping pink fingers and popping pink gum and hot-pink yo-yo unspooling like a lash in her Broadway debut as the good-hearted bad girl who lives fast and thinks she's in trouble in "Grease!"
As Roseanne O'Donnell, class president, prom queen and jock at Commack South High, Class of '80, on Long Island, the former comic who is fast becoming Hollywood's favorite best friend, was a lot tamer.
Like, you know, she didn't hang at the Commack Motor Inn.


The Handy-Dandy Evolution Prover
AT A PARTY A FEW YEARS AGO, I told some friends I had found a new subject to write about.
Afterward, a woman came up to me by the coat closet.
"Did I hear you say you're writing about evolution?" she asked.


There's a First Time for Everything, Braves' Lemke Discovers
Braves 2, Expos 1
Mark Lemke went against the odds and won.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Indiana Cool
Product placement -- companies paying a product's way into movies, television shows and magazines -- has taken a new form in Indiana.
The state recently dedicated an official historical marker in Terre Haute at the birthplace of the original green, contoured Coca-Cola bottle, which has since become the shape known round the world.
The bottle shown above (a reproduction) was designed by the Root Glass Company in 1915 to be instantly distinguishable from other bottles by sight or feel, whether whole or broken in pieces on the pavement.
It won a Coca-Cola contract for Root, although the shape that actually went into production was a bit slimmer.


Once-Silent Mothers Raise Voices
For years, Mary Jean Marsh would plunge into what she called "an emotional black hole" every Mother's Day, as she remembered the baby girl she gave up for adoption in 1978.
"It was a day to be endured," Ms.
Marsh said.
"I had so much hidden grief."
But five years ago, the women in the birth mothers' support group that she belonged to in Seattle decided they would not suffer silently through another Mother's Day.
With singing, poetry reading and candle-lighting, these women have since 1990 commemorated a self-proclaimed Birth Mother's Day on the Saturday before Mother's Day.


Ideas &amp; Trends; It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World Money Market
HAVE you ever noticed that whenever you read a story about the dollar, the news always seems bad?
When the dollar is up, it's bad.
When the dollar is down, it's bad.
When the market is closed, it's bad.
When the market is open, it's bad.
When the Treasury is intervening to prop up the dollar, it's bad and when there is no intervention, it's bad.
Dollar stories are like the weather report from Antarctica: it's always bad.
Why is that?
The simple answer is that the dollar is connected to so many things that its movement up or down is always cutting one person's net worth while doing wonders for another's balance sheet.
For instance, when the dollar is too weak -- as it was last week when the Treasury stepped in to prop up the American currency -- exporters are thrilled because it means everything they sell abroad is cheaper and easier to buy, but importers howl because it means everything they sell is more expensive and harder to buy.
The dollar story is the ultimate investor Rorschach test: How you interpret it depends entirely on where your money is.


Mary Collins, Anthony Yarborough
Mary Collins, a 43-year-old agent with the Triton Agency, a theatrical talent company in New York City, often arrives at work wearing a fuchsia Chanel suit, pearls, black stockings, black high heels and a beat-up black leather jacket.
A singer and an actress herself, she grew up in Texas and lived in Paris in her 20's, and never believed in marriage.
Everything from her spiky hairdo to her thinking about long-term commitments softened after she met Anthony Yarborough, a private investigator who grew up in North Carolina, at the christening of a mutual friend's baby three years ago.


High School's Partnership With Pratt Institute Goes Sour
As first envisioned two years ago, the pairing of the Benjamin Banneker Academy for Community Development and Pratt Institute in Clinton Hill seemed like a perfect match.
The students at Banneker, one of the city's 30 new experimental high schools, would have access to some of the best teachers of urban planning and design and would be part of a nurturing college environment.
In turn, Pratt would strengthen its relationship with the community.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FAMILY DRAMA  DAYBREAK  By Belva Plain. Delacorte, $22.95.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMiss Needham, Mr. Donahue
Catherine Elizabeth Needham, a daughter of James J. Needham of Bridgehampton, L.I., and the late Dolores H. Needham, was married yesterday to Timothy James Donahue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard G. Donahue of Rutland, Vt.
Msgr.
John J. Lynch performed the ceremony at the Queen of the Most Holy Rosary Church in Bridgehampton.
The bride, 31, is a senior analyst in the structured finance group at Moody's Investors Service, the bond rating concern in New York.
She graduated from Boston College and from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father, who is retired, was a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission from 1969 to 1972, and was the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange from 1972 to 1976.
Her mother was a bookkeeper in Bridgehampton.


Pagan Is Criticized Over Language
Did Councilman Antonio Pagan use sexist and racist language at a tumultuous Lower East Side school board meeting on March 23?
Or was he vigorously championing the rights of parents wrongly prevented from speaking out against the ouster of the District 1 Superintendent, William A. Ubinas?
Four people have appealed to City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone to censure Mr.
Pagan.
In a letter, the Lower East Side residents -- John Curtis, Janet Freeman, Wendy Scribner and Susan Stetzer -- say Mr.
Pagan was disruptive and intimidating at the meeting, commandeering the microphone and urging people to drown out the proceedings.


Thinking Is Required
To the Editor:
In her otherwise fine essay "I, the Jury: Why This Novelist Can't Resist a Good Book Panel" (April 10), Diane Johnson concludes with a swat at writers of oral histories.
She says there seems to be "in this technique an almost cowardly reluctance to think."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
CAPTURING NATURE The Writings and Art of John James Audubon.
Edited by Peter Roop and Connie Roop.
Illustrations by Rick Farley. 39 pp.
New York: Walker &amp; Company. $16.95. (Ages 8 to 12) JOHN JAMES AUDUBON By Joseph Kastner.
Illustrated. 91 pp.
New York: First Impressions/Harry N. Abrams.


Cortines Delays Changing Special Education System
In the face of protests from parents, school administrators and powerful unions, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced yesterday that he would postpone for one year a promised shake-up of the city's vast special education system.
Under a reorganization plan that Mr.
Cortines announced in March, school principals were to gain control for the first time, starting in September, over the nearly 3,000 psychologists, educational evaluators and social workers who work in teams in each of the city's schools to test children who have been referred for evaluation.
The evaluation teams are currently under the control of administrators at Board of Education headquarters.
Eventual Decentralization
Mr.
Cortines had also called for the establishment, by this September, of pilot programs in 3 of the city's 32 community school districts, to prepare the way for the full decentralization in September 1995 of District 75, the citywide school district that encompasses the programs for the city's most severely handicapped youngsters.


All American


Wash That Winter Right Out of the Draperies and Shades
DRAPERIES, blinds and shades usually benefit dramatically from spring cleaning.
All can become dirty in the winter, when low humidity increases static electricity, causing dust to cling.
Vacuuming may suffice for draperies.
The only other options are washing or dry-cleaning.
Close the draperies and clean the fabric panel by panel.
Use an upholstery attachment connected to an extension arm, and open the suction-control ring on the hose to prevent the vacuum from drawing against the fabric with too much force.


Hospitals Are Scrambling to Deal With Radioactive Wastes
With their only disposal site closing on June 30, New York's hospitals and medical laboratories are trying to figure out what to do with the low-level radioactive wastes produced in cancer treatment and research.
The issue is particularly acute on the Upper East Side, the home of the state's two largest producers of such material: Memorial Sloan-Kettering (about 2,800 cubic feet of waste per year) and New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center (2,260 cubic feet).


Scant Space in Hong Kong
If the basic rules of supply and demand hold true, hotel rooms in Hong Kong could soon be rarer and costlier.
To make way for more office buildings, several hotels, including the 660-room Lee Gardens Hotel in Causeway Bay, were recently torn down, and more are scheduled to go, including the Ambassador in Tsim Sha Tsui and China Merchants in West Point.
A bigger loss could be the Hongkong Hilton, whose management recently shifted from Hilton International to Hutchison Ltd., the real-estate company that owns the 739-room hotel, though no plans have been announced.
But the 263-room Pearl Seaview Hotel in Wau Ma Tei is to open in 1994.


Obviously, It Was Party Time
Dinners, dances and receptions for books, for art, for music, for schools, for good works and for those who do them were plentiful enough to keep partygoers hopping.


Images of the Perfect Mother: Put Them All Together in a Multitude of Ways
At the American Greetings card shop at 40th Street and Broadway a few days ago, throngs of shoppers stood paralyzed in the aisles, frozen in a pre-Mother's Day panic.
So many cards, so many messages, and so many of them mixed.
Who is Mother anyway?
A bedrock idea is quaking, and the seismic shocks are still rumbling.
Despite the collective sentimentality and familiar homilies of this annual celebration, there is now, as seldom before, intense confusion and anxiety about motherhood.
Once, it was clear what a mother was supposed to be.
But now a mother can be working outside the home, or not; married, divorced or single by choice; a biological parent, an adoptive one or a recipient of donated eggs.
Women can look to Tipper Gore or Hillary Rodham Clinton, women of the same generation who chose different paths.
Donna Reed has given way to Roseanne, and audiences cheer "Serial Mom" as a manic sendup of the 1950's icon perkily kills people who threaten her children.
Cultural Anxiety
One Mother's Day card reads, "What do you get when you combine Joan of Arc, Amelia Earhart, Florence Nightingale, Madame Curie and Mother Teresa all in one person? A Hell of a Mess! Who Needs Them When We've Got You!"


Campaign Against Smoking Has Gotten Out of Hand
To the Editor:
In regard to the April 24 Coping column, "A Lonely Cry From the Smoking Section," I feel that the discrimination going on against smokers has gotten totally out of hand.
Let me start by saying that I have never smoked and have no desire to smoke.
My father, a three-pack-a-day man starting when he was 14, died at age 70 from lung cancer attributable to smoking.
When he was diagnosed, he stepped up the smoking, saying, "Why stop now?" And indeed his last act, after getting the last rites, was to light up.


Racial Slur Causes Political Turmoil for Democrats in Northwest
A racial slur directed at Asians 18 months ago has turned into political quicksand for this state's Democratic Party, which has been sucked into deeper trouble with every effort to extricate itself from the controversy.
Last Tuesday the party dropped plans to hold this year's state convention in Spokane, where two local party officials have been accused of calling Hong Kong businessmen "chinks."


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike
To the Editor:
"His efforts to end the war came to naught for years" (April 24): When I read these words above the heading "Vietnam 1969" and the photo of a smiling President Richard M. Nixon among United States soldiers in Saigon, I hit a wall of shock and pain.
It is one matter that Richard Nixon lied to this country for decades about subjects from Helen Gahagan Douglas and Checkers through Vietnam and Watergate; I believe we are still suffering from the harm he did to the American Presidency, and to our images of political leaders.
It is another that, on his death, you lie about his efforts to end the war in Vietnam.


For All Ages


The Bum Who Fathered Mother's Day
You have heard the arguments against the rite of condescension that you are observing today.
So I won't take up time deploring the crimes against taste typified by that Mother's Day card icon, the gauzy photograph of a single rose. (Why, as Dorothy Parker wondered, is it never one perfect limousine?) Nor will I rail against the mother who profits most from the holiday, Ma Bell.
Let the historical record speak for itself.


'Genesis': Celebrating Black Playwrights
THE eight plays and four musical works that comprise Genesis 1994 at the Crossroads Theater Company are in no shape for scrutiny by critics nor are they ready for the niceties of production.
But anyone who cares about the process of theatrical creation wouldn't mind taking up residence at Crossroads for 11 days starting Thursday.
The aptly titled festival of works in progress to be performed as a series of staged readings marks the theater's fifth foray into the untried.
This year though, Genesis is concluding the season for the first time.
"That puts our whole concentration on the event, instead of splitting the theater's focus, as when it happens between shows," said Sydne Mahone, the director of Crossroads play development, who is in charge of Genesis.
"More than in past years, this festival is a fusion of tradition -- new spins on tradition -- and innovation," Ms.
Mahone added.


Sound Bytes; A Guide in Big Blue Country
SAM ALBERT may be the quintessential schmoozer and self-promoter, a computer management consultant who calls himself "the Sol Hurok of the information systems business."
His company, Sam Albert Associates, based in Scarsdale, N.Y., is well connected in the industry and enjoys bringing people and companies together -- particularly if the International Business Machines Corporation is involved.


Russia Trips to Aid Endangered Tigers
A chance to see some of the world's last remaining Siberian tigers and at the same time contribute toward the effort to insure their survival is provided by a trip this summer and fall to Ussuriland, in Russia's Far East.
The area, bounded by Manchuria, China, on the west and the Sea of Japan to east, is a unique habitat of subtropical plants and animals that escaped the last ice age.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEDaniele Gerard, Daniel Woods
Daniele Gerard, a lawyer at North Carolina Prisoner Legal Services in Raleigh, was married yesterday to Daniel John Woods, the data base editor at The News &amp; Observer in Raleigh.
Daniel Neiden, a justice of the peace in New York, performed the ceremony at the home of Hala Makowska and William Kurth, friends of the couple, in Scarborough, N.Y.
Ms.
Gerard, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Lois K. Gerard of New York and Fred N. Gerard of Phoenix.


Talks Failed To Resolve Clinton Suit
In the 24 hours before a former Arkansas state employee filed a sexual harassment suit against President Clinton on Friday, lawyers for both sides tried hurriedly to work out a compromise that would avert the lawsuit, the lawyers said in interviews today.
The effort was aimed at getting the President to issue a statement that would satisfy both sides.
Although at times the lawyers felt they were close to accomplishing that goal, it eventually became clear that the problem was insurmountable.


Stylish Alternatives to Plain Pork Chops
NOT many women got the last word with George Bernard Shaw.
But Mrs.
Patrick Campbell, the actress, engaged in a furious battle with this die-hard vegetarian during a rehearsal of one of his plays and finally ended the argument by saying, in effect, "Shaw, someday you will eat a pork chop and then God help all women!"
Pork chops have long been thought to be especially nourishing.
Now that pork is also being touted as a low-fat meat, it is making its way back with increasing frequency to the dinner table and onto the menus of popular restaurants.
It is mellow and rich without being too heavy -- and it is also inexpensive.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
4th Graders in College
THEY CAME, they saw, and they most definitely conquered.
When fourth-grader students from Barnum Woods Elementary School in East Meadow journeyed to Adelphi University it was not the fourth graders who were in awe.
It was the college students with whom they shared a Latin American literature class.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours pages on April 24 about "On Stage at the Met," the annual party at the Metropolitan Opera for the Met's corporate sponsors, misidentified the woman shown with Cecile Zilkha, chairwoman of the benefit committee.
She was Donatella Andreani, the wife of the French Ambassador to the United States (not Monica Baeyens, the wife of the French consul general).


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEDawn Carroll, Anthony Nish
Dawn Melanie Carroll, a daughter of Patrick Carroll of Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Anthony John Nish, a son of Adele and Anthony Nish of Cinnaminson, N.J.
The Rev.
Tony K. Wolfe performed the ceremony at Setauket (L.I.) Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Carroll, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Stetson University and is a candidate for a master's degree in environmental management at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She was raised by her great aunt and uncle, Marion and Ben Robins of Cutchogue, L.I.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINECathy E. Taub, Lowell C. Freiberg
Cathy Ellen Taub, an assistant counsel to Marsh &amp; McLennan, the New York insurance brokerage, was married last evening to Lowell Carl Freiberg, a senior vice president and the chief financial officer of Reliance Group Holdings, an insurance holding company in New York.
Rabbi Carole Balin officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Ms.
Taub is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Shirley and Jesse Taub of Edison, N.J.


Trade Won't Guarantee Human Rights
To the Editor:
In his plea that the Clinton Administration retain China's most-favored-nation status ("In China, Let Free Markets Aid Liberty," Viewpoints, April 24), Stephen Robert's expectations for democracy in China are much too high.
While maintaining free trade is the proper approach in helping improve China's political situation, Mr.
Robert's assumption that "economic freedom is rapidly thrusting China toward political freedom that will be . . . ingrained in the fabric of Chinese society" is dangerous.


Hear Them Roar
Watching the skating finals in the Winter Olympics, a certain Manhattan man in his 40's found himself focusing more on Katarina Witt's upper torso than on her skates.
This man blithely made a remark to his wife about the skater's plentiful gifts -- without serious repercussions.
Ten years ago, this same man reflected, he might not have allowed his eyes and thoughts to wander as they had.
What was sure, though, was that he would never have mentioned it to a woman for fear of being thought an unreconstructed pig.


It's Choir vs. Choir, All in Harmony
THIRTY choirs from around the city will compete this week in a gospel music sing-off at Queens College.
The amateur groups, most of them affiliated with churches, range in size from 15 to 90 people and have singers as young as 10 years old.
Both the semifinals, on Thursday and Friday, and the finals on Sunday will be open to the public.
Vivian Charlop, executive director of the college's Colden Center for the Performing Arts, said, "Each of the groups will have 15 minutes to set up, perform two songs and get off the stage.


Clinton Grants Haitian Exiles Hearings at Sea
President Clinton decided today to grant asylum hearings to Haitians who are halted at sea while trying to reach the United States, reversing a policy that has required the Coast Guard to forcibly return the boats, White House officials said.
Responding to growing pressure from Congress and supporters of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, White House officials said the United States would grant asylum interviews to potential refugees on United States vessels in the Caribbean or at sites in other countries in the region.


Stylish Alternatives to Plain Pork Chops
NOT many women got the last word with George Bernard Shaw.
But Mrs.
Patrick Campbell, the actress, engaged in a furious battle with this die-hard vegetarian during a rehearsal of one of his plays and finally ended the argument by saying, in effect, "Shaw, someday you will eat a pork chop and then God help all women!"
Pork chops have long been thought to be especially nourishing.
Now that pork is also being touted as a low-fat meat, it is making its way back with increasing frequency to the dinner table and onto the menus of popular restaurants.
It is mellow and rich without being too heavy -- and it is also inexpensive.


POSTINGS: 'Automobile Row' No More; A New Fragrance Image for the Far West Side
While mid-Manhattan was changed and changed again by waves of redevelopment, the far West Side kept much of the husky character of the early 20th century, when the district was dominated by the automotive industry.
Even today, many vestiges remain -- garages, showrooms, service stations and office buildings -- from Broadway (once known as Automobile Row) to the riverfront.
Now, International Flavors &amp; Fragrances is introducing a sleek, corporate tone to the area with a $19.5 million renovation of its headquarters, a two-building complex at 521 and 533 West 57th Street where it has operated since the 1960's.
The company, a leading creator and manufacturer of flavors and fragrances, has its corporate offices, New York sales offices and perfumers' laboratories on West 57th Street.
Other space is leased to CBS, whose Broadcast Center is across the street.


RECORD BRIEFS
Dowland: 'Lachrimae' Christopher Wilson, lutenist; Fretwork.
Virgin Classics 5 45005 2; CD.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEScott S. Waxenberg, Nadine B. Stein
Nadine Beth Stein, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Stein, was married last evening to Scott Stephen Waxenberg, the son of Alan and Suzanne Waxenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Patrice Heller, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Mrs.
Waxenberg, 31, is the advertising manager for the New England region at Self magazine in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father was the president of the Generation Metals Corporation, a metals broker in Hauppauge, L.I.


Romania's Other Revolution
At the final match of the Romania Cup soccer tournament last weekend, an antiquated television camera roamed the sideline like some hulking metal insect, tattered sofa cushions lined metal benches in the press box, advertising placards promised soft drinks from the West while vendors hawked only the seeds of sunflowers and pumpkins, and police ringed the field wearing riot helmets and carrying batons.
When the match was over and a team from Transylvania, Gloria Bistrita, had won a surprising 1-0 victory over the university-affiliated Atomic Lions from Craiova, the police charged the disconsolate Craiova fans, clubbing them as they reached for jerseys being tossed over a fence, and later skirmishing with the supporters outside of the stadium.


Mr. Gingrich's False Alarm on Trade
The minority whip, Newt Gingrich, has threatened to vote against the trade agreement that the U.S. and over 100 partners signed last month after seven brutal years of negotiation.
That is a bizarre turnabout for a man who almost single-handedly bailed out the Clinton Presidency by rounding up Republican votes for a similar accord -- the North American Free Trade Agreement -- over the opposition of House Democrats.
Bizarre -- and wrong.
Mr.
Gingrich says he is for world trade but against world government.
He fears that the World Trade Organization, the oversight body provided for in the new agreement, would subject Americans to rules imposed by third world countries.
But the W.T.O. would be more pussycat than tiger -- and would protect U.S. interests better than the existing General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT, which has governed trade for almost 50 years.


For Sumatra's Warriors, Defenses Were Divine
LIVING AMONG volcanoes on the high plateaus of Indonesia, the Batak warriors of Northern Sumatra resisted invaders until the 19th century.
Turbulence and isolation in a rugged island landscape helped these people shape powerful expressions of the supernatural in architectural sculpture, everyday artifacts and ritual objects.
Images of magic, death and deities are pervasive in the exhibition "Divine Protection: Batak Art of North Sumatra," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, through Dec. 31, the first show in New York to focus exclusively on the art of these Southeast Asian people.


The World; The War Still Unsettles The Winners Of the Peace
CHANCELLOR HELMUT KOHL, who says he's content to be left out of the 50th anniversary commemoration of the Allied landings in Normandy on June 6, finds it unfathomable that nobody believes him.
"Quite frankly, I really do not understand what people are talking about," the German leader said in London recently.
"At no point did I seek to get invited to the commemorations for D-Day. Had I been invited, I would not have attended."


The Inmate Gangs of Rikers Island; New Challenge in a System in Which Violence Is Chronic
Outside the highest-security unit on Rikers Island, a chain link fence topped with razor wire has split up a recreation yard into three squares.
Inside, a chapel that can accommodate more than 100 inmates recently held only 45 after officials limited the size of groups allowed inside.
As one officer videotaped the worshiping inmates, a team of eight officers with batons and helmets waited outside their cell block to guard against trouble as they returned.


The Earth's Orbit, Dusk to Dawn


A Nation of Oddballs
THE TROUBLESOME OFFSPRING OF CARDINAL GUZMAN By Louis de Bernieres. 363 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINERuth Yanoff, Michael Hoare
Ruth Eve Yanoff, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Leo Yanoff of West Orange, N.J., was married last Sunday to Michael John Hoare, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William Hoare.
Judge John A. Marzulli of State Superior Court in Newark officiated at the Eaglerock Club in Roseland, N.J.
Ms.
Yanoff, 43, is a member of the staff of the employee assistance program at The New York Times.
Her father is a State Superior Court judge in Newark.
Her mother, Louise J. Yanoff, retired as a statistician at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Teaneck, N.J.


Splish Splash: Go for Gin Heads Straight to Roses
Holy Bull stalled on the brink of greatness today when he got trapped and outrun and finished 12th while Go for Gin swept through the mud to a commanding victory in the 120th Kentucky Derby.
It took a few seconds more than two minutes for the colts to play out their drama on a rainy day over a sloppy track before a throng of 130,594 at Churchill Downs.
And it was a drama of violently changing fortunes.


Editorial Notebook; Do You Work? Are You Guilty?
One of my favorite movies is a French film from 1978 called "Dear Inspector." It starred the marvelous Annie Girardot as a high-ranking police detective.
Ms.
Girardot is teamed with a more traditional male partner, and their methods are at odds throughout the film.
At one point, in frustration, Ms.
Girardot's character quits her job.
This is where the movie got interesting -- to me, anyway.
The Girardot character was, you see, a mother as well.
And she had not been home for more than a few days before her daughter was pleading: "Mother! Will you please go back to work?" (Or the equivalent, in French, of course.) The energetic police detective, with nowhere to put her energy except into her household, was making herself a thorough pain to her family.


A Floral Tour of Vermont
EVEN in Vermont, a state well used to snow and subzero temperatures, it was an exceptionally hard winter, the kind that has made Vermonters stop pining for the snowfalls of their youth.
And it required a certain optimism, when the snow cover lingered into mid-April, to believe that flowers would bloom again.
In northern Vermont, spring comes first to the Champlain Valley, where Lake Champlain itself acts as a large thermal mass, tempering the climate of the region, according to David Heleba, a field research technician at the University of Vermont's Department of Plant and Soil Science.


The Nation; Bags Aloft, Planes Grounded
IN the days when a strong back and quick hands were enough to get the task done, the ultimate in might, and right, was embodied in a character named Superman.
But since the emergence of the microchip, the man of steel -- faster than a speeding bullet but downright slow compared to 14,400 bits per second -- has become obsolete.
Even his alter-ego, Clark Kent, must have learned to work a laptop, or take the buyout at the Daily Planet.
For decades now, American workers have been looking over their shoulders at the advances of labor-saving technology, and growing weary of all the fawning over computers.
They keep hearing that computers can do the job better, faster and without a peep of protest.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE HISTORIC EXPEDITION TO AMERICA (1909): Freud, Jung, and Hall the King-Maker By Saul Rosenzweig.
Rana House, Box 2997, St.
Louis, Mo. 63103; $14.95.
Freud made only one trip to the United States, after he was invited by G. Stanley Hall, the president of Clark University, to accept an honorary degree.
The 1909 visit was characterized by incidents highlighting Freud's power struggle with his disciple, Carl Jung, and by a strange meeting with William James, another scholar skeptical of Freudian theory.
This account "is both sound and ingenious," Perry Meisel said here last year.


Wins and Losses on 2 Sides in Custodial Contract
Amid the latest dispute between City Hall and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, it was clear last week that a tentative labor agreement with New York City's 853 school custodians was neither a revolution, as Mr.
Cortines described it, or ineffectual tinkering, as it was called by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The accord contains several work-rule changes that would increase productivity and save money.
It would make the custodians more accountable to school principals, create a system of annual "operations plans" for the maintenance of each school building, and eliminate the custodians' ability to buy and sell equipment for their own use or profit.


Still Laughing Out Loud
To the Editor:
It was with great joy -- and a couple of tears of the happiest kind of nostalgia -- that I read Peter Schickele's appreciation of Spike Jones and his City Slickers  [ "The Hills Are Alive, but What a Way to Live!," April 10 ] .


Q and A
From Delhi to Agra
Q.
I would appreciate any information you have about going from New Delhi to Agra, site of the Taj Mahal, by car and driver and by train. -- Sylvia Sudin, Huntington Beach, Calif.


Data Bank/May 8, 1994
Data Bank/May 8, 1994
Construction Spending
March
Feb.
Jan.
Monthly percent change
0.8
-1.0
-2.3
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.0
0.4
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.1
-0.3
2.4
Consumer Borrowing
Annual rates of growth
11.1
6.0
9.7
Employment
In thousands
122,300
122,000
122,300
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,400 (6.4)
8,500 (6.5)
8,500 (6.5)
Weekly Jobless Claims
April 22
April 15
April 8
In thousands
350
333
366
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
912,754
964,163
961,089


Sisters


D-Day
To the Editor: Stephen E. Ambrose's article, "The Battlescape of Normandy" (April 17), states that the 9,386 G.I.'s buried in the cemetery at Normandy had names that are Polish, German, Russian, Jewish, Irish, Greek, Dutch, Scandinavian.
My father lost a dear friend who had an Italian name who is buried there.
There were many Americans with Italian names who died in the Normandy invasion.
I am surprised and disappointed that they too were not honored in this article.
AMY GILIBERTO  Old Bethpage, L.I.


World Markets; Madrid Weathers a String of Scandals
MADRID'S stock market was shaken last week by corruption scandals that rocked the Spanish Government, prompting fears of prolonged financial panic.
In fact, the opposite happened.
After two days of steep plunges, the market began bouncing back once Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez made clear that he had no intention of resigning.
Although analysts do not rule out further volatility, most feel that Madrid's Bolsa index will continue to rise as the economy improves.
For all the ups and downs, there are still good buys for those in for the long run.
The market in Madrid, which enjoyed gains of over 50 percent in 1993 and a big surge this January, has behaved much like other European markets of late.
It plunged over concern about rising interest rates in the United States, and recovered with cuts in Spain's own domestic rates.


The Woman Before Hillary
LEADING WITH MY HEART By Virginia Kelley with James Morgan.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.50.


Ex-Communists In Hungary ead in Polls
Jozsef Kiss, nattily dressed in a pale spring suit and contrasting tie, has fared well in the four years since the Communists were tossed from power here.
He travels abroad twice a month, his import company is flourishing, and his son holds an important post in a big Western company.
His standard of living, unlike that of most Hungarians, has improved.
But in the parliamentary elections on Sunday, the 56-year-old former Communist, a factory manager in the old days, plans to turn his back on the right-of-center party he favored in 1990 and vote for the return of his old Communist comrades, revamped and renamed the Socialist Party.


The Executive Life; Stepping Into the Heels Of Their Career Moms
WHEN Toni C. Lichstein's mother began working in the mid-1950's, Ms.
Lichstein felt ashamed.
She was about 7 years old, and most children where she lived in Trenton went home from school for lunch.
Ms.
Lichstein, whose mother was an accountant, had to eat at school.
She remembers hiding her lunch bag and thinking "there was something strange or peculiar about my family that my mother worked and other children's mothers did not."
Today Ms.
Lichstein feels only pride.
"When I had children, I really realized how many balls my mother had been simultaneously juggling in an era when there was not the kind of support that is available now," said Ms.
Lichstein, a partner with the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
"The dry cleaners didn't deliver, there were no Cuisinart machines, there wasn't takeout food." Ms.
Lichstein has all these things plus an au pair, a housekeeper and a husband who "helps tremendously." This support, she said, makes it possible for her to work long hours as a litigator.


WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT JEWS
Wood shows an extraordinary sensitivity to the rhythms and tones of others.
It is therefore especially tragic that he is deaf to the entreaties of the columnist Richard Cohen, among many others, whose contrast of their behavior with that of other groups is not intended to exclude blacks from the American family but to show them the only way in.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEClaire A. Bloch, John T. Nielsen
Claire Anne Bloch, the head of story development for National Geographic Television, was married in New York last evening to John Thomas Nielsen, an environment correspondent at National Public Radio.
Both work in Washington.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at the Pierre.
Ms.
Bloch, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Skidmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Lucienne and Dr.
Claude Bloch of New York.
Dr.
Bloch is a radiologist in private practice and is also on the staff of Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
The bride's mother is an author.


From Haute Couture To Cultural Affairs
WHEN Martin Schrader retired three years ago from his job as vice president and publisher of Harper's Bazaar, he stepped up his skiing and tennis playing, took a 160-mile hiking trip in Europe and learned, he said, that there was more to the county than his own family's home in Croton-on-Hudson and "a 40-mile train track" to Manhattan.
Now the 69-year-old Mr.
Schrader, who also served as publisher of Town and Country and House Beautiful in his 32-year career with the Hearst Corporation, is again poring over sales figures and marketing plans, but this time his subject is the arts, not fashion or design.
In February he became the publisher of Arts News, a monthly publication of the Westchester Arts Council.
It is a job he is doing free of charge but with immense enthusiasm.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINECatherine DiDomenico, J. G. Dishner
Catherine Lee DiDomenico, the daughter of Maury and Angela DiDomenico of Bernardsville, N.J., was married last Sunday to Jeffrey Gordon Dishner, the son of Jimmy and Linda Dishner of Tewksbury Township, N.J.
The Rev.
Gregory D'Emma performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
The bride, 27, is an assistant marketing manager at Chesebrough-Ponds, a consumer products manufacturer, in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Amherst College.
She and the bridegroom received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a telecommunications consultant and the president of Telephone Video of America, a provider of video services.
Her mother is the manager of the Basking Ridge, N.J., office of Coldwell Banker-Schlott Realtors.


Winston May, Actor, 57
Winston May, who acted in Off-Broadway productions, television commercials and films in a 35-year career, died on April 29 at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 57 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his manager, Roxy Horen.


CAST IN BRONZE
Just as the ancients admired its luster and sheen, designers this season choose bronze for their modern-day statuary.


White Supremacists March in Boston
Nineteen white supremacists marched through South Boston today despite city officials' warnings that they would be arrested if they paraded without a permit.
The marchers, who called themselves the Nationalist Movement, were almost obscured by more than 800 police officers in riot gear who surrounded them as they walked on the sidewalk.
There were no arrests, the police said.


Symbols/The New South Africa; The First Emblems of Unity: A Little Something for Everyone
At 11 A.M.
Tuesday, guests at the inauguration of Nelson Mandela as the President of a new South Africa are to stand for the singing of the national anthems, both of them, and the raising of the national colors, all six of them.
Thus even before Mr.
Mandela begins his inaugural address, the national symbols will have announced to attentive guests his likely themes: reconciliation and consensus.
A negotiated revolution requires negotiated decoration, and South Africa's new heraldry, like its Constitution, shows the labor of trying to include everybody.


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
MAKING IT: Capt.
Thomas M. Chin has been promoted to head the Fifth Precinct in Chinatown, becoming the city's first Asian-American commanding officer.
Relations between the precinct hierarchy and the community have cooled in recent months. . .
HEAR NO EVIL: The Harvard Club has asked a judge to order striking employees to be more civil on the picket line.
Club officials say strikers scream at patrons and encourage horn-honking.
The Hotel Employees Union says its people are well-behaved. . .
UP AND OUT: The police are about to start enforcing a 1 A.M. curfew in Union Square Park, says Rob Walsh, director of the Union Square Business Improvement District.
He says curfews in Tompkins Square, Washington Square and Stuyvesant Square Parks are causing more of the homeless to come to Union Square. . .
AND UPTOWN: Residents around De Witt Clinton Park, at 11th Avenue and 52d Street, complain that homeless people are making a mess of the park.
Julia Fitzgerald, district manager of Community Board 4, says she'd like to see a "Friends of DeWitt Clinton Park" formed. . .
READERS' GUIDE: The Tompkins Square Library is closing Saturday for 18 months of renovations.
A temporary storefront will open June 1 at 201 First Avenue.


20+, HIV+
Stephen Beachy makes us aware, in "20+, HIV+" (April 17), that young, bright talents and spoiled shoplifters on Government assistance are equally susceptible to H.I.V. infection.
But what I find almost as tragic as Beachy's H.I.V. status is the casual ease with which he depicts himself as both.
BRAD CONARD Miami Shores, Fla.


19th-Century Reformer's Way With the Homeless
THE mothers and their children stare at the camera in the shelter where they will spend the night -- tired, apprehensive, huddled like sheep, afraid of the dark outside.
At another shelter, this one for men, the occupants are getting ready to sleep on cots so close together that they look like a carpet of rectangles.


A Pinkster Festival At Philipsburg Manor
AN organization living up to the promise of its title by preserving and showcasing important places and customs of our American past, Historic Hudson Valley, is celebrating the Pinkster Festival today at Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown.
Originally a Dutch holiday, said Burns Patterson, public relations director of Historic Hudson Valley, Pinkster "evolved in the Hudson River Valley as a spring holiday celebrated by enslaved Africans as well as landowners and tenant farmers." He added, "Storytelling, dancing and music, including 'the language of the drum,' make for an unforgettable family event." The grounds are open from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The number to call for more details is 631-8200.
Those willing to drive a little farther afield, to Annandale-on-Hudson, will find Montgomery Place, another Historic Hudson Valley restoration, and a taste of Elizabethan England "a spring celebration featuring jesters, jugglers, merchants, musicians, lords and ladies, and actors performing the works of Shakespeare." The hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and the information number is 758-5461.


Where There's Smoking, There's Controversy
To the Editor:
By Brennan Dawson's tortured logic -- "people who smoke are absolutely more likely to get lung cancer" but smoking doesn't cause lung cancer -- the smallpox virus does not cause smallpox, cholesterol does not clog the arteries and driving while drunk does not kill because some of those exposed to these dangers manage to survive intact.
Her argument rings as true as that of the tobacco industry executive who argues that smoking is not addictive because many people are able to quit; it proves only how talented some people are at rationalizing behavior that helps them and hurts others.
VICKI ROVERE  Manhattan, April 24  The writer is the author of two New York City guidebooks.


Defending the Blue
IT CAN probably be said that Barry W. Agulnick knows more police officers accused of breaking the law than almost anyone else in the city.
That is because for more than two decades, Mr.
Agulnick, a lawyer, has developed a peculiar boutique practice: he specializes in representing officers steeped in seriously hot water.
His clients leaped into headlines from the Knapp Commission report, the Xaviera Hollander "Happy Hooker" investigations, the death of the graffiti writer Michael Stewart, and the pervasive corruption of the 77th Precinct in Bedford-Stuyvesant in 1986.


In the Region/Westchester; A School Adds an On-Site Course: Construction 101
A YEAR ago, a private school in White Plains that expected a great deal of disruption from the construction of a 19,000-square-foot addition decided to make the site a learning laboratory for its students.
While the experiment did not lessen the noise or the amount of dust generated by the project, the experiment has yielded some hoped-for benefits.


South Africa Slips Quickly Into Parliamentary Routine
The big moment for the rest of the world may be Nelson Mandela's presidential inauguration on Tuesday, but representative democracy actually arrived today across South Africa in all its humdrum glory.
Eight of the nation's nine new provincial legislatures held opening sessions to inaugurate their own regional versions of the multiracial power sharing at the heart of the new South Africa.
And, far from debating liberty or death, the newly elected politicians soon enmeshed themselves in points of order and the perquisites of incumbency.


Clowning Around for Mom, Family Style
LOOKING for a last-minute Mother's Day gift?
You could take Mom to the Pickle Family Circus at 3 this afternoon at the Palace in Stamford.
A four-piece jazz band underscores the acrobatics, and original music and dance provide counterpoint to the ribbon swirling, wire walking and clowning around.
The box office number is 325-4466.


Where There's Smoking, There's Controversy
To the Editor:
By extending coverage to Brennan Dawson, Michael Janofsky has proven himself a thoroughly modern member of the press.
Today's Fourth Estate has charged itself with the presentation of all points of view without offering the requisite framework for analysis.
To the uninformed, this endows all ideas with equal intellectual currency ("I saw it in the Sunday Times") and plays directly into what Ms.
Dawson's keepers desire -- an addled populace unable to denounce those involved in the tobacco industry as the liars and scoundrels they are.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINELaura C. Halter, Nicholas Sardone
Laura Caine Halter, a senior account manager at the Wordperfect Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to Nicholas Sardone, a vice president at Citicorp Real Estate in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Carson performed the ceremony at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Pawleys Island, S.C.
Mrs.
Sardone, 36, graduated from the University of Georgia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank B. Halter of Greenville, S.C.


Sand, Plenty. Surf, Warming. Guards, Cut.
Lifeguard patrols along the white-sand beach of Jacob Riis Park on the Rockaway peninsula have been eliminated for more than a third of the beach season as officials adjust to cuts in Federal spending.
Park officials say the move could further damage the image of the beach, which suffered in 1988 and 1992 when medical waste washed ashore.


Nets' Next Foe: Daly's Future
Today is Sunday, so Chuck Daly will rest.
Tomorrow is Monday, when he is scheduled to be inducted into the Naismith International Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass.
Those are not the kinds of things the coach of the Nets likes to be doing at this time of year.
Even before it was definite that New Jersey's first-round opponents would be the Knicks, Daly was anticipating his 11th consecutive trip to the National Basketball Association playoffs, his second straight since taking over the Nets for the 1992-93 season.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEJodi M. Kule, Robert A. Nagel
Jodi Michelle Kule, a daughter of Eugene and Arlene Kule of New York, was married last evening to Robert Alan Nagel, a son of George and Gertrude Nagel of Long Beach, L.I.
Cantor Richard Betton performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Kule-Nagel, 32, is a vice president of Silk Club, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her father is the president of the company and her mother is the designer.


F.Y.I.
The Legend of Tess
Q.
Five or six years ago, there was a mysterious outburst of handposted signs that read, "DJ NO X-MEN TESS." Recently, they have reappeared.
What are they all about?
My best theory is that the ex-members of Menudo, forced into retirement when they passed the age of 15, formed a group called the X-Men and hired a vocalist named Tess, and are protesting because disk jockeys won't play their album.
True?


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $799,500
200 Mercer Street 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, dining area, fireplace, 16-ft. ceilings, 2,000-sq.-ft. private roof deck; maintenance $1,430, 90% tax deductible, listed at $895,000, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: Eychner/Village; Douglas Elliman)


Editors' Note
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the popularity of Gregorian chants refers to RCA Victor's forthcoming album "Chill to the Chant." Finished copies of the compact disk, distributed before the section appeared, carried the subtitle "The Magic of Gregorian Chant," which the article cites.


Boris, Is Your Work Cut Out for You!
To the Editor:
Regarding the article on the Russian mega-shareholder Boris Isgarchev and his efforts to save the Intourist Hotel in Volgograd ("In the New Russia, an Era of Takeovers," April 17), Mr.
Isgarchev will have to do more than just overhaul the plumbing in the hotel.
I visited Volgograd in 1989, and while attending a circus performance I was almost overcome by fumes from the sewer system.
The local citizenry didn't seem to be affected, but I wondered what was done with the city's waste.
Repairing the hotel's pipes is just a start.
REGINA BLAY  Toms River, N.J., April 20


Beads. Feathers. Sequins. Lace. Fantasy. Flash.
BOB MACKIE IS ON HIS KNEES, hand thrust up Dee Hoty's skirt, trying to get what's called the mike pack onto her behind or maybe just above it.
He pushes higher.
Her eyebrows fly.
"Sorry," he murmurs politely.
"Usually people buy me dinner before they do that," she says.
Most people would happily go without dinner to have the man who created Cher's clothes do the same for them, especially if they didn't have to expose their bellybuttons in the bargain.


Manager's Profile
Randall W. Merk Fund: Benham Adjustable Rate Government Securities Fund, $840 million in assets.
Co-manager since 1991 inception. (Sponsor: the Benham Group, Mountain View, Calif.)


No Headline
Human rights involve national perspective.
The United States may be troubled, for example, by China's insistence on limiting families to two children.
For their part, the Chinese may regard widespread gun ownership in the United States as a threat to human rights. -- LE MAI, Deputy Foreign Minister of Vietnam.  [ 12:6. ]


Stylish Alternatives to Plain Pork Chops
NOT many women got the last word with George Bernard Shaw.
But Mrs.
Patrick Campbell, the actress, engaged in a furious battle with this die-hard vegetarian during a rehearsal of one of his plays and finally ended the argument by saying, in effect, "Shaw, someday you will eat a pork chop and then God help all women!"
Pork chops have long been thought to be especially nourishing.
Now that pork is also being touted as a low-fat meat, it is making its way back with increasing frequency to the dinner table and onto the menus of popular restaurants.
It is mellow and rich without being too heavy -- and it is also inexpensive.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Robert M. Biondi; Paying Attention to Children's Asthma
IF it seems there is more asthma around, there is.
According to a 1991 report by the National Institutes of Health, the prevalence of asthma increased 29 percent from 1980 to 1987.
Of 12 million Americans diagnosed with the disease, 4 million are under the age of 18.
Inhalers are regularly seen at ice hockey rinks, soccer fields and in lockers, quelling the cough.
Parents and their asthmatic children can rattle off asthma medications as easily as their own telephone numbers, and the words "nebulizer" and "peak flow meter" are regularly heard on the playground.


Writer Confronts the Legacy Of Whitman and 'Raintree'
WE stood at the top of Jaynes Hill, the highest point in Long Island, looking out at the sea Walt Whitman looked upon.
Larry Lockridge was holding his father's annotated copy of Whitman, in which his father's favorite lines were marked.
Oh, despairer, here is my neck,


NEWS SUMMARY
SHIFTS ECONOMIC STANCE  After a year and a half of seeking faster economic growth, the Clinton Administration has now reluctantly changed course, putting the stability of financial markets ahead of rapid economic expansion.  1  LOOKING TO WAYS AND MEANS  Advocates of health care restructuring are desperate for a display of legislative machismo to break the stalemate in other Congressional committees.
They are counting on the Ways and Means Committee to produce it.  1  SPECTER OF HEROIN GROWS  The latest drug in vogue is heroin, which, a generation ago, may have evoked the specter of the ultimate dead end.
But for young users, its allure has grown.  1  A HARASSING SWITCH  Some conservatives who had once called Anita Hill a liar for accusing Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment were now supporting Paula Jones, the woman accusing President Clinton of sexual harassment.
Some women who put Ms.
Hill on a pedestal now find themselves wishing they could cut the ground out from underneath Ms.
Jones.  16  OUTSIDER LOSES ALLURE  Two years ago, Lynn Yeakel almost unseated Senator Arlen Spector of Pennsylvania by focusing on his role in questioning Prof.
Anita Hill.
But now, she is just one of a pack of Democrats seeking the nomination for Governor.  16  WHAT IS A 'MOTHER'?
Once, it was clear what a mother was supposed to be.


Stylish Alternatives to Plain Pork Chops
NOT many women got the last word with George Bernard Shaw.
But Mrs.
Patrick Campbell, the actress, engaged in a furious battle with this die-hard vegetarian during a rehearsal of one of his plays and finally ended the argument by saying, in effect, "Shaw, someday you will eat a pork chop and then God help all women!"
Pork chops have long been thought to be especially nourishing.
Now that pork is also being touted as a low-fat meat, it is making its way back with increasing frequency to the dinner table and onto the menus of popular restaurants.
It is mellow and rich without being too heavy -- and it is also inexpensive.


A Cafe With Imaginative, Affordable Fare
THE passerby chancing upon the Good News Cafe, which is in a large, pale green frame house by the side of the main road in Woodbury, will find it a cheerful place: bright yellow walls hung with modern art (for sale), large windows framed by heavy green movers' blankets to muffle the high decibel level, tables and a double row of booths down the center.
Pots of tulips and other fresh flowers line the top of the dividers between the rows of booths.
A quick glance at the menu suggests that it is no roadside pancake house, despite its layout.
What is not necessarily immediately apparent is the culinary talent of the proprietor, Carol Peck, who made a name for herself several years ago with a farmhouse restaurant in New Milford.
Her style of wholesome, straightforward American cooking, using only fresh ingredients and combining them in imaginative ways, gives her dishes a signature.


Corrections
A report in the Night column on March 20 about Debbie Reynolds and her signing autographs in March after a performance of her revue at the Debbie Reynolds Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev., misstated Miss Reynolds's age.
She was 61 at the time and is now 62.
This correction was delayed because The Times was not alerted to the error until April 20, when a spokesman for the hotel and casino telephoned the columnist.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINELaura Berger, Mickey Morris
Laura Meredith Berger, a daughter of Roberta and Dr.
Irwin Berger of Brookfield, Conn., was married last evening to Mickey Morris, the son of Diane Jaffin and Gerald Morris, both of New York.
Rabbi Jerome R. Malino officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 26, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is the marketing manager of Gildan Activewear, manufacturers in Montreal.
Her father is a chairman emeritus of the English department and a professor at Bronx Community College.
Her mother is a freelance advertising consultant.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINELinda Pollak, R. R. Goldsmith
Linda Pollak, a daughter of Carole H. Pollak of Larchmont, N.Y., and Jerome S. Pollak of Bedford, N.Y., was married on April 30 to Richard Robert Goldsmith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Goldsmith of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, 28, is a second vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father is the president of the International Outerwear Group, a clothing manufacturer in New York.


Japanese Minister Dismissed for War Comments
A former Imperial Army officer who served a little more than a week as Japan's Justice Minister was dismissed tonight, three days after he provoked protests throughout Asia by declaring that one of the biggest massacres of World War II, the Rape of Nanking, was a "fabrication."
Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata asked the Justice Minister, Shigeto Nagano, for his resignation as Japan tried to quell growing outrage all over Asia.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Deserved Honor
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's shameless character assassination of Richard M. Nixon in her April 27 column (and on his day of mourning) is formidable revisionist history itself.


After Fire, Sag Harbor Is Looking at Long Cleanup
AS Sag Harbor struggles to recover from the worst fire to hit a community in the East End in recent memory, the shock and horror that residents felt as they watched the blaze rage for six hours, devouring one historic building and severely damaging another, are giving way to other emotions.
Weeks after the blaze on April 3 left a gap in the middle of Main Street, residents speak of a sense of relief, relief that the fire was not worse and that no one was seriously injured.


Journal; The Real Paula Jones?
Is it possible that the same right-wing journalist who tried to destroy the credibility of Anita Hill has destroyed the credibility of Paula Jones, the woman whom Clinton-haters now embrace as their own "Anita Hill"?
The journalist is David Brock, who first in the conservative magazine The American Spectator and then in his book "The Real Anita Hill" blended misogynist invective ("a bit nutty and a bit slutty") with tabloid reportage to smear the woman who accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
RINGWOOD EVENTS
A Crab Apple Festival and open house today and a Victorian Spring open house with the trappings of an 1886 wedding will enhance visits to two architectural treasures in Ringwood State Park.
The Historic Skylands Manor House will be open for self-guided tours from noon to 4 P.M. today while the festival will be in progress in its gardens, which are now the New Jersey Botanical Gardens.


Profile; Building a Chemical Empire on the Industry's Castoffs
WHEN the going gets tough for industrial companies, the Utah billionaire Jon M. Huntsman hops in his jet and goes hunting.
Chemicals are his game, and he has built the nation's largest privately held chemical business by snapping up premium properties at low prices when the industry goes into one of its periodic recessions and big corporations unload chemical assets.
These days, he is taking aim at some huge targets.
In late April, Mr.
Huntsman, chairman and chief executive of the Huntsman Companies, completed the largest and perhaps riskiest deal of his life.
He and Kerry Packer, one of Australia's richest men, paid $860 million for Texaco Inc.'s worldwide petrochemical operations.
The acquisition will almost double the size of his family business, to about $3.4 billion in annual revenues.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEFelicia S. Rubin, Marc R. Engel
Felicia Sue Rubin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James M. Rubin of Great Neck, L.I., was married last Sunday to Marc Robert Engel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Engel of Bloomfield, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Widom officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride, 29, is the executive assistant to the president at Blaylock &amp; Partners, fixed-income traders in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father, an allergist and immunologist, is the chief of the allergy and immunology department at Beth Israel Medical Center, where he is the president of the medical board.
Her mother, Phyllis G. Rubin, retired as a physical education teacher at the Dutch Lane School in Hicksville, L.I.


Warhol Museum Opens In His Hometown
Pittsburgh's $12 million museum dedicated to the life and work of Andy Warhol is scheduled to open May 16, in the city where the artist grew up and attended art school.
Housed in an early 20th century, eight-story warehouse with a Beaux-Arts terra cotta facade, the museum, which is a part of the Carnegie Mellon University, will display more than 500 works at a time, among them "Campbell's Soup Cans," the "Disaster" series and portraits of Marilyn Monroe and Elvis Presley.
A permanent exhibition of self-portraits and biographical information about Warhol will share one of six floors of gallery space with a theater offering screenings of his films, as well as those of contemporaries and other filmmakers influenced by his work.
Continuous screenings of the artist's early silent films, including "Kiss" and "Empire" will be shown on another floor.


Two Stage Magicians Reinvent a Drama
NOT SINCE THE ARRIVAL OF "Angels in America" has Broadway had a nonmusical event as seriously exhilarating as Stephen Daldry's re-creation of his London hit "An Inspector Calls." The revival of J. B. Priestley's 1945 play is now at the Royale Theater where, if God hasn't forever stepped away from His desk (as "Angels in America" suggests), it deserves to run for a very long time.
This is not to equate Priestley's small, schematic, essentially realistic English work with Tony Kushner's giddy and somber American phantasmagoria.
Each calls up its own era and exists in its own theatrical dimension.
Yet each, in a very different manner, also rediscovers the kind of primal excitement we once expected to find in plays as well as musicals.
Significant of just how peripheral such drama has become to the Broadway scene, we describe it not for what it is, but for what it isn't: nonmusical, as if it were something lesser.


A Tasteful Blending of the East and West
TUCKED in a corner of the Peppertree Commons in Commack, Ariana's looks give few hints of anything other than another shopping-center Italian restaurant.
But Middle Eastern lentil soup and tabouli salad are listed alongside the expected minestrone and Caesar salad on the menu.
Ariana is an interesting blend of East and West.
Background music segues from exotic Middle Easter songs to Vivaldi's "Four Seasons." Near the door is a photograph that many diners will assume is St.
Mark's.
A second glance reveals that the building in the picture is a Muslim shrine and the locale is Afghanistan, not Venice.


In His Own Words: 'Harlem Is Nowhere'
Historically, American Negroes are caught in a vast process of change that has swept them from slavery to the condition of industrial man in a space so telescoped (a bare 85 years) that it is possible literally for them to step from feudalism into the vortex of industrialism simply by moving across the Mason-Dixon line . . .


SURFACING
CLOTHES  Stelll-aaa!
Even if the wearers themselves are young enough to be Stanley Kowalski's grandchildren, it's easy to see the spirit of Marlon Brando in the resurgence of ribbed tank-top undershirts on the street.
DECOR  Do not recycle: The natural look of brown-paper lamp shades is hot (even if lamp shades are not an ecological issue).
Above, the Millerit shade from Ikea.
SPORTS  Catch a wake!
Wakeboarding, an aquatic cousin of snowboarding, is soaring in popularity, embraced by both hip-conscious teens and baby boomers who find it easier on the body than water-skiing.


Roulette Wheel Stilled On Ships Off Alaska
Gambling will be prohibited this year for the first time on all cruise ships plying the waters off Alaska's rugged coastline.
While Alaska banned gambling in 1978, many foreign-registered cruise ships continued to operate casinos that offered slot machines, roulette and blackjack tables.


Youth Killed at Brooklyn Club
A 14-year-old youth was killed early yesterday outside a club in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, when two men became involved in a shootout that wounded five other people, three of them teen-agers, the police said.
The dispute began inside the Club Mahogany on 1368 Fulton Street about 3 A.M. and spilled outside.
Detectives found the sidewalk littered with 17 spent shells from 9-millimeter semi-automatic pistols.


How an Animal Therapist Cured an Incontinent Cat
To the Editor:
In "New York Observed: A Newcomer's Journey," April 3, the author described how her move to the city apparently contributed to her cat's incontinence and how she consulted to no effect with a cat therapist.
My husband and I had a similar problem with our cat, Agrippina, after we moved to New York several years ago.
We also went to a cat therapist, who came with her new-age tape, needlepoint bag and an ample supply of catnip.
But at this point, our story diverges.


The Perfect Pitch
St.
Petersburg, Fla. -- He is, quite simply, a selling machine, a muscle man in boa constrictor-skin boots who lifts weights and moves inventory.
Put him in front of a television camera with a dumbbell, a treadmill and a stationary bike, and let the merchandising begin.
All at once, phones ring, wallets open, entire warehouses are depleted.
The numbers are staggering.
On a good weekend, he can sell 15,000 skiing machines, 10,000 mini-steppers and 4,000 treadmills, products that go for as much as $499 each.
And we haven't even gone to the videotape.
His newest exercise video, "Fat Free," sold 1.2 million copies on the Home Shopping Network over the space of several months.


Rehabilitation of a Biotech Pioneer
BIOTECHNOLOGY companies do not use pop songs to hawk their wares as the makers of athletic shoes or sports coupes do.
But if they did, Genentech Inc. could well be singing Steve Winwood's 1987 hit, "Back in the High Life Again."
As it happens, 1987 was the low point for Genentech, the world's first biotech company.
That was the year an advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration recommended against approval of the company's flagship drug, Activase, used to dissolve blood clots in heart attack patients.
Though Activase was ultimately approved in 1988, Genentech was unable to show that its $2,200-a-dose drug was any more effective than a competing drug selling at one-tenth the price, and sales failed to meet early expectations.
The result: Roche Holdings Ltd., a big drug maker based in Switzerland, acquired majority ownership of the weakened Genentech in 1990.


Which Way to the Truth?
To the Editor:
John Patrick Diggins's review sent me to find a quotation from William Lyon Phelps, often called America's most beloved college professor: "I thoroughly believe in a university education for men and women; but I believe a knowledge of the Bible without a college course is more valuable than a college course without the Bible."  RUTH HALLOCK  El Paso


Bookshelf
OLIVER TWIST.
By Charles Dickens.
Illustrated by Don Freeman.
Books of Wonder/ Morrow. $20. (Ages 10 and up) A century after the novel was published, the artist best remembered for "Corduroy" began work on his painterly illustrations, which were set aside shortly after completion.
They finally appear in this handsome edition, after another 56 years.
Still grand to read aloud.
HALMONI AND THE PICNIC.
By Sook Nyul Choi.
Illustrated by Karen M. Dugan.
Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) The setting is Manhattan.
Yunmi and her grandmother, Halmoni, are Korean immigrants.
The story of how Yunmi's school friends help Halmoni may be familiar, but it is freshly told and illustrated.


Clinton Administration Nominates Six for Federal Judgeships
Faced with an unprecedented number of Federal judicial vacancies in New York, the Clinton Administration has nominated six judges for positions in New York State, and the Senate has confirmed an appointment for the District Court in Manhattan.
The Senate confirmation of Deborah A. Batts, a Fordham Law School professor who was recommended by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, came on Friday, and she may begin hearing cases this summer.
She was appointed to a seat left open in 1989 when Judge Richard Owen took senior status.
Of the 28 seats in the Southern District, nine are still empty.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Spidermagnets
"The last thing we want is for someone to try and scale the San Francisco bridge," says Ross E. Myer, a retired engineer from Los Alamos National Laboratory, in New Mexico.
Unless they're authorized.
Myer has designed the perfect equipment for steelworkers, Navy Seals and kids who want to climb the World Trade Center -- a set of magnetic foot-and-hand grippers that let climbers move up steel structures, or down, or sideways.
The Defense Department financed the research.
And Los Alamos is seeking a manufacturing partner to get the gadgets into production.
Probable cost: $1,200 the set.


Garden Pests? To a Nematode, They're Lunch.
DO you have grubs in your lawn?
Black vine weevils eating holes in the rhododendron leaves?
Cutworms felling those little cabbage plants like trees?
Before reaching for a toxic pesticide like diazinon, you might want to try beneficial nematodes, tiny parasitic roundworms that can be stirred up with water and sprinkled or sprayed on the lawn or garden.


For Rwandans, the Agony Goes On


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEPaula Omansky, Mordecai Rosenfeld
Acting Justice Paula Joan Omansky of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan was married last Sunday to Mordecai Rosenfeld, a retired lawyer.
Rabbi Robert L. Lehman performed the ceremony at the couple's home in New York.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Radcliffe College and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Norma Omansky of Brookline, Mass., and the late Max Omansky.


On the East Side, the Future of Health Care


IN SHORT: FICTION
WESTERN  CITY OF WIDOWS  By Loren D. Estleman. Forge/Tom Doherty Associates, $20.95.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; 1-800-Can You Dial This?
One of the great unanswered questions of modern technology is why -- when the numbers on telephone key pads are clearly visible and the letters are eensy and crowded three to a button -- businesses insist on using words and letters in their 800 numbers.
Presumably, the idea is to attract customers and make the numbers memorable since these numbers often appear in advertisements.
But even if you do remember the word/numbers, you still have to decode them to dial/punch them.
Herewith some of the goofier, less obvious offenders.
No explanation is offered for the numbers since, if this gimmick is such a good idea, the word/numbers ought to be self-explanatory.  1-800 LOW AIR FARE  1-800 LIFENET  1-800 THE MTNS  1-800 AT-CHASE  1-800 TRUE USA  1-800 PICKUPS  1-800 USA LION  1-800 772 OWEN
1-800 MARC TASH  1-800 MIDWOOD  1-800 55 BLEMISH  1-800 347 FUND


The Nation; In Welfare Debate, It's Now Not 'How?' but 'Why?'
IT is a potent promise, this often-repeated vow of President Clinton's to "end welfare as we know it." And it may have unleashed forces that Mr.
Clinton did not envision and cannot control.
Propelled by social distress and political opportunism, the welfare debate is now moving further and faster than anyone predicted as recently as six months ago.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the poor nutritional value of movie house snacks misstated the type of fat used by theaters to pop corn.
It is saturated, not unsaturated.


Fan of Anglesey
To the Editor: Your article of April 11, 1993 ("An Island Ancient and Unspoiled"), which featured Anglesey and other islands and described Beaumaris Castle lovingly, piqued our interest enough for us to cut it out and save it.
Glowing articles with enticing photographs and enthusiastically recommended places to eat and stay in, however, often leave some lingering suspicions about the author's ability to be objective when a trip is recalled later and is perhaps blurred by nostalgia and time.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMs. Castiglioni, Mr. van Amerongen
Kathryn Anne Castiglioni, a Deputy State Attorney General in Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to Jan Anthony Taets van Amerongen Jr., an assistant Salem County prosecutor in Salem, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jon Walton performed the ceremony at Westminster Presbyterian Church.
Mrs. van Amerongen, 27, graduated from American University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Castiglioni of Woodstown, N.J.


Sports of The Times; Racing Needs A Crown On Go for Gin
WAITING, waiting, waiting, waiting.
Waiting in the damp gloom of the Ohio River Valley.
Hoping for a super horse that will pull racing out of its miasma.
Nobody ever thought of Go for Gin as a super horse, but now, to paraphrase the late Lyndon B. Johnson, Go for Gin is the only Triple Crown candidate we've got.
I'm not knocking the joy that broke loose yesterday afternoon, when Go for Gin outslogged everybody else in the Kentucky Derby, and Nick Zito started hugging everybody in sight, but racing needs more than one hour of giddiness.
Racing needs some continuity, some familiarity, a hero, a heroine.


Writing It Right
To the Sports Editor:
Steve Carlton, the Hall of Fame inductee pitcher, got into trouble recently by extending the hospitality of his home and by trusting the veracity of his remarks to a former minor league pitcher turned writer named Pat Jordan.
For his trouble, Carlton was accused of not only being a nut case but also an anti-Semite.
I too extended my hospitality to Jordan and his wife for an interview at my home.
Although I have some reputation as a pediatric ophthalmologist, I only get requests for interviews from the popular press because of my being the notorious transsexual tennis player who also coached Martina Navratilova during the 1980's.


Picking Up The Legos And The Pieces
Mia Farrow is sitting in her large, dark, paneled apartment on Central Park West.
The light shines through her blond curly hair -- hair she says she cuts herself.
She is nearly 50 years old, with 12 children, 3 cats, 4 birds, a hamster, a guinea pig.
She has been up last night with her new adopted daughter, 3-month-old Keili-Shea.
Yet she seems eerily younger than her age.
Her skin is luminous, seemingly without makeup -- or makeup applied so expertly it is undetectable.
The impression of youth is enhanced by her clothes -- jeans, worn white cotton T-shirt, Doc Martens.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Defying Gravity, and Age
Ballet is usually thought to be an art of the young.
There are, of course, Margot Fonteyns and Maya Plisetskayas with long careers.
But creating the illusion of airy grace punishes the body, and ballerinas, unlike male ballet stars, don't have the career-lengthening option of continuing to lift their partners once the grand leaps require too much faith.
Even so, in this spring's dance season, the three major New York City ballet companies -- the New York City Ballet, American Ballet Theatre, and The Joffrey Ballet -- have nine ballerinas who, like Beatriz Rodriguez of the Joffrey (below), have been dancing with their companies for 20 years or more.


It's Wait 'til Next Week for the Rangers
For the first 33 seconds of tonight's Stanley Cup playoff game, the Rangers seemed poised to complete a sweep of the Washington Capitals.
They scored on the first shift and needed only to hold the lead for the next 59 minutes 27 seconds to advance to the third round of the four-round tournament.
Unfortunately for the Rangers, the Capitals weren't ready to surrender, even though several of their key players were out with injuries and even though many of the fans in their home rink, the USAir Arena, were tourists from New York who were rooting against them.


The Executive Computer; For Befuddled Newcomers, Easier Access to the Internet
TO the uninitiated, navigating the Internet can feel like sailing the Pacific without a chart or compass.
Users may reach land eventually, but whether it's their intended destination is another matter.
That's because the global web of computer networks known as the Internet arose from scientific and academic computing based on the notoriously arcane Unix software operating system, which can require users to memorize all sorts of complex network commands.
But suddenly, dozens of companies seem to be offering graphical interfaces to the Internet, using on-screen icons and a point-and-click mouse to disguise the command-line complexity of the network.


U.S. SHIFTS STANCE IN EFFORT TO SLOW ECONOMIC GROWTH
After a year and a half of seeking faster economic growth, the Clinton Administration has now reluctantly changed course, putting the stability of financial markets ahead of rapid economic expansion.
No longer do Administration officials promote low interest rates and a falling dollar.
The economy's health, coupled with the political uncertainties that have led an already weak dollar to sag further, has driven the Administration to abandon those early policies.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINESusan Lemley, D. A. Thistlethwaite
Susan Lee Lemley, a project engineer at the Kaman Aerospace Corporation in Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to David Alan Thistlethwaite, a senior software-systems engineer in Fairfax, Va., for TRW.
Msgr.
John Enzler performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church in Potomac, Md.
Msgr.
Raymond Meier, a great uncle of the bride, took part.
Mrs.
Thistlethwaite, 30, graduated from Villanova University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo W. Lemley of Potomac, Md.
Her father, a scientist at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, is the chairman of the NATO committee on electronic warfare.
Her mother, Barbara W. Lemley, retired as the chairwoman of the business department at the University of the District of Columbia.


Where Do Tickets Go? Albany Wants to Know
Pressing a broad investigation into ticket-scalping, the State Attorney General hopes to peel back the mystery from a system in which private brokers offer great tickets to plays, sporting events and concerts for vastly inflated prices while the average customer at the box office often cannot get a seat at all.
Over the last month, Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell has issued subpoenas to 34 licensed ticket brokers in Manhattan, requesting detailed information about their ticket sources, their customers and their costs of doing business.
The investigation, conducted jointly with the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, appears to be the most sweeping probe in three decades into an industry that has long frustrated lawmakers and ticket-buyers alike.
Criminal Charges
State law allows resellers to charge only $5 or 10 percent, whichever is higher, over a ticket's face value.
But brokers in New York and surrounding states routinely charge much more, a practice Mr.
Koppell and others say limits the public's access.


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Editor Bites Snake
The editors of the Alameda Newspaper Group have introduced a new journalistic principle: no unnecessary snakes.
Forget sex and violence, they decided -- irresponsible use of snakes is the real issue.
Show a snake photo to an editor on a slow news day, and that snake will be on someone's breakfast table the next morning.
Charles Cooper, the group's executive editor, and his boss David Burgin, editor in chief, decided to remedy that.
A memo was sent to employees of the five Oakland area newspapers in the Alameda group announcing that "we don't want to unnecessarily shock, offend, upset or frighten our readers." So no snakes, the memo proclaimed, unless they do something newsworthy.


Nocturne For the Marxist Of Venice
THE GREAT THING ABOUT Manfredo Tafuri, the Italian architectural historian who died in February at the age of 59, was that he lived and worked in Venice.
His books sent out a constant stream of reminders that the soggy old Serenissima was a good deal more than a beautiful corpse.
For the past quarter-century, it was home to one of architecture's greatest living minds.
Yet the city's sumptuous decay provided an oddly sympathetic backdrop for Tafuri's lively polemical writings.
His most influential books -- "Theories and History of Architecture" (1968) and "Architecture and Utopia" (1973) -- advanced the thesis that architecture itself was a beautiful corpse, an art form no longer sustainable in the modern world.
Architecture, as he viewed it from his neo-Marxist perch, depended on a society's capacity to maintain a fixed relationship between forms and ideas.
People could build cathedrals because the medieval social order was firm enough to insure that those looking at, say, a rose window would recognize it as a symbol of the Virgin's celestial powers.


'The Unquiet Ghost'
To the Editor:
I spent 4 1/2 years of my 10-year sentence in the Kolyma labor camps.
Having read everything available on the American market that has to do with the Stalinist era and especially with the labor camps, I find Adam Hochschild's recently published book, "The Unquiet Ghost: Russians Remember Stalin," to be the most accurate, in-depth and interesting exploration of the Stalinist past by an American journalist.
The interviews with both victims and oppressors do not have the quality of talk-show confessions; they are very real, dignified and deeply moving.


Washington Monuments Take Walks, Too
Each spring, Washington bursts with tourists who tramp around to the White House, the Jefferson Memorial, the Mall -- all the usual destinations.
The 80-degree weather is nearly perfect for monument and museum hopping.
The flowers are in Technicolor bloom.
And as if to balance the political era of the donkey, the National Zoo has a baby elephant for the first time since the 1970's.
Those who live in Washington also do their share of sightseeing, though at a very different roster of sights.
The big draws have more to do with power than with history.


Fort Worth Visit
To the Editor: On a June 1993 visit to Dallas, my wife and I rose early on a Saturday morning and drove to the 3,400-acre Fort Worth Nature Center and Refuge to walk some of its various trails, boardwalks and over-water viewing platforms.
After picking up our son, who flew in from Phoenix, we proceeded to visit the Botanic Gardens in Fort Worth and, a short drive away, the Zoological Park, before returning to Dallas.
This Saturday outing has been our sole encounter with Fort Worth, but it was indeed memorable -- from the varied bird and waterlife at the nature preserve, to the serenity and expanse of the Botanic Gardens, especially the sizable Japanese garden with its hundreds of varied goldfish and numerous pools, bridges, cascades and stone crossings, and on to the variety of exhibits at the zoo, particularly the aviary and tortoises.


Fortunes Turn for 3 Ex-Superstars
Only a few years ago, after the 1990 season, say, a general manager would have thought he was putting together a terrific outfield -- an All-Star outfield -- if he could have acquired Darryl Strawberry for right, Eric Davis for center and Vince Coleman for left.
Strawberry and Coleman, in fact, were free agents then, and two teams paid handsomely to secure their services.
In 1990, Strawberry hit 37 home runs and drove in 108 runs, marking the third year in four he surpassed 30 and 100; Davis hit 24 home runs and knocked in 86, slightly off from his production the previous three seasons but solid nonetheless, and Coleman batted a career-high .292 and led the league in stolen bases, with 77, for the sixth consecutive season.


Wall Street; Raining on Fund Managers' Parade
LISTEN for a hue, cry and drone of irritating whining from the nation's mutual fund managers tomorrow, as they react to proposals that will make it much less fun for them to tend to their personal trading while on the fund's payroll.
A blue-ribbon panel of mutual fund executives, under the umbrella of the Investment Company Institute, the trade group for the fund business, will announce proposals to tighten up personal trading activities of fund managers at a news conference tomorrow.
Although the new rules would be voluntary, Government officials who have been briefed on the code anticipate that fund executives will feel the pressure to show the public that they intend to meet the new standards.


Still Guilty After All These Years: A Bouquet of Advice Books for the Working Mom
THE most consistent gift and burden of motherhood is advice.
Every year books on mothers appear to mark Mother's Day.
Most mothers do not have time to read about motherhood; they're too busy practicing it.
But take a look at the books that typically initiate them, the classic baby care books, and it is easy to understand why so many mothers -- working ones, in particular -- still feel so guilty, so inadequate, so tormented.


Not Quite So Simple
To the Editor:
I found Vincent Canby's general attitude toward the character Medea and her history notably cavalier  [ "Diana Rigg Is a Chilly, Elegant Medea," April 17 ] .
True, as Mr.
Canby wrote, Medea fled to Greece with Jason after helping him steal the Golden Fleece.
It is also true that she had committed several ghastly murders, though always in the cause of Jason's career.


Giants of Health Cast Larger Nets Across East Side
The Upper East Side, home to a world-renowned cluster of hospitals, medical schools, doctors' offices and nursing homes, has become a testing ground for America's growing, changing health-care industry.
Vivid symbols of growth are jutting out over the F.D.R.
Drive, where Rockefeller University recently completed an addition and two hospitals are building additions, including a 12-story wing that is part of a $842 million renovation and expansion of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Not to be outdone, Mount Sinai, which completed a 362-bed pavilion in 1992, is working on a $200 million research wing on Madison Avenue.


Washington Trolley Links Major Sights
Gold Line/Gray Line Sightseeing has introduced the "Lil Red Trolley" in Washington, a two-hour sightseeing circuit around the city.
Passengers may remain aboard for the entire two-hour narrated tour, or spend the day, getting off and on at any of the 16 stops made by the motorized trolley.


Someone Loves Parking Signs
With their convoluted directions and frowning demands, parking signs are hardly the most popular of civic accouterments.
Except in the beach communities of Rockaway Park, Belle Harbor and Neponsit.
Residents there have won a two-year battle with the city's Department of Transportation to have hundreds of signs installed.
Some of the old signs are faded; some were stolen by people trying to park illegally, and others were removed during construction projects.


20+, HIV+
Beachy's self-indulgence evokes no sympathy from me.
It says he hasn't gotten past a 2-year-old's "me" phase.
It says: I'll take my anger out on the world at large, thumbing my nose in childish arrogance.
His is the response of the quintessential brat.
It has nothing to do with the tragedy of AIDS, personal or otherwise.
MIRIAM S. MICHEL FROHMAN Jackson Heights, Queens


Biomorphism in One Show, Cool Geometry in Another
OF the two shows on view here, the first is of wood sculpture by Michael Lekakis at the Station Gallery, with many of the works suggesting life forms.
The second, of black-and-white photographs by Daniel Delaney at the Village Library, is characterized in part by a strong feeling for abstraction and three-dimensional shapes.
Mr.
Lekakis died in 1987, having appeared in numerous group exhibitions, including 11 Whitney Annuals between 1948 and 1968.
He also had 11 solo shows, among them the retrospective staged at Kouros Gallery in Manhattan in his final, 80th year.


No Stars, but the Food Is Good
THE Educated Palate is no ordinary restaurant.
The chefs, waiters and busboys, all 16 to 18 years old, may be coming into work after a math test or running off after the restaurant closes to make up a gym class.
But preparing and serving food is part of their high school education, because the restaurant is operated by culinary-arts students at the Tech Center in Yorktown, part of the Northern Westchester/Putnam Board of Cooperative Educational Services.
The Tech Center has a long history of hands-on, practical vocational training.
Students, who take traditional courses at their own high schools, can travel to Yorktown to study cosmetology, auto-body repair, licensed practical nursing, plumbing, air-conditioning and more.
Operated on the principle that nothing teaches like doing, the Tech Center offers high school undergraduates training through experience.


BEST SELLERS: May 8, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
4
2
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
3
2
3
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a strange death.
4
3
3
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
5
5
91
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
6
9
4
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
7
6
4
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
8
8
16
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) An executive is accused of sexual harassment.
9
10
12
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A tragic car collision involves four teen-agers.
10
12
2
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart transplant operation, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
11
14
27
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
12
7
3
THE COURTSHIP OF PRINCESS LEIA, by Dave Wolverton. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) Romance and the balance of power in the "Star Wars" universe.
13
13
56
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
14
11
5
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
15
1
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
16*
1
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
52
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
1
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
3
2
20
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
9
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
5
10
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
6
3
4
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
7
6
8
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
8
8
3
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
9
7
8
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
10
9
17
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
11
15
3
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
12
13
23
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
13
12
31
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
14
11
90
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
14
37
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
2
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
1
16
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
3
4
2
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
4
3
50
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRTHDAY BOYS, by Beryl Bainbridge. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $18.95.) A lively, subversive historical novel that penetrates the stoic official heroes of Scott's Antarctic expedition of 1912 to discover the individual silly boys within.
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) Three previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.
E.M.
FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally punctuated by little bursts of liberation.
THE FAVOURITE, by Meredith Daneman. (Knopf, $19.) Humming with rare humor and moral intelligence, Ms.
Daneman's fourth novel is told in alternating time frames -- that of a girl growing up painfully in the 1950's and that of the rueful wife and mother she becomes in the 1970's.
THE HOMELESS, by Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $17.95.) Mr.
Jencks's careful review of the large body of accumulated research on the homeless contradicts the received wisdom of both liberals and conservatives; he proposes sensible discussion and incremental remedies.
KAY BOYLE: Author of Herself, by Joan Mellen. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A fervent telling of the turbulent and unexamined life of a modernist author whose popularity peaked in the 1940's.
LEARNED HAND: The Man and the Judge, by Gerald Gunther. (Knopf, $35.) Penetrating and delicate, this study of a judiciary eminence known for his self-restraint and fortitude explores the inner tensions and doubts that shaped Hand's character.
ONE ART: Letters, by Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.
PAUL REVERE'S RIDE, by David Hackett Fischer. (Oxford University, $27.50.) No rehash of Longfellow but a historian's careful account of the ride and the surrounding events, emphasizing the broad-based, communal nature of the Revolutionary movement in New England.
ROALD DAHL: A Biography, by Jeremy Treglown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) This deft, revealing unauthorized biography of the bullying author of children's books serves as an antidote to Dahl's own sparky but none-too-truthful image of himself.
THE SUMMER HOUSE: A Trilogy, by Alice Thomas Ellis. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) Edgy, bright, subversive fictions about women's inner lives and experiences, each narrated by an Englishwoman whose existence is under revision.


Poetry Enhances Newspaper Articles
I am writing in response to the article "Love 101: Outlining the Course of the Heart" on April 3.
The article discusses the course called Pairs, which promises "skill training for healthier relationships," and emphasizes the need for expressing appreciation.
I, for one, appreciated this nicely written article, dealing with something positive being offered for couples.
I also appreciated an article that included two great poems: one a Shakespearean sonnet and the other, "When You Are Old" by William Butler Yeats.


May 1-7: Where's the Applause?; Lights, Camera, Foreign Policy By Bill Clinton
President Clinton's 90-minute encounter with CNN's global village last week captured something important about his approach to the world: the contrast between the confident economic thinker and the uncertain Commander in Chief.
In the role of America's chief economist, he seemed in control, explaining with precision why Japan must have a more open trade policy and why an extension of China's preferential trade status is in the interest of both sides.


At Work; Must It Be No Pain, No Gain?
CONVENTIONAL wisdom tends to have a short life span.
As Labor Secretary Robert Reich observed at the Detroit jobs conference in March, just a few years ago the conventional wisdom was that Europe and Japan could do no wrong and had nothing to learn from and everything to teach the United States.
Now, the United States is doing everything right; Japan, and Europe, everything wrong.
Under this theory, the contrast between Europe and the United States is especially vivid: while the former struggles with high unemployment and an expensive system of social insurance, the latter is creating jobs, lowering labor costs and slimming and toning its corporate infrastructure.
The current conventional wisdom came in for criticism last month at the International Seminar on Growth and Employment at Oxford University, a gathering of academics, activists, journalists and directors of progressive think tanks from the United States, Britain, Europe and Australia who came together to mull over politics and the impact of the globalization of markets.
The notion that what appears to be working for the United States as it crawls back to economic health -- driving down wages for existing work and creating low-paid jobs -- should be the prescription for Europe does not sit well with progressives.
They tend to be less inclined than those who have more faith in the wisdom of the markets to view the economic consequences to individuals of such a course as mere collateral damage.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Vice President at Home
To the Editor:
I should like to add a small glimpse of Richard M. Nixon.
In 1957, I was allowed to write a magazine article about the two Nixon daughters, a rare thing arranged for me at high-ranking levels.
Julie was 9; Tricia, 11.
I was in the Nixon home with a photographer for several days.
It was a large house, and the family and staff could come and go without everyone else necessarily being aware of it.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on April 24 about the opening in London of the Jewel House, the new display quarters for England's Crown Jewels, misstated the weight of the Imperial State Crown.
It weighs 45 ounces, not 32 ounces.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEPriscilla Cunningham, Jay LickDyke
Priscilla Cunningham, an art historian in New York, was married yesterday to Jay Cary LickDyke, a vice president of the Gruntal &amp; Company stockbrokerage in New York.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Southampton, L.I.
Ms.
Cunningham, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of the late Eleanor Lamont Cunningham and the late Charles Crehore Cunningham.
Her father was the director of the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford and of the Art Institute of Chicago.
Her grandfather the late Thomas William Lamont was the chairman of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.


Evening Hours; Brooklyn Museum's Ball No. 36
Chase Manhattan's chairman and chief is honored, April 27.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
101.70
101.70
110.40
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6540
1.6540
1.5860
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3823
1.3823
1.2685
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5185
1.5185
1.5690
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$376.60
$376.60
$356.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In Defense of Street Fairs: They Bring People Together
To the Editor:
The May 1 Soapbox essay "Who Needs Street Fairs?" was a public disservice because some of your readers may have accepted the author's misleading opinions.
Street fairs like the 92d Street Y's festival that same day on Lexington Avenue actually are a public benefit, bringing businesses, organizations and other elements of the community together.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMs. Lemperly And Mr. Grant
Barbara Lemperly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Lemperly of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Frederic Delano Grant Jr., a son of Mrs.
Frederic D. Grant of Wellesley Hills, Mass., and the late Mr.
Grant.
The Rev.
Robert N. Spalding, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at West Parish Meeting House in West Barnstable, Mass.
The bride is the merchandising consultant to Tom and Linda Platt, women's clothing designers in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father retired as a partner in Lemperly Associates, a media buying service, formerly in Vero Beach.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
That Whinny You Hear Longs for Manhattan
The National Horse Show, which has been stabled in the Meadowlands for five years, is considering a move back to New York City.


Soil, Big and Little Bugs and Chemicals
WAYNE HANSEN was managing a farm in Kansas before he (moved to the East Coast in the 1970's, and there was one thing he hated about going to pick up supplies. "I just never liked the smell of the darned chemicals," Mr. Hansen recalls. "That section of the garden centers, the smell always turned me off."
So when Mr.
Hansen arrived in Sterling and began a house renovation firm in the mid-1980's, he picked up a magazine about organic gardening and began growing his own vegetables.
Then he started selling to friends, then taking his produce to farmers' markets.
Today, the farm has become his primary business.
Warning on Spraying


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEVirginia Moyles, R. J. St. Pierre
Virginia Curry Moyles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Moyles of Sewickley, Pa., was married yesterday to Raymond Joseph St.
Pierre, a son of Therese St.
Pierre of North Attleboro, Mass., and the late Maurice G. St.
Pierre.
The Rev.
Leo Vanyo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul Cathedral in Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
St.
Pierre graduated from Catholic University of America.
She is a soprano and a graphic artist in Sewickley.
Her father is a partner in Riverfront Capital Fund, an investment fund in Pittsburgh.
Her mother, Virginia C. Moyles, is an interior decorator in Sewickley.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEStacey Moreau, Pels Matthews
Stacey Marie Moreau, a daughter of Mrs.
Gail H. Moreau of Washington Depot, Conn., was married yesterday evening to Pels Alexander Matthews, a son of John A. Matthews of Madison, Conn., and Sharon C. Matthews of Montpelier, Vt.
The Rev.
Jon Mundy, a minister of the Interfaith Fellowship, performed the ceremony at the Alger Mansion in New York.
The bride, 26, is an equity trader for Harpel Advisory, an investment company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her mother is an interior designer in Washington Depot.


Hits 1,000 Years in the Making
LET'S SEE, NOW.
THE ROMAN Catholic Church abandoned its centuries-long commitment to Gregorian chant with the Second Vatican Council in the 1960's, and many American parishes put their faith in a watery folk-pop idiom to stanch the flow of young worshipers.
Some leading lights of the early-music movement have given up on genuinely early repertory in recent decades to ply their authenticist trade before wider audiences in the standard repertory of later eras.
The work of dead white European males, even living ones, is widely scorned as stodgy and un-American if not sexist and racist.
And through these fickle skies, like some spiteful comet with a tail of imitators in tow, soars an album of 1,000-year-old Gregorian chant, sung by Benedictine monks of Santo Domingo de Silos in Spain.
Angel's "Chant" has been No. 1 on the American classical charts since it appeared in March.
It actually reached No. 12 before it was released, since some stores opened their shipments early.


Fraulein Sally


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEAmy Smethurst, John Mathiason
Amy Charlotte Smethurst, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Everett W. Smethurst of Bronxville, N.Y., is to be married today to John Michael Mathiason, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Mathiason of Mount Tremper, N.Y.
Sidney Slayton, a justice of the peace in Woodstock, N.Y., will officiate at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
The bride, 23, is the office coordinator at the Veterinary Centers of America Animal Hospital in Los Angeles.
Her father is a senior editor at John Wiley &amp; Sons in New York, a publishing company.
Her mother, Arlene Smethurst, teaches the second grade at the Hawthorne Pearls School in Yonkers.


Washington Memo; Suit Sets Off Rush for High Ground
Backward ran the beliefs in Washington this week:
Some conservatives who had once called Anita F. Hill a liar for accusing Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment were now supporting Paula Corbin Jones, the woman accusing Bill Clinton of sexual harassment.
Some women who put Ms.
Hill on a pedestal now found themselves wishing they could cut the ground from underneath Ms.
Jones.


Soaring Unemployment Is Spreading Fear in Russia
The future has finally arrived for Vitaly A. Chekhovich, but it has only made him sorry that he helped to bury the past.
In the past, Mr.
Chekhovich -- along with his mother, father, wife and all three brothers -- had unshakeably safe jobs here at the vast Zil Automobile Factory.
They lived in Zil apartments and attended Zil schools.
As babies, they spent their days at the Zil day care center, and when they were sick, Zil doctors saw them through their illnesses.


Cruising With the Decibels Down
It is Saturday night on Eighth Street and the rites of spring have commenced.
Clusters of young women parade down the street, followed by groups of young men clutching 40-ounce bottles of beer or malt liquor in brown bags.
The occasional Jeep or expensive sports car cruises by.
But there are far fewer of the boomboxes that tormented residents last year, and those that remain are conspicuously quieter.
"They're getting the word," said Captain Peter Cassidy of the Sixth Precinct.
For the last month, his officers have been engaged in Operation Soundtrap -- identifying vehicles playing stereos louder than 80 decibels -- on weekend evenings in the rectangle bounded by Eighth Street, Avenue of the Americas, Broadway and Bleecker Street.
The increased police presence appears to have made a dent in the problem: last summer, in five test operations, 62 cars were seized as evidence; this year, in eight operations, only eight cars have been taken.


Notches: Rock Carved By Glaciers
THE glacier that shaped the White Mountains of New Hampshire retreated to the north some 10,000 years ago, but drive through one of the great mountain notches on a cloudy spring day or just after a heavy summer thunderstorm and you'll be convinced the ice left only minutes before.
What sun there is suddenly disappears, blocked out by mountain walls, dropping the temperature.
Beetling cliffs tower over the roadway, pinching it in toward the stream on the notch's talus-covered floor.
High above where stunted trees give way to granite, the steel-gray rock shines with runoff, making the summits look scoured, freshly polished, new, as if the force responsible for their creation were still working full blast.
Everywhere is evidence of a great glacial scooping, the notch's U-shaped form demonstrating in remarkably explicit fashion the shape of the powerful tongues of ice that advanced from the main ice sheet to cut the "soft" notches from the harder, unyielding granite of the mountain walls that form its flanks.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINECatharine Taylor, Gregory G. Farrell
Catharine Peale Taylor and Gregory Gerard Farrell, editors at Adweek magazine in New York, were married yesterday at the Congregational Church of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Lidabell Lunt Pollard performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Brian Albino, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Farrell, 34, graduated cum laude from Dickinson College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Taylor of New Canaan, and is a descendant of Charles Willson Peale, the 18th- and 19th-century American painter, scientist and politician.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Bailey Corporation, an automotive parts manufacturer in Seabrook, N.H.
Her mother, Julie Taylor, is a real estate broker at Brotherhood &amp; Higley in New Canaan.


May 1-7: Unity Unravels; The World's Latest Brushfire: Yemen
Bosnia and Rwanda can now welcome Yemen to the unhappy list of countries riven by civil war.
Last week the impoverished (and heavily armed) nation of 12 million in the southern corner of the Arabian Peninsula burst into conflict as a four-year effort to merge leftist South Yemen with conservative North Yemen unraveled.
The South grew convinced that the more populous North unfairly dominated the Government.


Italy Seeks to Extradite Ex-Nazi From Argentina
The Italian Government said today that it would press Argentina to extradite an accused Nazi war criminal who took part in the killing of 335 Italians in 1944 and who has been tracked down in Argentina.
The Justice Ministry said it expected Italian prosecutors to make such a request.
But it said that in the meantime, it had "immediately taken steps to gather all useful material to the end of prosecuting" the accused man, Erich Priebke, "beginning with the initiation of proceedings for his extradition to Italy."


Streetscapes/Bronx Terminal Market; Trying to Duplicate the Little Flower's Success
IN 1935, a new get-tough Mayor, Fiorello H. LaGuardia, took over the failing Bronx Terminal Market and in seven months made the multimillion-dollar boondoggle useful and profitable for the first time.
Now the market, along the Harlem River between 149th and 152d Streets, is a shambles under a troubled private lease deal, and another get-tough Mayor would like to repeat LaGuardia's success.


Political Notes; Unlikely Ally: Lauder Lobbies for a Giuliani Cause
Rudolph W. Giuliani does not usually have kind things to say about Ronald S. Lauder, the cosmetics heir whom he defeated for the Republican nomination in the New York City mayoral race in 1989.
In fact, just last week Mr.
Giuliani told Republicans in Rhode Island that he believed he lost his first race for mayor because Mr.
Lauder spent more than $13 million in the campaign, much of it for television advertisements attacking Mr.
Giuliani.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Stony Point; Rich in Tradition, With a 50's Mindset
MUCH of the Town of Stony Point, on the Hudson River in Rockland County, seems lifted directly from the 50's.
Its well-tended lawns front ranches and at Annie's Restaurant, in operation since 1952, motorists on Route 9W can drive up to the take-out window and order French fries served in paper dishes shaped like Chevy convertibles.
"We try to keep things the way they've always been," said Mario Ciabattoni, the manager.
"We're rich in tradition."
The restaurant has always attracted a lot of motorcycle clubs, he said, adding that Bruce Springsteen has been known to drop by "with his biker buddies."


Residents of Dying California Town See Future in a Prison
The residents who remain in this dying lumber town say they have two choices: either leave before the town becomes a glorified truck stop or strive for a future.
And the most promising future for them, they say, is prisons.
Officials in Weed, population 3,100, are hoping to make their town at the foot of Mount Shasta the home to a 4,000-inmate maximum security prison.
Officials say a new prison would bring jobs and money for the city coffers.


Hotels Catering To Children
IT was probably inevitable: Two hotel chains now have frequent guest programs for children, and one Washington hotel has weekend "kids' concierges," who are contemporaries.
Promotions like these, as well as the more usual summer programs, underline the rising importance of children to the lodging business.
Marketing surveys indicate parents want to take young children along, even on business trips.
As for vacations, Nancy Vaughan, a spokeswoman for Best Western International, said: "A lot of decisions are being made by kids. They influence the family." To respond to both possibilities, hotels may combine price promotions for the bill-paying parents, and recreation activities, gifts and cartoon character tie-ins that appeal to children.
Virtually all major chains have something for this market; here is a selective list of new or revised programs.


Capitals Find the Defense That Eliminated the Penguins
With his team still alive after an impressive showing in Game 4 against the Rangers, Joe Juneau was willing to admit he struggled to prepare for tonight's game.
"It was very hard to get ready to play," he said after the Washington Capitals beat New York, 4-2.
"You are really starting from scratch. You don't know what to build on. But now we do."


Assessing the Nitty-Gritty of Fertilizers
FERTILIZER bags and boxes are piled high at the garden centers and hardware stores.
Which one?
First, of course, read the label.
A good bit of information is available there and gardeners should be familiar with what it says, fine print as well as big print.
An important part of a fertilizer's label is the numbers.
They tell what the fertilizer's grade is, and the numbers may be any sort of combinations.
Some examples are 5-10-5, 10-10-10, 6-12-6, 4-3-2 or 0-10-0.
These numbers tell what the percentages are by net weight of total nitrogen (first number), available phosphoric acid (second number) and soluble potash (third number).
These are the primary elements needed by all plants for good growth and if a product has all three, it is what is known as a complete fertilizer.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova and Martinez in Italian Final  Second-seeded Martina Navratilova, volleying spectacularly, beat Irina Spirlea, 6-2, 6-3, yesterday to reach the final of the Italian Open in Rome.
She will face top-seeded Conchita Martinez, a 6-1, 6-2 winner over a qualifier, Karina Habsudova of Slovakia.


The High Noon of the Godheads
IT MAY BE THAT THERE HAS always been a single golden age in music: the age that is not the present.
Throughout a millennium of Western music, there has often been the sense that impossibly high standards were set in the past, which cannot be equaled again by mere mortals.
Even revolutionary manifestoes have been haunted by the weight of what had to be overcome or equaled.
When Brahms was writing, the golden age was embodied in the works of Beethoven.
And when opera was beginning in Italy at the end of the 16th century, the golden age was the era when word and tone were thought to have been unified in the musical prosody of ancient Greece.


Health Care Tests Mettle Of Ways and Means Panel
In more than 13 years as chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, Representative Dan Rostenkowski has cultivated a Democratic majority that prides itself on casting tough votes, revels in the committee's entrenched power and believes in its ability to do what the less-entrenched often cannot: move a big, complicated, controversial piece of legislation.
Now comes the ultimate test of the Ways and Means mystique.


POSTINGS: Seminar Wednesday; Preventing Fraud by Managers
The scandal involving kickbacks to apartment-house managers will be one of several topics discussed on Wednesday at the seventh annual Co-op and Condo Expo at the Roosevelt Hotel, 45th Street and Madison Avenue, in Manhattan.
Most of the seminars and discussions will concern mundane issues like shareholder rights or refinancing, insurance and sublet policies; there is also a trade show that will feature a variety of products for apartment owners.


Wash That Winter Right Out of the Draperies and Shades
DRAPERIES, blinds and shades usually benefit dramatically from spring cleaning.
All can become dirty in the winter, when low humidity increases static electricity, causing dust to cling.
Vacuuming may suffice for draperies.
The only other options are washing or dry-cleaning.
Close the draperies and clean the fabric panel by panel.
Use an upholstery attachment connected to an extension arm, and open the suction-control ring on the hose to prevent the vacuum from drawing against the fabric with too much force.


Nuclear Critic And Flaws in Study
"Brookhaven Reactor Fire Raises Questions on Nuclear Hazards"  [ April 10 ]  discusses many side issues that the writer attempts to connect to the fire, which took place at an experimental area within a building that houses a research reactor.
Among the irrelevant references, the most irresponsible is the claim by Ernest Sternglass, a retired professor of radiology at the University of Pittsburgh, that higher than normal breast-cancer rates in towns within 15 miles of the lab might be linked to radiation releases from Brookhaven.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMs. Baumgartner And Mr. Jones
Mary Marjorie Baumgartner, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Rolla W. Baumgartner of Columbus, Ga., was married yesterday to John Philip Alexander Hoblyn Jones, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
John Philip Jones of Syracuse.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Jones, 29, is the manager of consumer promotion at Home Box Office in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the Superintendent of Schools in Fort Benning, Ga.
Her mother, Liliane C. Baumgartner, is a school nurse for the Fort Benning Schools.


League Seeking Ball Field
THE Northeast League is looking for a new home for its first minor league baseball season this summer, following the rejection last month of its proposal to play 45 night games at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
The league is also considering the alternative of holding just an exhibition season, perhaps only for one week, reported Jay Acton, co-founder of the new league, which has its offices here.


Palestinian Police Go to Home They've Never Seen
As 23 of his men stood at attention, Capt.
Muhammed Abdel Aziz recalled today how one of his brothers was killed fighting with the Egyptians in the 1973 war against Israel and that another spent three years in an Israeli prison.
But today, Captain Aziz, a former Palestine Liberation Organization guerrilla, was not preparing troops for another commando raid on an Israeli target.


With Canoe and Kayak, a Moving Front-Row Seat to Beauty
If the Shepaug is not the fairest river in all of Connecticut then one of its tributaries, the Bantam, may be.
The Shepaug, a springtime paddlers' delight in Litchfield County, makes a modest run of about 25 miles south into the fat part of the Housatonic River known as Lake Lillionah east of Brookfield.
The Shepaug is a river that awaits and rewards exploration by canoe or kayak.
But there is some urgency because the spring runoff seldom lasts into mid-May.
And the river's dependency grows daily upon rainfall to cover its rock bed.


Encounters With Ralph Ellison
In the last years of Ralph Ellison's life, the Harlem neighborhood that he called home and transformed into a powerful metaphor for alienation was a place that had all but forgotten him.
But John B. Weaver still remembers.
For 20 years, Mr.
Weaver, a thin man with graying hair, delivered mail to Mr.
Ellison's building on Riverside Drive.
And until just before Mr.
Ellison's death on April 16 at the age of 80, he would buzz each day around noon, so the writer could collect his voluminous mail.


The World; With Little Joy, the Parting Starts
ISRAEL and the Palestine Liberation Organization showed last week that the old song had it right when it said breaking up is hard to do.
By finally signing off on the details of Palestinian self-rule for the Gaza Strip and Jericho, they in effect filed for divorce.
But theirs is a messy separation.
As an Israeli Government spokesman noted, this couple not only is still sharing the same house but has also devised a most complex arrangement for cohabitation.


"I wonder what's on the PC tonight."
TO know Dana Law is to know that the future of television may be a lot gloomier than powerful cable-industry figures like John Malone and Gerald Levin have been saying.
And that the future of the personal computer industry may be a lot brighter.
Mr.
Law, 40, who makes his living as a magician and a psychic, spends a lot of time in front of the tube in his house in El Cajon, near San Diego.
He gets the latest news and weather, sends and receives electronic mail, shops and checks travel guides to find out where to eat out.


In Defense of Street Fairs: They Bring People Together
To the Editor:
As a merchant with stores in two street-fair-infested areas of Manhattan, I was in complete agreement with the article.
The only thing I wish to add is that merchants do not lose "some" business, as the author put it; we lose between 50 percent and 75 percent of our business on fair days.
This means a loss in sales tax to the city, which if multiplied by the number of businesses on streets with frequent fairs and multiplied by 5,000 fairs annually would be in the tens of millions of dollars.
The city's administration should be alarmed at this loss of much-needed revenue.
FRED KATZ  Manhattan The writer owns Lightforms.


Long Branch Journal; Mayoral Campaign Threatens to Divide City
THIS historic oceanside city, which recently quelled what the police called a drug-related riot and is struggling to regain its economic health, is in the throes of an often bitter mayoral and Council election campaign.
Some complain that the campaign is only further dividing the 28,700 residents and stalling a revitalization plan for the city.
The nonpartisan election, to be held on Tuesday, has drawn regional attention.
It pits a councilman, the brother of a powerful member of Congress who also is the Democratic political leader here, against an incumbent mayor, who says the two have teamed up to defeat him.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Fought Desegregation
To the Editor:
"Richard Nixon," your April 24 editorial putting Richard M. Nixon in historical perspective, states that "he ordered the Justice Department to continue methodically dismantling the dual school system in the South." This is patently false.


Corrections
A picture caption on April 10 about Henry Wade, the Texas prosecutor who handled the abortion case that resulted in the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision in 1973, gave his title incorrectly.
He was District Attorney in Dallas County, not state Attorney General.


A Native Son Taps Into His Spanish Roots
SINCE ANCIENT TIMES, Valencia has been a thriving urban center on the Mediterranean, and its rulers have included Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Visigoths and Arabs.
Today, it is Spain's third-largest city.
Valencia is also the birthplace of Nacho Duato, the artistic director of Compania Nacional de Danza, which makes its New York debut on Tuesday night at the City Center.
Mr.
Duato, 37, is convinced that he has a Mediterranean temperament and that his Madrid-based troupe reflects both Spain in general and the forces that shaped his hometown.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEAllison Moore And Allan Ells
Allison Roebling Moore, the director of development and programming for Karen Bamonte Dance Works, was married yesterday to Allan Edward Ells, a senior Deputy Attorney General for Pennsylvania.
Both work in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wendel W. Meyer performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church there.
Ms.
Moore, who is keeping her name, graduated from Bowdoin College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Moore of Philadelphia.
The bride's father retired as the dean of students at Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Ind.
The bride's maternal great-great-great-grandfather John A. Roebling was the designer and builder of the Brooklyn Bridge.


Tom Snyder Reconsidered: Everyman At 57
WHITHER TOM SNYDER?
The last time this question produced even a faint buzz behind the national forehead, Ronald Reagan was settling into his first term as President, "Cheers" was a promising new sitcom, and a young former television weatherman named David Letterman was waiting impatiently between NBC network jobs.
Mr.
Letterman would soon occupy the very time slot filled by Mr.
Snyder.
At the time, NBC's management consensus was that America had seen quite enough of Mr.
Snyder -- an inquisitive, occasionally foul-tempered newsman, then 44 years old, whose arm-waving, cigarette-smoke-filled interviews had propelled his late night talk show, "Tomorrow," since 1973.


Woman of '92 Running Anew For a Pennsylvania Position
Lynn H. Yeakel, the political novice who nearly defeated Senator Arlen Specter in 1992, is making her second try for elected office in this year's Democratic primary campaign for governor.
But what a difference a single issue makes.
In 1992, Ms.
Yeakel, a 52-year-old former fund-raiser for women's charities here, had only to remind voters of Mr.
Specter's lead role in cross-examining Anita F. Hill in the Senate hearings on Clarence Thomas's Supreme Court nomination to see her popularity skyrocket.
After easily beating three male Democratic opponents in the primary, she lost the general election by a mere three percentage points to Mr.
Specter, who outspent her by a vast amount.


What Is Needed To Make Good Wine
"After Winning Years a Pioneer Bails Out"  [ April 3 ]  on the Hamptons wine industry was both entertaining and enlightening.
I was amused, however, by Christian Wolffer's comment, "If you produce a good grape, you can certainly produce a good wine if you have a good wine maker."


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEVictoria Meyer, Zaki Kneider
Victoria Allison Meyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Meyer of New York and Vancouver, British Columbia, was married on Friday to Zaki Anthony Kneider, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saleh Zaki Kneider of New York and Aleppo, Syria.
The Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Kneider is the director of recruiting for James M. Meyer &amp; Associates, an insurance agency in New York.
The agency was founded by her father, who is a senior manager with the Equitable Companies, the financial services concern in New York.
Her mother, known professionally as Wendy Martin, is an operetta singer and an actress.
The bride graduated from the American University in Paris.


On Washington; Thou Shalt Not Leave a Paper Trail
On the TV show "Home Improvement," Tim Allen's swaggering handyman likes to brag that he has tools to fix tools.
In Washington, bureaucrats like to brag that they have rules to fix rules.


A Classical Solution
To the Editor:
As a former colleague of Steve Ross's and founder of a company 50 percent owned by a Warner predecessor company and subsequently by the Warner Communications Foundation (unmentioned, of course, in Connie Bruck's "Master of the Game" and David McClintick's review of April 10), I would like to add some anecdotal material.


Groups Join Together in Call for Legalized Drugs and Clean Needles


The Man Who Knows Everything; Murray Gell-Mann
SIX WRITHING LEGS GLINT LIKE copper in the strong New Mexico sun.
Murray Gell-Mann, discoverer of the quark, winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1969, author of a new book that attempts to explain, oh, pretty much everything, has caught an insect.
He holds it delicately by its folded wings as he clambers down from the immense window where he found it crawling.
"Come on, kid," he says.
The bug wriggles.
Gell-Mann opens a door onto his patio and tosses the creature out among the pinons and junipers that surround his adobe mountain home near Santa Fe.
"I like these fine," he says.
"I just like them outside."


Client Aid; Legalities and Practicalities
ASSUMING you can find someone, which often isn't easy, hiring domestic help can be a tricky proposition.
Hiring a self-employed cleaning person (someone not affiliated with a service) to clean a one-bedroom apartment in New York City costs an average of $40 to $50.
Hiring someone from a service can cost $55 to $70.


Evening Hours; Wildlife Watching
A preview of new paintings by Kenny Scharf, April 30.


Debate Looks at Limits On Legislative Terms
SHOULD there be limits on the number of terms that legislators can serve the county?
Those who favor term limits say the current system of government creates a Board of Legislators run by a group of career politicians who are overly dependent on political action committees and whose votes are primarily cast with an eye toward re-election.
Further, they maintain, entrenched incumbents take full advantage of the seniority system on the Board, which often results in consolidating a great deal of power -- and the ability to dole out favors and patronage -- into the hands of a few Board members.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEJane E. Butler, G. H. Kendall 3d
Jane Ellen Butler, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John K. Butler of Orange, N.J., was married yesterday in South Orange, N.J., to George Hilton Kendall 3d, a son of Judith T. Kendall of Flanders, N.J., and the late Mr.
Kendall Jr.
The Rev.
Anthony J. Kulig, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Immaculate Conception Chapel at Seton Hall University.
The Rev.
Galen Goodwin, a United Methodist minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride is a sales assistant in Morristown, N.J., for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
She graduated from Seton Hall.
Her father is a pediatrician in Orange.


One Fan's Sad Season of Tribute
He watched from outside the tunnel that leads to the locker rooms.
That is where Mario Miocic always stood, with an approving nod from the house authorities.
That is where he used to watch his close friend, Drazen Petrovic, shoot glorious high-arcing jumpers.
There were times this season when Miocic was struck by an overwhelming sense of disbelief, when he half-expected a smiling Petrovic to come bounding by on his way to the court.
The white pin on Miocic's jacket, inscripted with Petrovic's retired number 3, was a symbol that Petrovic had been lost, forever, on the rain-slicked German autobahn last June.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 8, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
2
2
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
3
12
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
4
3
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
5
2
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her reputation.
6
7
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
7
1
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
8*
2
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
9
18
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
10*
1
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
11
1
CHAINS OF COMMAND, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) An Air Force major restores his reputation in action on the Ukrainian border.
12
3
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
13*
7
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
14
2
PRIVATE SCANDALS, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance, rivalry and revenge beset female hosts of television talk shows.
15*
2
PRIMAL FEAR, by William Diehl. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A singular lawyer defends a young man charged with murdering an archbishop.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
548
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
17
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
4
64
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
6
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
6*
1
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
7*
3
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
8
2
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
9*
9
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
10*
27
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
11*
49
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12*
134
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13*
148
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
14
147
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15*
13
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
164
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
171
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
29
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
1
THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $6.99.) Health and fitness advice for women.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT JEWS
Joe Wood is right. Enough of the judgments. Who's right? Who's wrong?
No real kinship is simple; it takes a rare openness and honesty.
We will all be victims if we allow the distrust to continue.
BARBARA D. WALDRON Cambria Heights, Queens


'Over the River' in The Bronx
IT is customary for the audience in a small nonprofit theater to hear a pre-performance welcome; in other words, a pitch for donations and subscriptions.
It is not customary for the audience to interrupt such a ritual three times with cheers and applause.
But that's the Belmont Italian American Playhouse experience for you.
It's not that the people at Saturday night's performance of "Over the River and Through the Woods" weren't feeling perfectly welcome in the first place.
It's just that the lively greeting by Lou Izzo, the theater's general manager, was a mere informality, rather like a communal embrace.


The High Noon of the Godheads
IT MAY BE THAT THERE HAS always been a single golden age in music: the age that is not the present.
Throughout a millennium of Western music, there has often been the sense that impossibly high standards were set in the past, which cannot be equaled again by mere mortals.
Even revolutionary manifestoes have been haunted by the weight of what had to be overcome or equaled.
When Brahms was writing, the golden age was embodied in the works of Beethoven.
And when opera was beginning in Italy at the end of the 16th century, the golden age was the era when word and tone were thought to have been unified in the musical prosody of ancient Greece.


BAT BOX BLUES
The Sunday feature "Bat Box Blues" (March 20), though factually correct, is misleading.
It is true that many bat houses have not been used by bats, but there can be good reasons for this.
The houses in upstate New York, cited in Brock Fenton's study, were too shaded and cool to be successful.


Reconstructing Nonconstructions
To the Editor:
Regarding "reconstructions" of dances by Isadora Duncan, Ruth St.
Denis and Ted Shawn  [ "When Modern Dance Was Brand New," April 10 ] , when I went with the dancer Margaret Severn, now 92, to a performance by the Annabelle Gamson group, someone said to her, "I hope you enjoy these reconstructed dances." Miss Severn, who saw Duncan and danced in the Denishawn company, replied, "They were never constructed." PETER LIPSKIS  Vancouver, British Columbia


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Thursday
Producer price index, April, pct. chg.
0.2
0.2
Retail sales, April, percent change
0.4
0.3
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
350
350
Friday
Consumer price index, April, pct. chg.
0.3
0.3
Business inventories, March, pct. chg.
0.5
0.3
Consumer sentiment index, May
92.6
91.5
This Week's Numbers
Tuesday
Treasury auctions 3-year note
Wednesday
Treasury auctions 10-year note
Bundesbank council meeting
Thursday
Atlanta Fed business survey


Elizabeth Bishop's Doctor
To the Editor:
Whatever Robert Giroux left out of "One Art," his edition of Elizabeth Bishop's correspondence (review, April 17), patients of Dr.
Anny Baumann know that the letters to her that he included merit their place, not solely because of the poet's confidence in the great doctor.


Embracing Cape Ann's Contrasts
MY first visit to Massachusetts' Cape Ann was on a cold, gray afternoon when surf detonated against the rocks, my scarf kept flying into my face and fishing boats pitched in such a forlorn way out in the harbors that it seemed impossible that anyone with a clear mind would want to live in this wind-struck, salt-struck place.
Enormous granite boulders shouldered up against the beaches.
The ocean was the color of rain, and the wind smelled fishy.
Ducking in and out of my car that day, I wasn't surprised that witches had thrown hexes on this spot, or that sea monsters had been sighted here by reliable witnesses, or that pirates had divvied up blood money on the rocks.
Or, especially when I glanced up at the widow's walks crowning a few old houses near the shore, that thousands of mariners had drowned off this coast.
Cape Ann, as far as I could see, had that grim obduracy that fosters both legends and bad dreams.
Two days later the ocean was silky, the sky was blue and Cape Ann was neat as a postcard and as far removed from witches, monsters and pirates as most romance novels are from real romance.
Families posed beside a monument for lost fishermen; beachcombers bought candy shells from souvenir shops; camera-hung visitors wandered through art galleries that sell the sort of seascapes that have become more familiar than the sea itself.
Water glittered behind 18th-century clapboard houses, which seemed only sweetly weatherbeaten.
Even the rocks looked benign.


Miracles Are Nice, but Bulls Count on Each Other
"Expect Miracles" reads the sampler that hangs on the wall in Phil Jackson's basketball office.
Nice work if you can get it, but it seemed mere fantasy, or, worse yet, merely a thing of the past, last Oct. 2 when Jackson, the coach of the Chicago Bulls, sat in a suddenly assembled, overflowing news conference at the Bulls' training center in suburban Deerfield.


May 1-7: Singapore Swings; Michael Fay's Torture's Over; Watch for the Docudrama
After weeks of threats, bluster and tears on both sides of the Pacific, an 18-year-old American was finally summoned from his prison cell in Singapore last week, strapped to a wooden trestle and given four lashes of a rattan cane, the punishment for having spray-painted cars in the well-off, authoritarian city-state.
An American envoy allowed to see the teenager, Michael P. Fay, told his family afterward that the youth was sedated and in pain from deep wounds to his buttocks.


Perversely, Higher Rates Hurt The Dollar
THE United States Government went on the record last week, firmly declaring it was against a collapse of the dollar.
Supported by unified central bank intervention, the lowly buck rallied a bit.
That it was necessary -- and newsworthy -- for Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury Secretary, to say nice things about the dollar is another indication just how confused things have become.
Mr.
Bentsen had once indicated he would welcome a weaker dollar, and it had not been clear that his opinion had changed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Brian Anderson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Butcher, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT JEWS
It was delightful to read Joe Wood's heartening essay "What I Learned About Jews" (April 10).
His article follows, of course, a steady stream of racist rhetoric and scapegoating of Jews that seems to be having an odd contemporary appeal to some black youths on college campuses.
The author and his friend Dan appear, like me, to be much too young to have personally suffered the most severe racial discrimination that blacks and Jews of older generations have, in America and Europe.
Yet, despite their youth, each has a sensitivity toward, and appreciation of, the other's ethnic heritage and history.


For Lawn Mowers, E.P.A. Pulls the Choke
Lurking in almost every suburban garage is an environmental villain, a machine that spews inordinate amounts of smog-causing hydrocarbons and poisonous carbon monoxide whenever the ignition is turned on.
The car? No, the lawn mower.


The Importance Of Fire I. Beaches
"Beaches Expecting Better Year Than '93"  [ April 24 ]  makes no mention of the 32 miles of coastline of Fire Island.
It contains major public recreation areas, Robert Moses State Park, Smith Point County Park, town beaches of Islip and Brookhaven and the Fire Island National Seashore.
The barrier also plays a key ecological role, protecting the low-lying mainland flood plain from inundation and maintaining the ecosystem of the Great South Bay.
Finally, it plays a significant role in the local and regional economy.
What should be reported is the following:


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEKiri J. Borg, Brian P. Henry
Kiri Jan Borg, a daughter of Winni Borg and of Robert F. Borg, both of New York, is to be married today to Brian Peter Henry, a son of Adrienne and Donald Henry of Christchurch, New Zealand.
Rabbi Harold Swiss is to perform the ceremony at the Stanhope in New York.
Ms.
Borg, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
She is the director of business development for the Tishman Interiors Corporation, the construction company in New York.


Go for Gin, 9-1 Shot, Wins Kentucky Derby


Wash That Winter Right Out of the Draperies and Shades
DRAPERIES, blinds and shades usually benefit dramatically from spring cleaning.
All can become dirty in the winter, when low humidity increases static electricity, causing dust to cling.
Vacuuming may suffice for draperies.
The only other options are washing or dry-cleaning.
Close the draperies and clean the fabric panel by panel.
Use an upholstery attachment connected to an extension arm, and open the suction-control ring on the hose to prevent the vacuum from drawing against the fabric with too much force.


6 Boston Pitchers Give Yanks 1 Victory
It's as if a secret addition was made in very fine print, somewhere deep in the baseball rule book, to determine how an expansion-era game would finally end.
The last bullpen to blow the lead loses.
No one escapes in the 90's, not even the team with the best record in baseball and the closer with the second highest number of saves.
Not even the Red Sox and Jeff Russell, who gave up the sacrifice fly by Randy Velarde that scored pinch-runner Gerald Williams with the winning run in a 6-5 Yankee victory yesterday.
Until the bottom of the ninth brought an end to a long, noisy, breezy, unpredictable afternoon, it appeared that the reshuffled Yankee bullpen had accomplished little except sounding the siren for more changes.
Especially after the two-run, upper-deck home run Mo Vaughn launched off Paul Gibson in the eighth inning established an emphatic, 457-foot difference and a 5-4 Boston lead.


A Noise Sculptor Reveals An Ear for the Commercial
TRENT REZNOR, THE one-man studio band who records as Nine Inch Nails, can be mighty touchy.
"Don't you tell me how I feel," he howls in "I Do Not Want This" on the third Nine Inch Nails album, "The Downward Spiral." "You don't know just how I feel!"
But he'll tell anyone within earshot.
He's tortured, he's confused, he's lonely, he's horny, he's enraged.
More than that, he realizes how many people want to hear all about his turmoil; he understands the sense of collusion between the raving demagogue and the silent but supportive audience.
"I am the hate you try to hide," he sings insinuatingly in "Mr. Self Destruct." "I take you where you want to go/ I give you all you need to know." Later, he whispers, "You let me do this to you."


Assessing the Nitty-Gritty of Fertilizers
FERTILIZER bags and boxes are piled high at the garden centers and hardware stores.
Which one?
First, of course, read the label.
A good bit of information is available there and gardeners should be familiar with what it says, fine print as well as big print.
An important part of a fertilizer's label is the numbers.
They tell what the fertilizer's grade is, and the numbers may be any sort of combinations.
Some examples are 5-10-5, 10-10-10, 6-12-6, 4-3-2 or 0-10-0.
These numbers tell what the percentages are by net weight of total nitrogen (first number), available phosphoric acid (second number) and soluble potash (third number).
These are the primary elements needed by all plants for good growth and if a product has all three, it is what is known as a complete fertilizer.


The Man Who Took Pictures of the Movies
BARELY DRAWING A BREATH, the diminutive man with the old-world manner and two 35-millimeter cameras around his neck crouched alongside the motion picture camera and took aim, a benevolent sniper trying to get off his shots without giving himself away.
The set could have been a street corner at midnight, a bridge at midday or a worn patch of waterfront at dawn.
The director might have been Sidney Lumet, Arthur Penn or George Roy Hill.
But the place was almost always New York City -- inside in summer, outside in winter, in rain, darkness or sticky heat.
And the man with the Hasselblad or the Nikon was, more often than not, Muky: the man who took pictures of the movies.


The World; Leftists Await Bitter Victory In Hungary
HUNGARY'S former Communists seem on the brink of a comeback, but instead of rejoicing they are bracing themselves and the country for a formidable task.
Anything but utopian in their thinking these days, these are practical politicians; they guided Eastern Europe's softest form of Communism in the 1980's, and now they are trying to lower expectations among an electorate already soured by its first taste of a market economy.
The ex-Communists, who now call themselves Socialists, stand a good chance of leading a coalition government after two rounds of national voting, which starts today and ends May 29.
They say there is no looking back to the false comforts of Communism.
They warn there will be more pain, not less, in the near future.
What they are offering is a "correction" on the path to free markets, not redemption.


Tourist Safety
To the Editor: Referring to the flight of tourism from Florida, there is a possible way to alleviate fears of travelers.
Instead of having tourists drive from the airport in rented cars, would it not make sense for the hotels to provide bus service from the airport to the hotel for people traveling from Europe, in particular?
If the hotels do not provide this service, then the airports or the tourist office might take up the slack.
Thus, travelers could be protected in a large and even a secured vehicle, which would insure their arrival in safety to their destination, be it even 50 miles or more from the airport.
Individual drivers in rented cars being such targets, it makes sense to decrease this mode of travel.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Land Rover Discovery; A Tough Family's High, Mighty Heir
THERE it was, the tallest mountain in Manhattan, sprawling over a couple of acres near the Hudson River.
True, it wasn't much.
In a city of skyscrapers, a mountain 18 feet high doesn't amount to a hill of beans, but it was sufficient to its purpose.
That purpose, in conjunction with the New York Auto Show, was the introduction of Land Rover's Discovery, the British company's third entry in America's growing sport utility market.


Curse of the Midnight Dumpers Grows Worse
In the last year, Joseph E. Holley Sr.'s company has been fined more than $6,000 by the Environmental Control Board on charges of dumping trash outside a vacant apartment building that his company owns in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
But Mr.
Holley, executive director of the nonprofit Northwest Brooklyn Development Corporation in Bedford-Stuyvesant, says his hands are clean.
The problem, he said, is that the building, an old warehouse that the company plans to renovate, on the corner of Throop and Lafayette Streets, is being used as a dumping ground by people who drive by to discard everything from washing machines to rotting fish.


The Hand-Off
On Dec. 7, 1993, Carmen Christina Mirach, age 11, wrote a letter to a well-known children's benefactor: Dear Santa,
My name is Carmen Mirach.
My mother has AIDS, and is sometimes very sick.
I am very concerned about her.
But I am also concerned for myself.
I ask myself every day, who will take care of me once she's gone to heaven?
Santa all that I want for Xmas is a caring, loving family.
I am 11 years old.
I am a girl.
I know it's hard to find a family for a big girl like myself.
If I were a baby it might be easier.
I'm funny, smart, respectful and somewhat shy.
I have blond hair, blue eyes.
I have very fair skin.
I like math, I'm not too crazy about reading.
I want to become a vet when I grow up.
Santa can you please help me.
Santa can you please, all I want is a family.
Thank you,
Carmen Mirach


Mutual Funds; A.R.M. Funds Show Sparks of Life
ADJUSTABLE-RATE mortgage funds may be pulling out of their slump.
After a less-than-stellar performance over the last two years, they held up well in the first months of this tough year.
And the future looks promising.
A.R.M. funds were originally billed as the funds with everything: high yields, stable principal and United States Government guarantees.
But while the number of funds has grown, they have lagged other types of bond funds.
In 1992, the group returned 4.5 percent, compared with 6.4 percent for Treasury funds, and last year they gained just 3.8 percent against 11.2 percent for Treasuries, according to Morningstar Inc., the Chicago-based fund researchers.


BENEFITS
Eclipse Preview  MONDAY -- The Hayden Planetarium will hold a benefit party in celebration of the annular eclipse that will begin at 11:48 A.M. on Tuesday.
The party will include a simulation of the eclipse, at the height of which 88 percent of the sun will be obstructed by the moon.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. in the planetarium will be followed by dinner and dancing under the simulated stars.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 769-5165.
Broadway Gathering  MONDAY -- The casts of "Damn Yankees" and "Kiss of the Spider Woman," with performers from several other Broadway shows, will entertain at a benefit for the Manhattan Theater Club at the New York Hilton.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and the show.
Tickets, $250, or for the show alone, $60, from (212) 645-5590, extension 146.
Phoenix House Award  MONDAY -- Phoenix House, the drug treatment and prevention agency, will honor Richard L. Gelb, the chairman of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, at its 16th annual Public Service Award Dinner at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $550, from (212) 997-0100.
Ballet Salutes Tchaikovsky  MONDAY -- The American Ballet Theater will hold its annual spring benefit at the Metropolitan Opera House with a 7 P.M. performance of excerpts of Tchaikovsky ballets.
A black-tie dinner-dance in a tent in Damrosch Park will follow the performance.
Tickets, $650, from (212) 477-3030, extension 246 or 247.
Whitney Museum Benefit  MONDAY -- The Sony Corporation of America will receive the Whitney Museum American Art Award, which will be presented to Michael P. Schulhof, the company's president and chief executive.
The black-tie event at the museum will include cocktails at 7 P.M. and entry to the exhibition "Richard Avedon: Evidence 1944-1994," to be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 570-3672.
Promoting Literacy  MONDAY -- The Reading Reform Foundation of New York, which trains teachers, parents and volunteers in ways to help children read, write and spell, will hold a benefit party at the Hudson Theater.
Cocktails at 6:15 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment by Andrea Marcovicci, the cabaret singer.
Tickets, $275, from (212) 307-7320.
Opening the Door to Theater  MONDAY -- The 52d Street Project brings together theater professionals and children from the Clinton neighborhood of Manhattan to work on theater projects.
The group will hold a benefit dinner-dance with entertainment by the professionals and the youngsters at the ballroom of the Toy Building, 200 Fifth Avenue (23d Street).
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 764-1379.
Dick Button Honored  MONDAY -- Dick Button, the Olympic figure-skating champion, will be honored by the Ice Theater of New York at a benefit for the theater's rehearsal fund.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will served from 6:30 to 10 P.M. at the Players, 16 Gramercy Park South.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 239-4320.
Anti-Defamation Award  TUESDAY -- Edgar S. Woolard Jr., the chairman and chief executive of the Du Pont Company, will receive the Americanism Award of the Anti-Defamation League.
The black-tie event at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 490-2525, extension 389.
Dance Theater Celebration  TUESDAY -- The Dance Theater Workshop will celebrate its 30th anniversary with a benefit at 7 P.M. at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street and Park Avenue.
Dinner will follow at the Metronome Restaurant, Broadway at 21st Street; transportation will be provided.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, or $50 for the performance alone, from (212) 691-4823.
Helping the Homeless  TUESDAY -- The Piano Duo Schnabel will give an 8 P.M. recital at St.
George's Church, 209 East 16th Street.
A dessert reception will follow the performance to benefit the Partnership for the Homeless.
Tickets, $35, or $25 for students and those under 25, from (212) 645-3444, extension 116.
Ailey Dancers at the Apollo  TUESDAY -- Members of the various Alvin Ailey dance companies will present some of their most notable works at a benefit performance at the Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street.
The 7:30 P.M. performance, to be followed by a reception, will benefit the Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Center.
Tickets, $75, or for the performance alone, $10 to $50, from (212) 864-0372.
Choice at Lincoln Center  TUESDAY -- The Real Estate and Construction Council will hold its annual "Evening at Lincoln Center" to benefit the center's 10 performing arts group.
After cocktails, at 5:30, and dinner on the promenade of the New York State Theater, guests will have the choice of attending either "Carousel" at the Vivian Beaumont Theater or a performance by the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 875-5430.
Party on the Pier  WEDNESDAY -- The Children's Storefront, a private, tuition-free elementary school in Harlem, will hold its annual spring benefit at Pier 88 at West 52d Street and the Hudson River.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by a soul food dinner, dancing and entertainment by the Cadillacs and the Harlem Bethune Big Band.
Tickets, $400, or $150 for anyone 35 and younger, from (212) 838-2660.
Antiques Preview  WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail party and preview of the Fifth Avenue Art and Antiques Show from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. will benefit the the Lighthouse's various programs for the visually impaired.
The show, at the Sinclair Fletcher Mansion, 2 East 79th Street, will be open to the public Thursday through next Sunday.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 249-4865.
Aiding Rape Victims  WEDNESDAY -- A benefit for the Rape Crisis Intervention Program at the Mount Sinai Medical Center will be held at Tavern on the Green, where cocktails, music and a light supper will be offered from 6 to 9 P.M.
Anna Quindlen, the New York Times columnist, will be the main speaker.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 241-5461.
Helen Keller Awards  THURSDAY -- The first annual Helen Keller Achievement Awards will honor J. W. Marriott Jr., the chairman of Marriott International; Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman of The New York Times Company; Ray Charles, the singer, and Frank P. Doyle, the executive vice president of the General Electric Company.
The black-tie gala at the Marriott Marquis Hotel will benefit the American Foundation for the Blind.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Fine Art Fair  THURSDAY -- The reference library of the Frick Collection will benefit from a preview of the International Fine Art Fair at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street.
The fair, which will feature art produced between 1300 and 1900, will be open to the public Friday through May 17.
The evening will begin with a 5:30 reception with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres.
Tickets, $500 for the 5:30 P.M. preview, or $200 for a second preview and reception at 7 P.M., from (212) 921-9070.
A Tribute to Bob Fosse  THURSDAY -- Liza Minnelli, Gwen Verdon, Ben Vereen, Roy Scheider and Ann Reinking are on the bill for a tribute to Bob Fosse, the late director and choreographer, at the opening of a monthlong retrospective of Mr.
Fosse's 14 films at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street (Avenue of the Americas).
The event will begin at 7:30 P.M. and will benefit the nonprofit Film Forum, which is renaming one of its three theaters in Mr.
Fosse's honor.
Dinner and dancing will follow at the offices of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, 375 Hudson Street (Houston Street).
Tickets, $250, from (212) 627-2035.
Designers' Party and Tour  THURSDAY -- The New York Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers will be the host for a cocktail reception for nine designers from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Pace Collection, 321 East 62d Street.
The designers' work is represented by nine New York residences, which will be open to the public for tours on Saturday, beginning at 11 A.M.
Both events will benefit Furnish a Future, which provides furniture to formerly homeless people in the New York area.
Tickets, which include the house tour, $60, from (212) 744-4111, or at the cocktail reception.
Families Helping Families  THURSDAY -- A fund-raiser for the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services will celebrate families and the board's charitable work with a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 632-4645.
For the Samaritans  THURSDAY -- A champagne reception and private viewing of the Fifth Avenue Arts and Antiques Show will benefit the Samaritans of New York City, which operates support groups and a suicide-prevention hot line.
The event will begin at 6:30 P.M. at the show, at the Sinclair Fletcher Mansion, 2 East 79th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 677-3009.
Scholarship Dinner  FRIDAY -- The third annual Hellenic Times Scholarship Fund dinner will honor Michael Chiklis, who stars in "The Commish" on ABC.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. at the New York Hilton will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will address the gathering.
Tickets, $125, or $85 for students, from (212) 333-7456.
Spring Hospital Ball  SATURDAY -- A spring ball at the Pierre for Long Island Hospital will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
The evening will also feature a floor show and a raffle of an automobile, vacations and other items.
Black tie.
Tickets, $325, from (718) 780-1234.
For Cancer Research  SATURDAY -- The Joel Finkelstein Cancer Foundation will hold its 38th annual dinner-dance at the Plaza.
The black-tie evening, which will begin with cocktails at 7:30, will raise money for cancer treatment and research at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 470-8690.
For Battered Families  SATURDAY -- The Rockland Family Shelter in Spring Valley, N.Y., which provides services to survivors of domestic violence and to homeless families in Rockland County, has scheduled a benefit dinner prepared by Yves Payraudeau, the executive chef of La Promenade restaurant in Closter, N.Y.
Tickets, $55, from (914) 425-0112.
Readings at the Beaumont  MAY 16 -- Charlie Rose, the talk-show host, will introduce readings by John Irving, Frank Conroy, P. J. O'Rourke, Clarissa Estes and John Ashbery at the Vivian Beaumont Theater.
The evening, which will begin with cocktails at 6, will raise money for Literacy Volunteers of New York City.
Barbara Bush, the former First Lady, will offer remarks, as will Liz Smith, the Newsday columnist.
A black-tie dinner-dance will follow at the New York State Theater.
Tickets, $500, or $175 for the cocktail reception and reading alone, from (212) 925-3001.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PERSONAL ESSAYS  PAPER TRAIL  Essays.  By Michael Dorris. HarperCollins, $22.


D-Day
To the Editor: Your listing of British and French museums covering D-Day, "Guns and Tanks, Flags and Diaries" (April 17), omitted the Cabinet War Rooms in London.
This museum is in the underground apartments where Winston Churchill and his Government carried out their wartime leadership while Nazi bombs fell overhead.
The War Rooms are under Great George Street and the entrance is on King Charles Street.
PHIL HALL  Bronx, N.Y.


Stepping Up A Campaign To Add Police
For at least five years, residents of the northern end of East New York have watched drug dealers slowly overrun their neighborhood, and for at least that long, they have asked for more police protection.
But those requests, usually made at private meetings with police officials of the 75th Precinct, went largely ignored, residents say.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINETalia V. Levy, M. A. Farbowitz
Talia Vered Levy, a daughter of Silvia Goldsztajn of Los Angeles and Mark Levy of Salt Lake City, was married last Sunday to Michael Aron Farbowitz, the son of Leonard and Rosilyn Farbowitz of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Avraham Weiss performed the ceremony at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
The bride, 26, is a bilingual education teacher at Public School 48 in the Bronx.
She graduated cum laude from California State University at Northridge and received a master's degree in elementary education from Teachers College at Columbia University.
Her mother is the owner and president of Allied Interpreting, a translating service in Los Angeles.


Fire Captain Dies From Injuries in a March Blaze
A 49-year-old fire captain who was critically injured in March while fighting a blaze inside an apartment building in SoHo died yesterday at the hospital where he had been undergoing treatment for the last 40 days, fire officials said.
Capt.
John J. Drennan died at 4:47 P.M. in his room inside the burn unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, said Louis Wetstein, a spokesman for the hospital.


Does Sharpe James Retain Common Touch as Mayor of Newark?
The President was on the line to the Mayor of Newark.
Could he, would he come to Washington, discuss the anti-crime bill, maybe stay the night?
Relishing the moment of two months ago, Sharpe James, president of the National League of Cities, occasional news-show guest and new Friend of Bill, chuckled at the President's politeness.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CREEPY CRAWLERS
What more could a child want than 100 live snakes, lizards, salamanders, and turtles?
A nice boa constrictor?
An albino python, perhaps?
Or a monitor lizard, the largest of all lizards?
All will be on display on Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M. in the Jorgensen Auditorium on the Storrs campus of UConn, courtesy of the university faculty and members of the Southern New England and Rhode Island Herpetological Societies.
So too will a red strawberry frog, a timber rattlesnake, a copperhead and a pancake tortoise.
Slide-lectures at 2 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturday by faculty members from UConn and the University of Massachusetts will deal with the protection of New England species and why snakes have forked tongues.
More information on amphibians and reptiles will be divulged in a demonstration and a slide-talk on Sunday at the same hours by Steve Garnett, a freelance herpetologist from New Rochelle, N.Y., and James Lazell, a consultant to Harvard and Yale Universities.


The Art Of Putting On a Play
THE flashy life of Tallulah Bankhead in flashback is what "Dahling!" the musical is about.
An autobiographical chapter in the early life of Jerome Kilty, the actor-writer-director from Weston, is the basis of "About to Begin," a new play.
The musical and the play make up the first two of five staged readings to be separately and successively performed on Friday evenings, starting this week at Westport Arts Center, under the new banner "The Searchlight on Theater Series." In 1980, when Marcella Cisney founded the forum for the development of new plays, the series came to be known simply as "Plays in Progress."


A Rap From 'the Heart of a Suffering People'
RAFAA MC RAE is big and black and young.
When he walks down a street in his loosely laced hiking boots and baggy jeans, some people see a menace to society.
When he sees that threat reflected in oncoming eyes, he feels frustrated, but it also gives him strength.
"I'm not going to pull out my student I.D. and say, 'Don't worry, I don't want your purse,' " he said.
"There is a tremendous sense of power a young black male receives seeing people who don't know him grip their bags, flinch, cross the street."


The Seagram, Redux, On the Park?
Having helped reintroduce turrets, pinnacles and arcades to the architectural vocabulary, Philip Johnson is turning to an equally historic source -- his own work -- for a project on Columbus Circle.
Mr.
Johnson has been chosen to redesign the former Gulf and Western Building, which is to be stripped to its steel skeleton and rebuilt as an extravagant apartment tower known as 1 Central Park West.
Inspiration will come from the glass-skinned Seagram Building of 1958, a landmark on which Mr.
Johnson worked with Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.


Out of Rwanda's Horrors Into a Sickening Squalor
Sitting on a torn foam mattress under one of the few trees that had not been stripped for firewood, Anatalie Mukankusi breast-fed her baby.
She was also watching over 13 children who had been separated from their parents in the panicked flight out of Rwanda.
Her daily challenge, like that of most of the quarter-million refugees on this open plain near the Rwandan border, is finding water, adequate food and shelter from the battering rains.
The children, mostly boys in ragged, dirty clothes, huddle together and talk in hushed tones about their families.


An Assessment System With Distortions Built In
IN about a month the City Council will set the tax rates for the various classes of New York City property.
Then the Finance Department will send out tax bills for fiscal 1995, which begins July 1.
What better time for owners of a house, co-op or condominium to haul out a calculator and figure out their own effective tax rate?
This is the percentage that expresses the relationship between the property tax in dollars and the market value of the property.


Overcrowded Vietnam Is Said to Face Catastrophe
Their streets are blocked by peddlers, beggars and parked motorbikes, their houses are overflowing with young children and visiting relatives, and even after death the urns containing their ashes must compete for space on the crowded shelves of Buddhist pagodas.
Vietnam is bursting at the seams with people, and unless the nation can change its demographic, social and economic trends, the Vietnamese will face a catastrophe, many experts believe.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMs. Sobol, Mr. McDermott
Patricia Lynn Sobol, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Sobol Jr. of Bolton, Conn., was married in New Haven yesterday to Dermot Michael McDermott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John McDermott of Woodside, Queens.
The Rev.
Sean Jordan McConway performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church at Yale University.


Assessing the Nitty-Gritty of Fertilizers
FERTILIZER bags and boxes are piled high at the garden centers and hardware stores.
Which one?
First, of course, read the label.
A good bit of information is available there and gardeners should be familiar with what it says, fine print as well as big print.
An important part of a fertilizer's label is the numbers.
They tell what the fertilizer's grade is, and the numbers may be any sort of combinations.
Some examples are 5-10-5, 10-10-10, 6-12-6, 4-3-2 or 0-10-0.
These numbers tell what the percentages are by net weight of total nitrogen (first number), available phosphoric acid (second number) and soluble potash (third number).
These are the primary elements needed by all plants for good growth and if a product has all three, it is what is known as a complete fertilizer.


The Clipper Debate
To the Editor:
An important issue was not discussed in "Of Privacy and Security: The Clipper Chip Debate" (April 24).
As long as the National Security Agency keeps secret the details of the Clipper encryption algorithm, its users cannot verify that its encryption technique is safe.
Revealing the encryption method should in no way compromise an effective encryption algorithm.
Failing to do so implies that if the details were revealed, the data would be compromised.
On top of the prospect that the keys might fall into the wrong hands, this insures that no sophisticated user will want to use Clipper.
DAVID FOX  Manhattan, April 24 The writer is a research assistant at the New York Univrsity Media Research Laboratory.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEAnne M. Kunitz, William Walsh
Anne Marie Kunitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Kunitz of Appleton, Wis., was married there yesterday to Lieut. (j.g.) William Cullinan Walsh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald E. Walsh of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
John T. McFadden officiated at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Walsh, 25, is a youth counselor for the work force development division of the Federal Department of Labor in Corpus Christi, Tex.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Wisconsin.


[ STOREFRONTS ] ; Fiesta Wear
WHEN YOLANDA ROSSI MOVED TO Los Angeles from Argentina 20 years ago, one of the first things she did was drive downtown, along Broadway.
"Oh, it was magnificent," she recalls.
"The people were cosmopolitan. The shops were fashionable and sophisticated." One shop in particular caught her eye: Bridal City, on the street level of the historic Bradbury Building at Third and Broadway.
It would have been almost inconceivable in those sunny California days that Bridal City would be torched by urban riots.
Almost from the day Jack Leatherman opened it in 1946, right up to the 1970's, Bridal City stood as a landmark in formal wear, famous for its vast variety of gowns and tuxedos and its glittering clientele of pop stars and politicians.


Financier Defends Record
To the Editor:
After reading Floyd Norris's "In a Cliffhanger, a Junk Deal Is Finally Sold" (Market Watch, April 17), I wasn't sure whether I should be concerned, confused or bemused.
The column dealt with the recent turmoil and prevailing weakness in the bond markets and used the $550 million Thrifty-Payless deal as an example of the difficulties of such transactions in a volatile market.
The successful completion of this transaction validates the intrinsic strength of the combined businesses and confirms the credit quality that made the deal.


Braving the Big Muddy
Two hours before today's Kentucky Derby, Gary Nitzken, a resident of this city, said, "I never miss the Derby, I don't care if it rains, snows or sleets." Then he walked under a sign marked "Exit" and headed to the Churchill Downs parking lot.
Rain showers pelted this town all day, and turned Churchill Downs into a Wet 'N Wild amusement park.
It was water, water everywhere.
The track was turned the color of chocolate milk, and led to Kandaly being scratched from the Derby because he doesn't like a muddy surface.
Fans were huddled underneath covered areas, some reclining on blankets, which made the ground floor betting areas seem even more crowded than usual at a Derby.


Badly Needed Intelligence
Not since the 1970's have so many Americans across the political spectrum asked so many anxious questions about what is known in Washington as "the intelligence community." Startling disclosures of Central Intelligence Agency involvement in assassination plots led in 1975 to inquiries by the Church and Pike committees, and by President Ford's Rockefeller Commission.
One salutary result was the adoption of a new executive order against the dirtiest of tricks: plotting to kill a foreign leader.
And the Senate and House for the first time attempted serious oversight of clandestine agencies.
The time seems right, a generation later, for comparable full-scale inquiries into the role and performance of all U.S. intelligence services.
At the least Americans deserve to know why security procedures failed to expose Aldrich H. Ames, a free-spending C.I.A. official who spied for Moscow from 1985 until his arrest in February.


May 1-7: Food Labels; Pass the Chips, If You Dare
If the Government can help it, you won't be seeing products like Healthy Select Batter-Fried Pork Rinds on your grocery shelf.
The Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture are adding "healthy" to the list of terms they will regulate on food labels.
Under criteria announced last week and taking effect tomorrow, foods labeled healthy must fall within specific limits on fat, saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, as well as contain at least 10 percent of the recommended daily allowance of either Vitamin A, Vitamin C, iron, calcium, protein or fiber.
Existing product lines will have time to conform to the new standards or change their labels.


May 1-7; Lies, Damn Lies and Baseball Statistics
For weeks a rumor has been circulating among baseball fans: "The ball is juiced!" Somehow, for some reason, batters are hitting home runs at a rate never before seen.
But maybe it's not the ball that's juiced but the numbers.
Statisticians say that when data are looked at in a scientific way there may be less there than first meets the eye.


Knicks Have a Score To Settle With Chicago
The opportunity that the Knicks have craved all year has finally arrived.
They have another chance to beat the Chicago Bulls, the opponent that has become almost an obsession.
New York has never won a playoff series against Chicago.
The Bulls have eliminated the Knicks in the last three seasons, and in four of the last five.
And last year was the cruelest blow of all for New York.


WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT JEWS
Because Joe Wood went to Riverdale School in the Bronx with a lot of Jews, he says it made him feel "a little like a Jew." That he felt a little like a Jew, it seems, allows him to put into print virtually every anti-Semitic cliche, under the guise of telling us what he learned about Jews.
And he actually ends his piece with a little rhapsody to his best friend from Yale . . . a Jew who feels like a black.
It's nice that some of his best friends are Jewish.
Otherwise, he would have had to leave that one out.
ELLEN BILGORE New York, N.Y.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINELeslie K. Gaspar, C. E. Streitwieser
Leslie Katherine Gaspar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Gaspar of Warren, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Edward Streitwieser, a son of Franz X. Streitwieser of Pottstown, Pa., and the late Katherine S. Streitwieser.
The Rev.
Linda E. Owens officiated at the Liberty Corner (N.J.) Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Richard Dancy, a Christian Community minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 26, is an intern in the curatorial department at the Winterthur Museum in Wilmington.
She graduated from Haverford College and received a master's degree in the history of decorative arts from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the managing director of Product Line Management International Inc., consultants in Warren.


Of Fate and Destiny: Master George and Tag-Along Billy
If you weren't covering them or working for them, Billy and George were the cartoon heroes of the sporting 70's and 80's, brawling descendants of Maggie and Jiggs, of Tom and Jerry, sires of Beavis and Butthead.
When Reggie joined them, the psycho-dramatics flared; three gifted, fascinating, flawed Captain Ahabs in quest of a whale of a photo op.
Or was it simply love?
Billy Martin is dead, under circumstances still being litigated.
Reggie Jackson is officially a Yankee factotum, but he seems to have racked his bat.
And George Steinbrenner is bigger than ever, truly the straw that stirs the drink.
Master of the premier franchise in sport, a bidder for Madison Square Garden and its teams, and a rising star in the United States Olympic movement, he may be in position to do to the city, the country, the world!, what he did to Martin.


Budget Plan to Include Bond Refinancing
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has decided to propose a complex refinancing of city bonds to save about $200 million to help close a $2.3 billion gap in next year's budget, mayoral aides said yesterday.
When he releases his executive budget on Tuesday, Mr.
Giuliani is also expected to propose saving $125 million by changing the schedule of payments on a debt that the city owes to its pension funds, the aides said.


Accentuating the Positive
NIXON A Life.
By Jonathan Aitken.
Illustrated. 633 pp.
Washington: Regnery Publishing. $28.


Corrections
An article on April 17, recalling D-Day and headed "The Battlescape of Normandy," misstated the surname of the paratrooper who spent the night of June 6, 1944, hanging by his parachute from a church steeple in Ste.-Mere-Eglise.
He was John Steele, not Shields.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column on April 24 about lectures at a bookstore in White Plains misidentified the publisher of "History Through the Opera Glass" by George Jellinek.
It is Pro/ Am Music Resources, not Dover Books.


Burnitz May Go to Minors
The Mets most likely will be without two-thirds of their starting outfield by early next week -- Jeromy Burnitz appears destined for Class AAA Norfolk and Ryan Thompson may well return to New York for more tests on his injured right hand.
Burnitz's troubles are all of his own making -- poor hitting, suspect fielding and awful base running.
Manager Dallas Green acknowledged today that it would be logical to send Burnitz down.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Electoral Morality
To the Editor:
With Richard Nixon's passing, his defenders are proclaiming their conviction that here was a great man who was, unfortunately, beset with a few minor flaws, one of which evidenced itself with the Watergate break-in and coverup.
The flaws were great, an integral part of the man.


L.I.R.R. Reshuffles Management In Response to Critical Report
The president of the Long Island Rail Road said on Friday that he had reorganized his top management to centralize responsibility for operations, as recommended by the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transit Authority after the collapse of service in the Feb. 11 snowstorm.
The inspector general said that a key reason that the railroad fell apart that day was that the president, Charles W. Hoppe, had given responsibility for the engineering department to one vice president, and responsibility for other key operational areas, like transportation, mechanical, service planning and police, to another.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Tempered by Caracas
To the Editor:
Most Americans seeking to understand better the life of Richard M. Nixon, only dimly remember his 1958 good-will tour of South America.
As an eyewitness and press attache then at the United States Embassy in Caracas, Venezuela, and after recent research, I wonder: Did this crisis contribute fundamentally to his subsequent style of bold innovation in foreign policy?


All-Girls School Left Out of Survey
The article on Westchester schools  [ "When Good Schools Aren't Good Enough," April 3 ]  was an interesting survey of the phenomenon of families living in good public school districts that nonetheless choose to send their children to private schools.
We live in Irvington and have two daughters in private schools in the area.
Many of the reasons cited for making this expensive choice resonate with us -- "a structured school environment," "smaller number of children," "class size," "communication with parents."


Special for Mothers in Many Ways
MOTHER'S DAY is the best of times and the worst of times for restaurateurs and diners.
More people will eat out today than on any other day of the year.
Families want to honor mom by getting her out of the kitchen.
They will fill restaurants today and be greeted with flowers, buffets, music, set meals and wall-to-wall diners.


Embracing Cape Ann's Contrasts
MY first visit to Massachusetts' Cape Ann was on a cold, gray afternoon when surf detonated against the rocks, my scarf kept flying into my face and fishingboats pitched in such a forlorn way out in the harbors that it seemed impossible that anyone with a clear mind would want to live in this wind-struck, salt-struck place.
Enormous granite boulders shouldered up against the beaches.
The ocean was the color of rain, and the wind smelled fishy.
Ducking in and out of my car that day, I wasn't surprised that witches had thrown hexes on this spot, or that sea monsters had been sighted here by reliable witnesses, or that pirates had divvied up blood money on the rocks.
Or, especially when I glanced up at the widow's walks crowning a few old houses near the shore, that thousands of mariners had drowned off this coast.
Cape Ann, as far as I could see, had that grim obduracy that fosters both legends and bad dreams.
Two days later the ocean was silky, the sky was blue and Cape Ann was neat as a postcard and as far removed from witches, monsters and pirates as most romance novels are from real romance.
Families posed beside a monument for lost fishermen; beachcombers bought candy shells from souvenir shops; camera-hung visitors wandered through art galleries that sell the sort of seascapes that have become more familiar than the sea itself.
Water glittered behind 18th-century clapboard houses, which seemed only sweetly weatherbeaten.
Even the rocks looked benign.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a developer's request to build a road through the pine barrens misstated the role of Supervisor John LaMura of the Town of Brookhaven in a Federal grand jury investigation.
He is cooperating with prosecutors and has not testified before the grand jury.


Call It RedHo?
It's the same old story, but it isn't the same old place.
"I came here from Southern California," Jim Dahl said, "because I'd been an artist there for a number of years and I just wanted things to go . . . quicker."


Francis X. Murtagh, Lawyer, 75
Francis X. Murtagh, a retired lawyer and Assistant District Attorney in New York, died on Thursday at his home in Venice, Fla.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Francis X. Murtagh Jr.


Erasing Gang Tattoos From Faces and Hands
Mike Petty dropped out of the Nortenos gang when his girlfriend had a baby, but he could not hide the 11 tattoos of gang symbols on his face, neck and hands.
This week, the 16-year-old had these symbols of his past erased, joining more than 200 other young people participating in a city-sponsored program offering free laser treatment to remove gang tattoos.


January's Cold Hitting Farmers Now
Russell Bartolotta stood on the edge of his cherry orchard here today, examining the nearly bare limbs of his sweet cherry trees.
Instead of the beautiful white blossoms that usually cover the trees, only tiny green leaves were visible.
Mr.
Bartolotta pulled one of the buds that would normally have produced a blossom in early May and a cherry in June.
It crumpled in his hand.


Which Way to the Truth?
To the Editor:
Advocates of religion are whining increasingly loudly about the disappearance of religion from the intellectual lives of people today.
It does not seem to have occurred to them that one large reason for this disappearance is the great likelihood that the metaphysical claims of religion are false.
As H. P. Lovecraft wrote in defending his atheism, "All I say is that I think it is damned unlikely that anything like a central cosmic will, a spirit world or an eternal survival of personality exists. They are the most preposterous and unjustified of all the guesses which can be made about the universe."
Now John Patrick Diggins comes along and, in the course of reviewing George M. Marsden's book "The Soul of the American University" (April 17), makes the following remarkable assertion: "Religion remains one of the few branches of study that tell us some truths about human nature."


In Gaza, a 'Shoot' Is Not Just Film Slang
CRADLING PLASTIC replicas of rifles and dressed in mock Israeli Army fatigues, helmets and bullet-proof vests, a group of Arab actors stood in an orange grove last month and pointed their fake guns at a Palestinian boy.
As one actor playing a jittery soldier went through the motions of shooting, a burst of genuine gunfire rattled in the distance.
Real Israeli soldiers were patroling nearby roads, checking cars for fugitive Palestinian militants.


Getting Even


Wash a Car, Win a Trophy


Serbs Barring Relief Flights In Bosnia City
Less than two months after Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia, flew in to the airport in this northern Bosnian town and declared that its opening heralded "the arrival of peace," the airport remains closed and its status has become a crucial battle of wills between Bosnian Serb forces and the United Nations.
No planes have landed at the airport since April 14, when Mr.
Akashi determined that the Serbian assault at Gorazde might make any United Nations flights into Tuzla vulnerable to Serbian attack from the surrounding mountains.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMadeleine Beresford, Jeffrey Burger
Madeleine Rosamond Sylvia Beresford, the daughter of Dr.
John Beresford of Toronto and the late Myriam Hartog, was married last Sunday to Jeffrey Allen Burger, a son of Chester Burger of New York and Hannah Burger of Stony Brook, L.I.
Rabbi Hirschel Jaffe officiated at the Chapel of Our Lady Restoration in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Ms.
Beresford, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a founder of the Galapagos Puppet Theater, based in Ridgewood, N.J.
She graduated from Oberlin College.


Evening Hours; Celebrating Bourgeois
A reception for the artist, 83, amid her exhibition, April 29.


Corrections
A report n the Travel Advisory column on April 24 about the new Tidal Force water ride at Hersheypark in Hershey, Pa., misstated the information telephone number.
It is (800) 437-7439.


D-Day
To the Editor: With your article "By Land, Air and Sea in England and the U.S." (April 17), you published a photo of the interior of Breamoor House in Hampshire, near Fordingbridge, and identify it as the headquarters of Gen.
George S. Patton in late June 1944 before he left with the Third Army for France.
It would perhaps be appropriate to add that long before the arrival of General Patton, Breamoor House was the headquarters of Maj.
Gen.
J.
Lawton Collins.
It was in Breamoor House, in the months preceding June 6, that the detailed planning was done for the landings on Utah Beach by the Seventh Corps of the First Army.
CHARLES G. WHITING  Evanston, Ill.


The View From the Other Side
ONE sloppy spring afternoon, light rain spitting from the darkened sky, Elaine Stong ducked into a brick apartment house on a Greenwich Village street, an oasis of well-kept town houses.
A scarf was capping her hair, giving her the look of a gypsy.
She exchanged pleasantries with the tub-bellied doorman, rode the elevator to the fifth floor and let herself into the two-bedroom duplex apartment of a man she scarcely knew.
She shrugged out of her jacket.
Then she methodically assembled cleaning suplies from the hall closet: bucket, glass cleaner, bathroom cleaner, floor polish, mop, rags.
Cradling them in her arms, she plodded up the steps to the second floor.
"Easy does it; don't fall on me," she scolded the supplies.
Her routine took little thought.
She followed it day after day.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR  CROSSING THE BORDER  An Erotic Journey. By Kim Chernin. Fawcett Columbine, $22.


A Boulevard That Belongs To 2 Boroughs
Robert Bixler votes in Brooklyn. His next-door neighbor, George Ruvio, votes in Queens.
Voter fraud?


SUNDAY, May 8, 1994; Puppies on Prozac
Any pet owner will tell you that dogs are people.
So why not give them Prozac?
That is precisely the question Dennis O'Brien and other veterinarians are facing in the age of psychopharmacology.
O'Brien, a professor of veterinary neurology at University of Missouri, says, "Quite often we have people bring in animals and ask if we can put them on Prozac or Valium" to solve behavior problems.
And why not?
Both drugs have been tested on humans for years, so they ought to be safe and effective for poodles.
And in practice, the drugs do seem to alleviate canine angst.


Unmasterly TV
To the Sports Editor:


Pull Up Your Socks
Schoolgirls have been wearing them for most of this century, but the black thigh-high stockings were considered shocking in the 1890's, when Toulouse-Lautrec painted cancan dancers lifting their skirts to expose women's legs for the first time in fashion history.
Only in primitive cultures had the female leg been exposed.
As this century closes, women are again pulling up the same black stockings to balance the revival of miniskirts.
One woman wore a skirt with attached garters to secure her stockings.
Others are often seen pulling them up.


Madame Walker's Grand Mansion
To the Editor:
While your article on Madame C. J. Walker  [ "The Grand Mansion of an Early Black Entrepreneur," April 24 ]  was interesting, it failed to report two of the most astonishing facts of her life.


At Melrose Court, Progress in Shades of Teal
For 14 years, Crucita and Abraham Rivera lived in a bleak three-bedroom apartment in a sprawling building in East Tremont where hypodermic syringes littered the stairwells, drug dealers loitered in the hallways and falling asleep to the sound of gunfire was a way of life.
In December, the Riveras joined legions of others who over the last decade have bought the new homes that have begun to tranform sections of the South Bronx.
Their only regret is that their four grown children are not with them to share the dream.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMs. Shaughnessy And Mr. Block
Maureen Ann Shaughnessy, a legal counsel at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the New York investment bank, was married yesterday in Pittsburgh to Steven Joseph Block, the chief financial officer of American Pacific Enterprises, a home-furnishings manufacturer in New York.
Msgr.
Charles O. Rice performed the ceremony at the Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Block, 28, graduated from Duke University, and she and her husband received J.D. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Shaughnessy of Pittsburgh, where the bride's father is a urologist and her mother, Carol Shaughnessy, is a realtor at Prudential Preferred.


Life Lessons From ABC's Nicotine Expose On 'Day One'
PHILIP MORRIS'S $10 billion libel suit against ABC News may in time be decided in more official tribunals, but however that turns out, the television programs that prompted it already invite attention.
They have things to tell us about the nature of the journalistic expose in general and of the television news magazine in particular.
The main objects of the Philip Morris Companies' displeasure are two reports (on Feb. 28 and March 7) on ABC's "Day One" that charged cigarette companies with controlling the content of nicotine as a way of increasing the pleasure of inhaling and possibly the likelihood of addiction.
The report was also mentioned on ABC's "World News Tonight," "World News This Morning," "Nightline" and "20/20."


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEGwen Korovin And Jack Uram
Dr.
Gwen S. Korovin, an otolaryngologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, is to be married today to Jack Uram, a partner in Blindman Uram &amp; Swords, a law firm in New York.
Rabbi Solomon Sternstein will perform the ceremony at the home of Barbara and Joseph Strassman, an aunt and uncle of the bridegroom, in Yonkers.
Dr.
Korovin is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her medical degree from the State University Health Sciences Center at Syracuse.
She is the daughter of Harold and Miriam Korovin of Delray Beach, Fla.


In Kent, a Grand Opening for a Dealer From SoHo
THE arrival of spring routinely triggers outbursts of art at the Paris-Kent-New York and Bachelier-Cardonsky Galleries in Kent.
Still, with no two seasons exactly alike, a scorecard is necessary.
As an example, P.K.N.Y. is currently confined to the Caboose, having yielded its space in Kent Station to a new kid on the block.
She is none other than Monique Knowlton, the dealer who flourished in SoHo from the mid-1970's to the mid-1980's.
Since hers was a grand opening in Kent, heavy with -- though not overwhelmed by -- reputations made in Manhattan, Ms.
Knowlton was still the center of attention on the day of the reviewer's visit.
Her gallery, though large, can barely contain the works of more than 40 artists and if there is no telling the furniture from the art it is because the two are so often one and the same thing.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LOWER MANHATTAN  Celebration and Dance From Tamils and Burmese
Just another Sunday at the Lotus Fine Arts Center: a Tamil New Year's celebration in the morning, a Burmese dance program in the afternoon.


Battling Payoffs In Co-op Buildings
To the Editor:
While it is true that there are managing agents who supplement their incomes through their dealings with contractors, as reported in "Battling Payoffs in Co-ops" on March 20, the article presented only a partial picture of a complex situation.


In Revolt Against Debris Police
In their navy blue uniforms and silver badges, they inspire a combination of respect and loathing in Manhattan Valley.
But they are not police officers.
They are sanitation agents, armed with sheaves of summonses to post on the doors of businesses and apartment buildings that fail to keep sidewalks and gutters clear.
Several building managers and residents in the area say they are being fined unfairly, however, by a corps of often overzealous agents who repeatedly give summonses to buildings near trash-strewn vacant lots or schools, where littering by students is difficult to combat.
And they say that some of the agents make it a practice to issue violations late in the afternoon, after porters have gone home, or on weekends, when many buildings operate with reduced staffs.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Barry W. Agulnick is an unpopular member of an unpopular profession.
His specialty: defending police officers.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Every neighborhood has one, a place so incapable of sustaining restaurant life that it just has to be cursed.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEDina A. Levy, Jordan K. Savitt
Dina Alyce Levy, the daughter of Randy and Jules Levy of Woodbury, L.I., was married last evening to Jordan Kalin Savitt, a son of Claire and Richard Savitt of Coral Gables, Fla.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.


Steamy Echoes From a Sun-Drenched Genre
FEW AMERICANS realize that Brazil went through a cultural upheaval of its own in the 1960's.
Racial, sexual and class schisms that still affect the society were explored for the first time in the media.
Popular music, in particular, became a bulletin board for fresh possibilities in the middle 60's after the international success of bossa nova and the start of tremendously successful song contests on television.
By 1968, a repressive but lethargic dictatorship had held power for four years while a generation grew desperate for the new affluence and mobility available to youth elsewhere.
The inevitable result was protest music.


Snorkeling With Dolphins
The chance to swim with bottlenose dolphins, the sweet-natured Tursiops truncatus, is a highlight of a six-day Dolphin Discovery Camp offered from June through August by the Institute for Marine Sciences on Roatan, Bay Islands in Honduras.
"The dolphins are wild and very playful," said a spokeswoman for the camp, which accepts children ages 8 to 14.
Before taking to the waters of a lagoon where the dolphins congregate, participants receive snorkeling and water safety instruction.
The camp, held in conjunction with Anthony's Key Resort on Roatan, costs $500 a week for children, and $800 a week per adult, including room and board.
Call (800) 227-3483 or (305) 666-1997.
TERRY TRUCCO


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEJudybeth Tropp, J. B. Schwimmer
Judybeth Tropp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zachary Tropp of Stamford, Conn., was married last night to Jeffrey Barnett Schwimmer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Schwimmer of Long Beach, Calif.
Rabbi Yechiael Lander officiated at the Swift River Inn in Cummington, Mass.
The bride, 27, graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She was until recently an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.


For Unlicensed Driver, a Long Prelude to Tragedy
He found equanimity poking through the entrails of a car.
He took delight and pride in resuscitating gasping engines, unclogging gas lines, repairing valves.
Those who brought their faltering vehicles to his makeshift bay along the curb of his housing project agreed that Abraham Meyers made magic with his fingers.
Friends and relatives spoke of him as an almost sanctimonious good Samaritan who admonished children in the project against drugs and drink.
Rarely, though, would he confide his own flirtations with drugs and affection for the bottle.


Wash That Winter Right Out of the Draperies and Shades
DRAPERIES, blinds and shades usually benefit dramatically from spring cleaning.
All can become dirty in the winter, when low humidity increases static electricity, causing dust to cling.
Vacuuming may suffice for draperies.
The only other options are washing or dry-cleaning.
Close the draperies and clean the fabric panel by panel.
Use an upholstery attachment connected to an extension arm, and open the suction-control ring on the hose to prevent the vacuum from drawing against the fabric with too much force.


The Nation; This Part's the Barrel, I Think
THE oratory that preceded the House of Representatives' by-a-whisker vote to ban the production or importation of 19 assault weapons was nothing if not portentous.
Justice, freedom and the American way of death were all invoked before the ban's proponents handed the National Rifle Association another Congressional defeat by a vote of 216 to 214.
Both sides left nothing out of their lobbying on the bill, which was passed six months after the House passed the Brady Bill, requiring a five-day wait before a handgun can be bought.
There were discussions of how criminals and law-abiding citizens use or abuse these guns -- most of them semiautomatic copies of fully automatic military weapons.
There were testimonials for and against by hunters, crime victims and law enforcement officers.
There were photo opportunities.


A Return to Amherst and the Pioneer Valley
SPRING in the Pioneer Valley of central Massachusetts is a glorious affair; almost all the trees bear lacy pink and white flowers, and you cannot step out of doors without smelling their perfumes.
Or so I recalled, having spent my student years at Mount Holyoke, one of the colleges - Amherst, Smith, Hampshire, and the University of Massachusetts are the others - situated around the town of Amherst, a veritable New England Oxford.
I had often contemplated returning is the valley to sample the season's pleasures, but had been deferred by the price.
Renting a car from New York for three days costs almost $200, and even if you take the train to Springfield for a mere $51 round trip, you need to rent a car to reach the Five College Area.
Amtrak offers service to Amherst as well, but the train, on its way to Montreal, stops in town at 2:40 A.M., and leaves for New York at 1:15 A.M.


Saw Mill From Start to Finish
ON the sort of steamy, sweltering day that more rightly belonged to midsummer than to early spring, a group of 20 youngsters peered over a small bridge opposite the Getty Square parking lot as they gingerly dropped marshmallows and oranges into the swiftly rushing water of the Saw Mill River below.
What looked to many elderly passersby as a pre-adolescent prank was instead a carefully planned science experiment, designed to demonstrate how objects would float in the river.
As soon as the students finished dropping the marshmallows and oranges, they hurried to the mouth of the Saw Mill River on the Yonkers riverfront to join other classmates, who squealed with delight at the first appearance of a marshmallow.


Wall Street; Late Numbers Often Add Up to Weak Numbers
LATE filings are on the rise, by the looks of 12b-25 filings by public companies that can't quite make a deadline.
In the six months ended March 31, 1,018 such forms were filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, up from 865 in the similar period the year before.
Reason to worry?
"Most times when we get in touch with companies who are late, it has something to do with the audit process," said Paul Gerlach, assistant director of enforcement at the S.E.C.
That's reason enough for an investor to look further, he said.


. . . While Rockers Turn Up The Heat on Superstardom
LIKE ANY SKILLED WORKERS, musicians have rivalries and quibbles, factions and guilds.
Often, they save their competitive barbs for articles, interviews or manifestoes.
Occasionally, however, ill will appears undisguised in song, and rivals get mentioned by name.
Pop music has a long history of insults, and few artists are above name-dropping.
While rap has elevated the dis, or put-down, to an art form, in rock -- particularly alternative rock -- the nature of insults has changed.
Though there's still plenty of name-dropping in recent songs by groups like Sonic Youth, Hole and Pavement, the enemies are no longer the bands being singled out but the marketplace that has made them successful.


Williamsburg
To the Editor: Readers planning a trip to Williamsburg ("What's Doing in Williamsburg," Feb. 20) can enter into the spirit of Colonial Williamsburg by reading Elswyth Thane's acclaimed Williamsburg novels, beginning with "Dawn's Early Light," set in Revolutionary America.
This volume, and some others in the series, have been reprinted by Aeonian Press.
CONSTANCE MARTIN  New York, N.Y.


Library Sued Over Ban on Nude Art
A DECISION by the Manhasset Public Library to ban "nude" paintings from an art exhibition in 1992 may carry a hefty price tag.
An artist from Oyster Bay, Robyn Bellospirito, is suing the library after she was ordered to withhold three paintings from her show because they violated an unwritten "no-nudes" policy.
For two years the library and Ms.
Bellospirito have been battling over the ban.
Ms.
Bellospirito complained about censorship.
Library officials argued that they were simply adhering to the "no-nudes" policy.
Art exhibitions are hung in the Community Room, an all-purpose area accessible to children.


Professional Soccer Comes to the County
WHEN Bob Butler was a child in England, he started playing soccer.
"I was 4 or 5, and I played the game enthusiastically until I was 35 years old," he said.
"Soccer was my game and a great one it is. Outside of the United States, it is the most popular game in the world. But over the last decade there has been a tremendous growth in youth soccer here, with 1 out of 4 American kids now playing the game. So I feel that this is the right time to bring professional soccer back to the New York region."
It is to that end that Mr.
Butler, a multifaceted businessman, has organized a professional soccer team, the New York Fever, which is New York's first professional soccer team since the demise of the Cosmos.
And Mr.
Butler has chosen Westchester as the home for the new team.
The New York Fever will play its 12 home games at Barrett Stadium at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, with the first home game against the Delaware Wizards scheduled next Saturday at 5 P.M.


Embracing Cape Ann's Contrasts
MY first visit to Massachusetts' Cape Ann was on a cold, gray afternoon when surf detonated against the rocks, my scarf kept flying into my face and fishingboats pitched in such a forlorn way out in the harbors that it seemed impossible that anyone with a clear mind would want to live in this wind-struck, salt-struck place.
Enormous granite boulders shouldered up against the beaches.
The ocean was the color of rain, and the wind smelled fishy.
Ducking in and out of my car that day, I wasn't surprised that witches had thrown hexes on this spot, or that sea monsters had been sighted here by reliable witnesses, or that pirates had divvied up blood money on the rocks.
Or, especially when I glanced up at the widow's walks crowning a few old houses near the shore, that thousands of mariners had drowned off this coast.
Cape Ann, as far as I could see, had that grim obduracy that fosters both legends and bad dreams.
Two days later the ocean was silky, the sky was blue and Cape Ann was neat as a postcard and as far removed from witches, monsters and pirates as most romance novels are from real romance.
Families posed beside a monument for lost fishermen; beachcombers bought candy shells from souvenir shops; camera-hung visitors wandered through art galleries that sell the sort of seascapes that have become more familiar than the sea itself.
Water glittered behind 18th-century clapboard houses, which seemed only sweetly weatherbeaten.
Even the rocks looked benign.


The View From: Springdale, Stamford; A Movie Theater Survives as a Neighborhood's Centerpiece
WHEN Joel Freedman bought an old building that housed a movie theater in the Springdale section of Stamford in 1978, he had no intention of getting involved in the movie business.
"I bought the building as a business investment and I was just going to be the landlord," said Mr.
Freedman, a nonpracticing lawyer who has operated a real estate business in Stamford for the last 26 years.
Opened as the Springdale Theater on April 25, 1927, as a combination silent movie theater and vaudeville house, the State Cinema on Hope Street is one of the oldest movie houses in Connecticut.
But by the 1980's it had fallen on hard times.
Many of its 640 seats were broken, its projection system was obsolete and the acoustics were bad.
To make matters worse, at least for Mr.
Freedman, the absentee leasor (operating out of Philadelphia) was months behind in the rent.


Does What You Eat Really Prolong Life?
To the Editor:
It is confusing and bemusing to note how every few years nutritionists in this country and abroad come up with different concepts of what constitutes a diet guaranteed to give you and me a longer, healthier life.


Bas Mitzvahs for All Ages
THE first question at the final rehearsal for 31 women about to make religious history in Plandome was not about prayer.
It was about purses.
"Should we check our pocketbooks?" a woman asked Rabbi Joy Levitt of the Reconstructionist Synagogue of the North Shore.


Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike; Strongarming Clinton
To the Editor:
William Safire's tribute (column, April 25) to his former employer's expiation of Watergate by "years of useful service" and "decades of selfless sagacity" is called into question by the reporting of how Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton forged their "rarefied bond" (news article, same day).


Visit by Nobel Laureate Swells Immigrants' Pride
Luis Garcia, a 33-year-old Guatemalan immigrant, clutched a small camera close to his chest as he stood in a crowd of hundreds of Central Americans and others, all intent on catching a glimpse of a woman they consider a legend.
Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan Mayan and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, had come to Long Island.
"This is more than a gathering, this is a historical event," Mr.
Garcia said.
"I've lived here a long time, and I've never seen an Indian person from my country achieve such fame."


Kovalev Growing Into Star
It's one of those topics that hockey people prefer not to discuss, the one about the Russian players and the criminals who try to extort protection money from them here or from their families back home.
Occasionally, it goes public, the way it did a few weeks ago, when the police arrested a man in Buffalo and charged him with menacing Alexander Mogilny.
But, most of the time, it's a concern that lurks in the shadows of the mind, especially when loved ones are so many miles away.


Devils Fake the Bruins Out of Their Lead in Overtime
The Devils and the Bruins are back to square one after four games of their Eastern Conference semifinal series.
The Bruins won the first two games in New Jersey, but the Devils have come back with two victories at Boston Garden, scoring a 5-4 overtime triumph tonight.
Alone at Boston's blue line after Bobby Holik won a face-off a few feet away, Stephane Richer faked goalie Jon Casey off his skates with a move from left to right and gently scored a goal to give the Devils their first overtime victory in three attempts in the playoffs this spring.


For Four Hands


On Sunday; Major Crime? Her Fine Hand Has a Part in It
STABBING or slashing, shooting or strangling, no matter what the crime, Marie Venticinque was at the scene.
The subway station where Brian Watkins, a tourist from Utah, was stabbed?
She was there.
The hotel ballroom where Rabbi Meir Kahane was shot?
She was there.
The pier where three CBS technicians were murdered after they apparently happened on a kidnapping?
She was there, too.
If it made headlines big enough to read without squinting, Ms.
Venticinque was there with a job to do: create Exhibit A for the prosecution, a scale model to show where a suspect had to have been to do whatever he was accused of doing.
On the payroll she is listed as an "engineering technician." What she is is the Manhattan District Attorney's artist in residence.


The Secret of the Marshes
AFRICAN AMERICANS AT MARS BLUFF, SOUTH CAROLINA By Amelia Wallace Vernon.
Illustrated. 309 pp.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. $29.95.


Changes Made On Highway Where 7 Died
The city's Department of Transportation has undertaken a major program to improve the safety of a stretch of Beach Channel Drive in Neponsit, where seven people died in a total of 57 traffic accidents between 1987 and 1992.
The stretch, which runs between Beach 141st and Beach 146th Streets, is near the intersection of Beach Channel Drive and Cronston Avenue, just to the east of Marine Parkway Bridge.


Park Avenue, Without Doormen
IF one thinks of the stolid apartment houses lining Park Avenue as $100 bills, then the little buildings sprinkled between them are loose change.
Some are silver, like the half-dozen surviving mansions, and some are nickel, like the occasional modest apartment house or tenement.
This is about the pennies, the tiniest and most humble of the bunch, the five two- and three-story buildings at 870, 949, 985, 1108 and 1110 Park Avenue.
Most are more than a century old, but they all have somehow survived to serve an unusual group of tenants and owners.


World's Oldest Paved Road Found in Egypt
In the Old Kingdom of ancient Egypt, a time of grand architecture beginning about 4,600 years ago, demand for building stones for pyramids and temples led to the opening of many quarries in the low cliffs near the Nile River.
To make it easier to transport the heavy stones from one of these quarries, the Egyptians laid what may have been the world's first paved road.
Research geologists mapping the ancient Egyptian stone quarries have identified a seven-and-half-mile stretch of road covered with slabs of sandstone and limestone and even some logs of petrified wood.
The pavement, they concluded, facilitated the movement of human-drawn sleds loaded with basalt stone from a nearby quarry to a quay for shipment by barge across the lake and on the Nile to construction sites.


Washington Talk; Day's Work in House Takes Week in Senate
The contrast between the Senate and the House of Representatives has rarely been so stark.
On Thursday, the House had two and a half hours of crisp debate on whether to ban semiautomatic assault weapons.
Almost every seat was filled.
Most representatives spoke for a minute or two.
No one spoke for more than five.


Lewis Gets Little Support for Effort
What a grand night for champions it was -- former champions, that is.
Only in this beleaguered heavyweight grab bag could a Lennox Lewis successfully defend his crown in such an amateurish manner that people immediately started looking to George Foreman, Larry Holmes, Riddick Bowe or Mike Tyson to save the division.
Or at least bring some excitement back.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEMr. Glashausser and Ms. Umezawa
Yumiko Umezawa, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kiyoomi Umezawa of Chiba, Japan, was married yesterday to Alexander Glashausser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Glashausser of Highland Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Solano performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Voorhees Chapel at Douglass College in New Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 24, graduated from Kandu Gaigo Gakuin College in Tokyo.
Her parents own and run the Fujiya Store, a grocery, in Chiba.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINELesley Gray And Craig Anton
Lesley Allegra Gray, a flight attendant for American Airlines, was married yesterday to Craig Ward Anton, a comedian and actor in New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth H. Colman, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Joslyn Art Museum in Omaha.


Tories, Drubbed, Could Move to Oust Major
After a crushing defeat in local elections across the country this week, Britain's governing Conservative Party appears to be girding itself for an internal struggle over whether to retain John Major as Prime Minister.
The Conservatives, whose national poll ratings have sunk to all-time lows, were prepared for poor results in the elections Thursday, in which voters chose councilors for 198 local governments.
But the outcome was far worse than they had feared.


Fast-Lane Killer: A special report.; Heroin Finds a New Market Along Cutting Edge of Style
The rising young fashion photographer was acting jumpy.
He scratched the label off a beer bottle and skittered his fingers over the buttons of a cellular phone without ever dialing.
For more than an hour this evening he'd been marking time in a dark and narrow bar in Hollywood called simply The Room.
No sign identifies the place, and its entrance is off an alley lined with garbage Dumpsters.
Yet, far from turning off customers, the furtive underground atmosphere has made The Room a voguish hangout.


Corrections
A related article, listing D-Day exhibits in France and England, misidentified the institution with the largest collection of air weaponry in Europe.
It is the Duxford, England, branch of the Imperial War Museum, not the Imperial War Museum in London.


Hospital Patient Burned
A woman patient was critically injured late last night when a fire broke out in a room on an isolation ward at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, fire and hospital officials said.
The ward was filled with 22 patients, all with contagious respiratory conditons like tuberculosis, when the fire broke out after 10 P.M. inside the patient's room, said Julia Rivera, a hospital spokeswoman.


Sports of The Times; Bulls Minus Jordan and the Knicks Plus Harper
FROM one season to another, teams in every sport add and subtract.
Players come and go.
But some players mean more than others.
In pro basketball, one player meant more than almost all the others combined.
And in this Knicks-Bulls playoff, that one player is now an outfielder for the Birmingham Barons.
"The biggest difference in the Bulls now is that Michael Jordan is gone," Knicks point guard Derek Harper was saying.
"Even though Scottie Pippin has lifted the Bulls to great heights, when you have a guy like Michael you can rest on him. Michael was able to to take over the series down the stretch."


May 1-7: Right-to-Die Victories; Dr. Kervorkian's Campaign Is Very Much Alive
After a Detroit jury cleared him last week of charges that he had illegally helped a 30-year-old man with a degenerative nerve disease to die, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian neatly summarized his legal status.
"I'm prosecutable," he said.
"I'm just not convictable."
The retired pathologist felt invulnerable, understandably.
In 1992, two years after he had begun hooking up the terminally ill to tanks of carbon monoxide, Michigan's Legislature went after him.
It made providing the "physical means" to help another kill himself a felony.


The Nation; The Boss Only Wants What's Best for You
BIG BROTHER, circa 1994, is more likely the boss than the Government, and he is watching both you and your bodily fluids.
With blood, urine and psychological tests, with video cameras, computers and telephone taps, employers today can drive bulldozers through the walls of their workers' private lives.
In hiring and managing employees, worker advocates say more and more employers exceed the limits.
"These companies think everything an employee does is their business, just for giving them a paycheck," said Lewis L. Maltby, head of workplace law for the American Civil Liberties Union.
"Some are trying to hold down their health-care costs. Some are trying to use the power of the paycheck to force their moral and religious views down your throat."


Wiretaps for a Wireless Age
I'd be furious if my phone were tapped.
Most people would.
Americans have a long, proud history of low tolerance for Government snooping.
Nonetheless, I strongly support the Government's ability to tap telephones when wiretapping serves a compelling law-enforcement end.
Civilized life is a compromise, and wiretaps have proved their value beyond doubt: over the last decade, wiretaps have played a role in convicting tens of thousands of felons and solving (or preventing) large numbers of ghastly crimes.
They seem particularly valuable in cases of large-scale drug trafficking and terrorist thuggery.
But in the age of high technology, the wiretap is a dead duck.
In the old days, all conversations associated with a given phone number were funneled through one physical pathway, and by spying on that pathway you could hear it all.
Nowadays, cellular phones and call forwarding make it much harder to find the right spot and to attach a tap.
New techniques coming into use will make it harder still: when many conversations are squished together and sent barreling over a high-capacity glass fiber, it's hard for wiretappers to extract the one conversation they are after from the resulting mush.


Promotion at The Times
Janet L. Robinson, a vice president for advertising at The New York Times, has been named to the expanded position of vice president and director of advertising.
Ms.
Robinson, whose appointment is effective today, will be in charge of overall advertising sales at the newspaper in addition to her current responsibilities for national advertising and for The New York Times Magazine.
Ms.
Robinson will report to William L. Pollak, executive vice president for sales, who said her new responsibilities reflected a reorganization of the sales and marketing departments.


What Have You Done for Me Late? Knicks Storm Back to Win
Of all the fourth-quarter rallies that the Knicks have enjoyed this season, yesterday's was the most important.
All signs pointed toward a Knick loss.
They trailed the Chicago Bulls by 15 points late in the third quarter.
The Bulls were poised to steal Game 1 of the four-of-seven-game playoff series.
And if the Bulls had won, they would have captured the home-court advantage, leaving the Knicks with a lot of disturbing questions to answer heading into Game 2.


Gotham Group Wins Magazine Account
New Woman magazine has named the Gotham Group, recently spun off from Lintas New York, to handle its trade advertising account.
The account, with billings estimated at $1 million, had been at Mezzina/Brown in New York for seven months after that agency acquired New Woman's previous agency, Wills &amp; Evans.


Seoul Journal; Nuclear Fears? Korea's Noodle Sales Say No
Signs everywhere in this city proclaim that 1994 is "Visit Korea Year." Never mind that a North Korean official declared a while back that Seoul might be turned into a "sea of fire."
Even as the nuclear standoff with North Korea approaches its next showdown, people in Seoul are enjoying a warm spring and a reinvigorated economy.
Many South Koreans say they do not believe that a war will come or that North Korea would ever use an atomic bomb, if it has one.


Review/Theater; A Curmudgeon, a Drunk And Various Other Losers
Despite the big names on the bill, there are no finds in the first installment of "Marathon 1994," the Ensemble Studio Theater's 17th annual festival of one-act plays.
A couple of performers, David Margulies and Lois Smith, will make you sit up and take notice though.
In Herb Gardner's "I'm With Ya, Duke," Mr.
Margulies plays an aging Jewish immigrant, the owner of a fruit store who's having heart problems and is not sure he wants to undergo a bypass operation.
Crusty and abrupt, he's unhappy with his life, his three sons and New York City without the Dodgers.
"The times, these times, ain't my times," he grumbles from his hospital bed.


Critic's Notebook; Do as I Say, and as I Do, Says Marilyn Horne
When Marilyn Horne was enduring what Verdi once called the galley years -- laboring to build a career in difficult circumstances -- she made a sign and hung it prominently in her apartment.
The sign offered a stern warning against the presumably well-meaning critics, teachers and singers always ready to offer advice on her tone, her technique and her interpretations.
"Don't listen," it declared.
"Think first who is speaking."
Ms.
Horne told a group of young sopranos and mezzo-sopranos about this message last week during a series of seminars and master classes sponsored by Carnegie Hall, but it was doubtful that anybody in the room had to think twice about who was speaking or whether to listen.


Eric Mower Chosen For General Tire Job
General Tire Inc. in Akron, Ohio, has named Eric Mower &amp; Associates in Rochester to handle its North American account, which had been at the Joey Reiman Agency in Atlanta for two and a half years.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.


Racial Stress Divides Town After Death of Black Youth
Few people here, either black or white, would have gone so far as describing race relations here as perfect.
Good, they might have said, certainly better than in big cities like Philadelphia or nearby Camden, where the races live in virtual isolation.
That was the situation when Patricia Kunchynski, the first woman to be a police chief in New Jersey, went on vacation in April.
By the time she had rushed back, a 14-year-old was dead, the victim of a bullet fired by one of her officers, and this town was split as never before along racial lines.


Tour Pro: LeMond Pedals On
So who is this Greg LeMond who is riding so well in the Tour Du Pont?
Is he still the king of the road, the American hero who won cycling's world road-race championship twice, the epic Tour de France three times and this, America's premier race, two years ago?
Or is he an almost 33-year-old has-been trying to recapture the glories of old with a body that no longer performs magic?


No Cigarettes Are 'Light'
Anyone who chooses a brand labeled "light" in the belief that he or she is getting a lower dose of tar and nicotine is deluded.
The amounts listed on the cigarette package, the Federal Trade Commission now concedes, bear little or no relation to what the smokers are actually ingesting.
Measurements carried out by tobacco laboratories under F.T.C. supervision are based on tests with machines that hold the cigarette and draw air through it in two-second puffs, one puff per minute, until the cigarette burns close to the filter.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart on Saturday of the new South African Cabinet misstated the first name of a Minister Without Portfolio.
He is Jay Naidoo, not Joe Naidoo.


Push Came to Shove, but Go for Gin Toughed It Out
It was the morning after he won the Kentucky Derby with Go for Gin, and Nick Zito signed autographs and addressed a bowl of oatmeal in the track kitchen at Churchill Downs.
Somebody handed him a cellular phone, and he said "thank you" into it several times.
Engaging, numb with joy and hoarse from talking, Zito handed the phone back, and said: "I thought it was the President again."


Congress Enters Battle Over New Lost Ground at Gettysburg
It is the ground that Lincoln said words could not hallow, the rolling fields and ridges of the farm town that became the central battlefield of the most searing conflict in American history.
Now a battle over the loss of part of that ground has drawn the scrutiny of Congress after riling Civil War experts and pitting townspeople against each other.
The controversy has been brewing for years, the outgrowth of a long-running debate over just how much land should be set aside in this shrine to the thousands of Union and Confederate troops who "here gave their lives" in the first three hot days of July 1863.


Can Both Wealth and Justice Flourish in a New South Africa? Two Old Foes Think So.
A fiery-eyed union leader with a Trotsky beard, Jay Naidoo is the chief proponent of Nelson Mandela's plan to ease the misery of South Africa's black majority by transforming the apartheid bureaucracy into an engine of houses, jobs and decent schools.
Derek Keys, a heavy-lidded boardroom wizard who has spent the last two years as President F. W. de Klerk's Finance Minister, is the country's ranking apostle of low-spending, business-friendly Government.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advocat Inc., Brentwood, Tenn., an initial public offering of 4.75 million common shares, four million in the United States.
Natwest.


Multiple-Personality Cases Perplex Legal System
The unmapped territory into which psychiatry can lead the courts became apparent earlier this year when a man on trial for rape in Arizona took the witness stand in a skirt, pink sweater, high heels and press-on nails.
The man, James Carlson, claimed to have 11 personalities, eight of which knew something about the crimes in question.
So the defense called each one as a witness, including the lesbian prostitute in the powder-pink sweater.


Essay; For a Haitian Legion
Here is my secret plan to avert a flood of Haitian refugees seeking political asylum, to reassert the credibility of American power in our sphere of influence, and to bring parliamentary democracy to the hemisphere's most oppressed nation -- all without the use of U.S. ground troops.
Can't be done, you say?
Certainly it will not be done by following the increased-asylum plan President Clinton announced yesterday.


Reining In Managers Of Funds
Imagine writing a check for $5,000, $10,000 or $20,000 and shipping it off to a money manager you had never met.
Such is the trust vested in the nation's mutual funds by many of their 39 million investors.
And such is the incentive for the strict new rules that the Investment Company Institute, a trade group representing mutual funds, will propose today -- rules that take aim at trading by fund managers in their personal accounts.


CHRONICLE
The Library of Congress held a luncheon the other day to honor RITA DOVE on the completion of her year as poet laureate of the United States, and, lamenting that her duties had kept her from writing much poetry, she said, "I hope to change that this year."
Ms.
Dove has accepted an appointment by James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, for another year in the post because, she said, "You can't get anything done in a year. That's not just for poets; that's everyone."


Giuliani's Policy Point Man Is a Quiet No. 2
In the days after he was elected, Rudolph W. Giuliani scratched the title of First Deputy Mayor out of the government organization chart.
But he clearly has not eliminated the job.
To the contrary, Peter J. Powers, the shy, self-effacing Deputy Mayor for operations, has emerged over the last four months as the strongest second-in-command seen at City Hall in years, despite a profile so low that a police officer recently asked him for identification when he tried to enter the building.


Absent Father Gives Up Bid for Daughter's Estate
A father who had refused to pay child support to his daughter but sought a share of her estate after her death has given up his quest for the money.
In exchange, the father, James E. Brindamour, was released last Monday after spending 59 days in jail for failure to pay tens of thousands of dollars in support to his daughter, Colleen.
The move came as part of a settlement with Mr.
Brindamour's estranged wife, Rose, a nurse's aide who will keep the entire estate.


INSIDE
Kemper Goes on the Block
Kemper put itself up for sale, inviting a bidding war by G.E. and other potential suitors for the insurance and investment company.
Page D1.
A New Policy on Peddlers
The Giuliani administration is trying to move peddlers from streets to open-air-style markets far from heavy pedestrian traffic.
Page B1.
Battle Over Black Colleges
A judge will hear a challenge to Mississippi's plan to desegregate its college system by closing a black institution.
Page A10.
Knicks Rally Past Bulls
The Knicks defeated Chicago, 90-86, in Game 1 of their Eastern Conference semifinals.
SportsMonday, C1.


Bottle Bill
In the decade that New York State has had a returnable container law, or bottle bill, consumers have returned about 76 percent of their bottles and cans and gotten their five cents back.
The 24 percent that get discarded are an annual bone of contention between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state Legislature.
Last month budget negotiators killed Mr.
Cuomo's latest proposal to have the state take $70 million in unclaimed bottle deposits from beverage distributors.
The distributors say they need the nickels to pay for the redemption system.
A proposal to replace Connecticut's 5-cent bottle deposit with a tax of the same amount was defeated last year.
A national bottle bill -- the National Beverage Container Reuse and Recycling Act -- could come to a floor vote in Congress for the first time this summer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 DETAILS ON NEW HAITI POLICY  President Clinton named a new envoy to Haiti, a well-known black Democrat, and discussed details of the new policy of allowing asylum hearings for Haitian refugees.
A1  HAITI ABUSES QUESTIONED  President Clinton reaffirmed his support for the exiled President of Haiti, but a cable from the American Ambassador there has charged that the President's supporters exaggerated human rights abuses.
A7  A fast over Haiti policy was worth it, an activist said.
A7  THE TOLL OF WAR IN ANGOLA  In Angola's rebel stronghold, life is a struggle, with no electricity or running water and little food or medicine, but the potential wealth of the country allows one of Africa's longest civil wars to continue.
A1  IMPATIENCE IN JERICHO  The Israeli occupation is supposed to end in Jericho, but so far little has changed.
The first contingent of the Palestinian police force was just six miles away, though, awaiting the signal to enter the area.
A1  An international force went to Hebron to keep order.
A3  SOUTH AFRICA'S CHALLENGE  Two men with very different backgrounds have responsibility in South Africa's new Cabinet for a complex task: improving the lives of the new electorate while protecting the stability of the economy.
A6  THE BASIC ISSUE IN BOSNIA  News Analysis: the town of Brcko, seen as the next flash point of Bosnian conflict, is also a sign of why the war is unlikely to end soon: Muslims are fighting to go home to areas cleared by the Serbs.
A2  HEADING FOR BRAZIL  American business people are flocking to Brazil in a new display of confidence that economic ties between the two nations will revolve around trade and investment.
D1  Ex-Communists were ahead in Hungary's elections.
A5  A businessman was winning Panama's presidential elections.
A5  Seoul Journal: In North's shadow, picnics, not panic.
A4 National A8-14 PRESSURE ON THE FED  The Federal Reserve is preparing to raise short-term rates for the fourth time in four months, but it is under pressure to act more quickly and more sharply this time.
A1  LOOKING OUT FOR ONE'S INTERESTS  The underlying story of why the Clinton Administration backed away from a proposed gambling tax to pay for part of the welfare plan illustrates the way the capital is patrolled by vigilant, organized interest groups.
A1  CRITICISM BY GAY SERVICEMEN  The "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" policy may have made life worse for homosexuals in the military, polarizing attitudes toward homosexuals and shifting the burden of proof to service members accused of engaging in homosexual acts.
A1  SETBACK FOR DOMESTIC PARTNERS  Voters in Austin, Tex., have repealed a policy granting health benefits for the partners of homosexual and unmarried city employees, making the city the first of roughly 20 communities in the nation with such benefits to repeal its program.
A8  NEW BATTLE WAGED AT GETTYSBURG  A dispute over the loss of part of the Gettysburg battlefield is the outgrowth of a long-running debate over just how much land should be set aside in the shrine to thousands of Union and Confederate dead.
A8  DESEGREGATING HIGHER EDUCATION  At issue in a Federal trial in Oxford, Miss., is how the historically black public institutions of higher learning will be treated as their formerly all-white counterparts are often attracting the cream of the crop of black students.
A10  REACTION TO ASSAULT WEAPON BAN  One freshman Republican Congressman and his staff in mostly Democratic Long Beach, Calif., found little passion over the assault weapons bill, and most constituents, worried above all about crime, seemed to support the ban.
A12  SEXUAL HARASSMENT RE-EXAMINED  America has again been plunged into a national seminar on sexual harassment, a migraine issue full of gray areas and her-word-against-his contentions, with Prof.
Anita Hill and Senator Bob Packwood now providing commentary.
A12  EMERGING FORCE IN HEALTH CARE  Robert Reischauer's Congressional Budget Office has no vote on health care legislation, but he and his team of analysts have emerged as a crucial voice in the current debate, with more influence at the moment than many lawmakers.
A14  GACY EXECUTION SET  The mass murderer John Wayne Gacy is scheduled to die by lethal injection at 12:01 A.M. on Tuesday in Illinois.
A9 Metro Digest B1 A NO. 2 WITH CLOUT  Peter J. Powers, the Deputy Mayor for operations, is the strongest second-in-command at City Hall in years.
He is the point man on both policy and on politics, roles traditionally split.
And his 35-year friendship with Rudolph W. Giuliani gives him an unrivaled authority.
A1  MULTIPLE PERSONALITIES IN COURT  As the diagnosis of multiple-personality disorder has become more common, it has stretched the rules by which people are tried.
The issue could become central in the case of Ricardo S. Caputo, who confessed in New York to four murders.
A1  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Yanks sweep Red Sox.
C1  Mets top Cardinals.
C7  Orioles' McDonald wins seventh.
C5  Basketball: Knicks beat Bulls in Game 1.
C1  Hawks even series with Heat.
C9  Boxing: Chavez reclaims title amid chaos.
C2  Columns: Anderson on Garden's front row.
C8  On tennis.
C3  On pro basketball.
C5  Cycling: LeMond fights headwind of age.
C9  Golf: Daly gains golf and personal victories.
C3  Hockey: Rangers have yet to hear from Anderson.
C4  Richer's goal gives Devils a life.
C4  Horse Racing: Go for Gin heading to Preakness.
C2  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Maya Lin on art and architecture.
C11  Marilyn Horne's class.
C11  Celebrating Martha Graham's centenary.
C14  Theater: Festival of one-act plays.
C13  "Airport Music." C13  Music: Giant Sand.
C13  Candlebox from Seattle.
C16  Andre Watts in recital.
C16  Books: "The Massacre at El Mozote," by Mark Danner.
C15  Television: The Road to Prime Time.
C11  Obituaries B7  Joe Layton, an award-winning director, producer and choreographer.
Clement Greenberg, a prominent American art critic.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  Haiti: Sanctions at last.
The new Senate standard on gifts.
No cigarettes are "light."  Judge Kiser off the beat, again.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Words, words, words.
William Safire: For a Haitian Legion.
Walter Reich: First, do no harm.
Chronicle B8 Bridge C13 Crossword C15


The Macedonian Issue Has a Sorry Past
To the Editor:
"Athenian Games" (Op-Ed, April 21) by Robert Kaplan, no less than "Macedonians Ask Recognition, Not Greek Land" (letter, April 2) by Loring Danforth, claims to defend the rights of an oppressed entity seeking justice, Macedonians, against an uncivilized and irrational opponent, the Greek Government.
The authors should be commended for their rhetorical prowess.
Mr.
Danforth extends an alleged Macedonian ethnicity inside Greek borders.
Mr.
Kaplan warns the President against a "gutter populist" and terrorist-loving Greek Prime Minister, and he sanctions the expansionist Macedonian constitution as "self-protection outside its borders"!


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve is preparing to raise short-term interest rates for the fourth time in four months.
But recent turbulence in the bond and currency markets is putting the central bank under great pressure to act more quickly and to raise rates more sharply this time, according to economists.  [ Page A1. ]


Review/Music; At Andre Watts's Recital, A Highlight but No Encores
Andre Watts declined to play encores after his recital on Friday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, saying it was "not an encore day" and leaving listeners to sift back through the performances for telltale signs of trouble.
There were problems all right, but they were of a kind not unusual in Mr.
Watts's pianism.
He seemed edgy in the first work, Mozart's Rondo in D (K. 485), and his impatience got the better of him in a couple of blurred passages.
He ran off track altogether late in the first movement of Beethoven's "Appassionata" Sonata but recovered his aplomb and successfully negotiated the high-wire act he set himself with a revved-up coda in the finale.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CITY HALL'S STRONG NO. 2
Peter J. Powers, the shy, self-effacing Deputy Mayor for operations, has emerged over the last four months as the strongest second-in-command seen at City Hall in years, despite a profile so low that police officers still occasionally ask him for identification when he tries to enter the building.
His 35-year friendship with Mr.
Giuliani, dating back to their days in Catholic school, gives him an unrivaled authority rare in politics.
A1.


The Conception and Delivery of a Sitcom: Everyone's a Critic
At the end of the dress rehearsal, the question seemed to come down to this: Was it O.K. for Monica to have sex with Paul on the first date?
On one side of the issue were the NBC executives who had come to monitor the nascent sitcom produced by David Crane and Marta Kauffman.
After the rehearsal, they huddled with the producers on a set designed to look like a Japanese restaurant.
Over plastic sushi, they said they were concerned that Monica did not care enough for Paul to hop into bed with him.
On the other side were the Warner Brothers studio executives, who even produced some patently unscientific research to back their position: As the spectators who watched the rehearsal left the set, they were asked to fill out a brief survey, and most indicated that sex on the first date was no big deal.


After 4 1/2-Year Wait, Gozzo Wins Another
The first four times Mauro Gozzo stepped on a major league pitcher's mound, he walked away with the victories.
The first three came as a starting pitcher for the Toronto Blue Jays and the fourth came when he pitched two innings of relief for the Jays in what would be a 14-inning victory over Paul Gibson and the Detroit Tigers.
That last victory came on Aug. 22, 1989.


More Missed Opportunities Postpone Ranger Celebration
The Washington goalie, Don Beaupre, was out of position, following the path of Mark Messier as he carried the puck wide.
The Ranger forward, Glenn Anderson, was in perfect position, moving into the slot in front of the net.
This was in the first few seconds of the Rangers' game at Washington Saturday night, a chance for the New York team to get off to a good start, an opportunity for Anderson to end a scoring slump.


Shaky McDonald Goes to 7-0 for Orioles
Orioles 8, Indians 6
Ben McDonald didn't have much on his fastball and couldn't get his curve over the plate.
This season, though, good fortune finally seems to be on his side.


Fidelity Tests an Infomercial
Infomercials -- those half-hour ads presented as talk shows or news programs -- have been used to pitch everything from low-fat diets to high-tech gadgets.
But can they sell mutual funds?
Fidelity Investments, the largest fund company in the country, plans to find out.
On Saturday, the firm began broadcasting a 30-minute show on local television stations in Cincinnati; Sacramento, Calif.; Salt Lake City and the Fort Meyers/Naples area of Florida.
The ad will run for four weeks; if the test results please Fidelity, it will probably buy broadcast time in other cities later this year.


Judge Kiser Misses the Beat, Again
The judge who in 1991 upheld the right of the taxpayer-supported Virginia Military Institute to deny women admission to its "unique" training program has done it again.
This time Judge Jackson Kiser of the Federal District Court in Roanoke finds that V.M.I. can reject women as long as the state offers a few drills and military courses at Mary Baldwin College.
Wrong again.
As he did three years ago, Judge Kiser tripped over his own metaphors.
"V.M.I. truly marches to the beat of a different drummer," he said then, "and I will permit it to continue to do so." Reversed by a higher court and told to require an end to sex discrimination, he now writes, "If V.M.I. marches to the beat of a drum, then Mary Baldwin marches to the melody of a fife, and when the march is over, both will have arrived at the same destination."


Texas Capital Ends Benefits For Partners
By nearly 2 to 1, voters here have repealed a policy providing health insurance benefits to the live-in partners of homosexual and other unmarried city employees.
With the vote on Saturday, Austin, one of roughly 20 cities with such benefits, became the first to repeal its policy.
The passage of Proposition 22, an amendment to the city charter, means that health insurance will again be offered only to employees' legal family members.
Christian groups that backed the measure said they would push repeal efforts in other cities with similar policies.


This Week's U.S. Sales Include Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills and notes markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will sell three-year notes tomorrow, followed by an auction on Thursday of 10-year notes.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.15 percent, and the rate on thesix-month bill was 4.61 percent.
In when-issued trading, the 3-year note and 10-year note were being offered at prices to yield 6.53 percent and 7.31 percent, respectively.


Dance in Review
Wendy Whelan and Nilas Martins  'The Sleeping Beauty' New York City Ballet New York State Theater


Some Bond Firms Complain As a Ban on Giving Begins
Wall Street, once a treasure chest of campaign funds to state and local officials, is feeling the first effects of new rules that severely curb political donations.
Big firms are upset that this industry faces special restrictions, and small firms, especially those owned by women and minorities, say they are being put at a competitive disadvantage.
These new rules by the Securities and Exchange Commission, in effect since late April, are intended to halt "pay to play" practices by Wall Street bankers who give money to local officials in hopes of getting lucrative municipal finance business in return.
Several big Wall Street investment houses are embroiled in scandals over such contributions in nearly a dozen states, including New York and New Jersey.


The New Senate Standard on Gifts
The debate was unusually passionate and personal last week when the Senate considered banning one of lawmakers' most cherished perks: the lavish meals, resort vacations and other gifts from lobbyists and other special interests seeking influence.
For a while, it looked as if the perk preservationists, led by Democratic Senator J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana and Republican Senators Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, might just prevail.


No Headline
We have an interest in bolstering the cause of democracy in the Americas.
We have an interest in insuring the security of our citizens living and working in Haiti.
We have an interest in stopping the gross human rights violations and abuses of the military and their accomplices.
And we clearly have a humanitarian interest in preventing a massive and dangerous exodus of Haitians by sea. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A7:5. ]


Leap Joins Roster Of Miller Brewing
The Miller Brewing Company has added the Leap Partnership in Chicago to its agency roster by awarding the shop undisclosed creative projects.
Leap, which uses a frog as its symbol, was recently formed by executives who had worked at DDB Needham Chicago, where they had helped create advertising for Bud Light, a principal brand of Miller's rival, Anheuser-Busch.
The brands and billings involved were not disclosed.
Fred Smith, president and chief executive of Leap, said on Friday that his agency was approached by Miller and awarded the assignment without a formal review.
The Bud Light campaign that Mr.
Smith and his partners worked on, carrying the theme "Make it a Bud Light," has become popular for a commercial featuring a brash imposter who says, "Yes I am," when his identity is challenged.


Seeing the Future of Print In a Universe Gone Digital
The consensus at a forum this week on the future of print journalism in the digital era was that there would be a future, in part because readers continued to see value in the printed page.
For a couple of decades now, publishers have been warned that the digital age could make newspapers and magazines -- and perhaps their staffs -- obsolete.
But at the forum, sponsored by CSC Vanguard, a consulting arm of the Computer Sciences Corporation, even those who are developing ways to deliver information electronically said the printed page would persist.


Lyric Soprano Wins Top Naumburg Prize
A lyric soprano from New York City has won first prize in the 1994 Walter W. Naumburg International Vocal Competition in Concert Repertoire.
Theresa Santiago, 25, is to receive $5,000 in cash, two recitals in Alice Tully Hall, a recording on the Musical Heritage label, and recital and oratorio appearances around the country.
Her first Tully Hall recital is to take place on Dec. 12.
Leon Williams, a 28-year-old baritone from New York, is to receive the $2,500 second prize, and Christopheren Nomura, a 30-year-old baritone from Boston, the $1,000 third prize.


Dworin Will Become Chairman of Ayer
Steve Dworin, who was named chief executive of Ayer Inc. in New York on April 17, will also become the agency's chairman.
Mr.
Dworin, who had previously been president of Deutsch/Dworin Inc. in New York, now Deutsch Inc., will succeed Jerry Siano, who had previously announced his retirement, effective on May 17, after 37 years at Ayer.


Radio Stations Reduce Coverage of Local News
The percentage of commercial radio stations with no employees devoted to gathering local news increased last year to 16.9 percent, according to a survey by a radio industry trade group.
The survey also showed that television news staffing has continued to grow modestly since 1987 even as radio news staffs declined at the steepest rate in more than a decade.
Opponents of broadcast deregulation cite the findings as evidence that radio listeners are being poorly served by station owners, who since 1981 have no longer been required to broadcast news and public-interest programming to obtain operating licenses.
But the survey did not address how much news is broadcast by these stations, since many of them use syndicated news reports.


Maya Lin's World Of Architecture, Or Is It Art?
Say Maya Lin's name to architects, and they will tell you she's really an artist.
Mention her to artists, and they'll start reeling off the architectural projects she has completed.
Spending one's life walking a delicate tightrope isn't easy.
Ms.
Lin knows she doesn't really belong to any one camp.
"It's been exceedingly difficult and at times downright discouraging," she said, perched on the edge of a chair designed by Charles Eames, the 1950's architect, that occupies the front corner of her Manhattan office.
"There's an incredible suspicion that if you're interested in two different disciplines, then you treat them lightly. I love architecture and I love sculpture, but I could never choose. Sculpture to me is like poetry, and architecture is like prose."


Pippen and the Bulls Are No Jordanaires
For two and a half quarters, Scottie Pippen was everything Michael Jordan would have been had it been Jordan roaming Madison Square Garden and Pippen shagging Southern League fungoes.
Pippen was all over the Garden floor and everywhere in the stat sheet, showing up under his own name and in everyone else's line as well.
Pippen and the Chicago Bulls were playing what seemed to be the perfect game for them against the Knicks.
They had a 15-point lead deep into the third quarter.
They had everyone, Pippen and his, uh, supporting cast, strutting their game as if this were Sacramento, not New York.
They had the Garden crowd cheering scared, as it did last spring in Game 5.
They had Pat Riley looking around for someone, anyone, to guard Pippen, settling for John Starks, who is half a head smaller.


Doghouse to Penthouse: Praise Heaped on Mason
There is still a debate going on among Knick fans about whether or not the suspension of Anthony Mason for the final three games of the regular season was the right thing or the wrong thing for Coach Pat Riley to have done.
But every Knick fan who saw how Mason's pit-bull intensity helped New York to come from 15 points down yesterday and win Game 1 of their Eastern Conference semifinal playoff series against the Bulls, 90-86, would agree that without Mason the Knicks may not have all the meanness and muscle they need.


Bridge
The 20th Cavendish Invitation Pairs, a prestigious event contested by most of America's top-ranked players, approached its climax yesterday afternoon at Loews New York Hotel, at Lexington Avenue and 51st Street
With 81 deals of a scheduled 117 completed, the leaders were: first, Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Bob Levin of Orlando, Fla., 1452.44 imps; second, Neil Silverman of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Kit Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., 1357.97; third, Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., and John Schermer of Seattle, 912.8; fourth, Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Montclair, N.J., 897.56; fifth, Beth Palmer and Bill Pettis of Silver Spring, Md., 812.44.


Andreychuk Leads Rout as Leafs Get Even with Sharks
Maple Leafs 8, Sharks 3
Dave Andreychuk's two goals and one assist last night led visiting Toronto's 8-3 romp over the San Jose Sharks.
The Maple Leafs evened their four-of-seven-game Western Conference playoff series at two victories apiece.


Books of The Times; The Nature of One Particular War
The Massacre at El Mozote  A Parable of the Cold War  By Mark Danner  Illustrated. 304 pages.
Vintage Books/Random House.
Paperback, $12.


Execution Date Only Hours Off For John Gacy
John Wayne Gacy is scheduled to die by lethal injection at 12:01 A.M.
Tuesday, more than 15 years after police detectives discovered dozens of decaying bodies in the crawl space beneath his home in suburban Chicago.
Mr.
Gacy, a 52-year-old former contractor, became one of the nation's most notorious murderers in 1980 when he was convicted for the sex-related slayings of 33 young men and boys.
He has remained the subject of morbid fascination over the years, receiving more mail than anyone else on death row and earning thousands of dollars with his paintings.


Review/Theater; Jumping Into the Melting Pot
You would have to have been brought up in the Philippines to understand fully the cultural and emotional reverberations that the word "hot dog" sets off in the mind of a Filipino immigrant to the United States.
In the Philippines, dog meat is an accepted dish.
In America, slaughtering dogs for food is against the law.
A hot dog is not literally a hot dog.
"Airport Music," a theatrical collage of poetry, reminiscences, slides and dance movement, written and performed by Jessica Hagedorn and Han Ong, makes much of such verbal dissonance.
Again and again, it asks the audience to follow its creators in making imaginative verbal leaps between two cultures.
Both Ms.
Hagedorn, a multimedia artist, poet and novelist, and Mr.
Ong, a Chinese-American playwright, are New York-based artists who grew up in the Philippines.
In "Airport Music," they offer interlocking meditations on the immigrant experience.


Dance in Review
'The Magic Rose'  'A Tale of Beauty and the Beast'
New York Theater Ballet  Gould Hall


Mississippi's University System Going on Trial
With its flat-roofed, spartan buildings shimmering under the harsh Delta sun, Mississippi Valley State University, established 44 years ago "to train Negro teachers and provide vocational training for Negroes," looks like a no-frills military installation.
Less than 50 miles away in Cleveland is Delta State University, where stately pin oaks shade manicured quadrangles and gabled buildings.
The university was founded 70 years ago to educate whites.


Review/Rock; Casual and Steeped in Neil Young
Howe Gelb, the songwriter, singer and guitarist of Giant Sand, likes to keep things loose.
At the Thread Waxing Space on Friday night, when this three-man band from Joshua Tree, Calif., topped a quadruple bill, a typical Giant Sand song might start out with a folky strummed guitar, move into a country-rock oompah, solidify into a hard-rock stomp or unleash a wailing, psychedelic guitar solo, dropping back into oompah now and then.
The band's set also followed no fixed path as it meandered from folksiness to blare, then abandoned any momentum while Mr.
Gelb decided on the next song.
"I guess we're sluggish," he observed halfway through an unhurried set; once a good part of the audience had left, he returned for a half-hour of more energetic encores.
Mr.
Gelb's songs earn him his eccentricities.
Beginning with Giant Sand's first single in 1981, he has created his own wayward updating of the 1960's.
The music is steeped in Neil Young -- both the folksy simplicity and the grungy hard-rock -- but skewed toward Mr.
Gelb's own timing and daydreams.


PRESIDENT NAMES BLACK DEMOCRAT ADVISER ON HAITI
After a six-week review of an Administration policy that he said is no longer "sustainable," President Clinton appointed a well-known black Democrat today as his new special adviser on Haiti.
The President also announced plans to allow Haitian refugees hearings at sea to determine whether they should be granted asylum.
Mr.
Clinton said that the evidence of mounting political violence in Haiti made the new asylum policy necessary and asserted that the United States also considered it necessary for domestic and foreign policy reasons to use sanctions to force a return to democracy.


You're Never Too Smart To Be Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
America's lack of understanding of mental illness was plainly on view in your April 29 report that the prosecutor handling the case of Joel Rifkin, the Long Island man who has acknowledged killing 17 women, attempted to use Mr.
Rifkin's excellent grades in high school as proof that he was not insane.
I do not know if Mr.
Rifkin suffers from a severe mental illness; that is for his doctors to determine.
I do know, however, a great deal about schizophrenia and other serious psychiatric disabilities.
Such illness tends to strike males in late adolescence or into their early 20's.
Women usually are affected a few years later.


Civil War of Nearly Two Decades Exhausts Resource-Rich Angola
When the sun goes down and darkness descends, this city disappears into an eerie void.
No one stirs on the streets.
There are no lights, no sounds, not even the barking of a dog.
Darkened hulks of crumbling buildings lie silent under the stars.
Huambo, Angola's second-largest city, is headquarters of the rebel movement that roams across two-thirds of the countryside.
Like Luanda, the coastal capital held by the Government, it is a place to measure the havoc and suffering wrought by nearly two decades of civil war.


First, Do No Harm
I was stunned by the words of a juror who, with his other colleagues, had just voted to acquit Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, the Michigan physician tried for helping a terminally ill man gas himself to death with carbon monoxide.
"In the back of a van -- I don't think that's the place for a medical procedure," the juror complained last week after the trial.


Domestic Partners Rebuffed
Voters in Austin, Tex., made their city the first to repeal a policy that had provided benefits to companions of municipal workers.
Page A8.


Second Thoughts on Health Data; Budget Office Estimates Carry Weight (Some Say Too Much)
The director of Congressional Budget Office, Robert D. Reischauer, has no vote on health care legislation.
But he and his team of analysts have emerged as a crucial voice in the current debate over it, with more influence at the moment than many lawmakers.
While the many health care proposals before Congress vary tremendously in philosophy and detail, they share some traits: they all involve huge amounts of money, are extremely complicated and are something of a plunge into the unknown.


Woman Burned in Lincoln Hospital Fire
A 30-year-old woman who was burned in a fire in her room at Lincoln Hospital was in critical condition yesterday at the Jacobi Hospital burn center in the Bronx, a hospital spokesman said.
The woman, Lourdes Torres, was a patient in an infectious disease ward at Lincoln Hospital, also in the Bronx, when a fire broke out in her room at 10:15 P.M. on Saturday.


CHRONICLE
There are awards made of gold or silver, there are awards made of crystal, there are awards with stipends of thousands of dollars, and there is the award WALTER CRONKITEwill get next Monday.
It is the $24 Award, signifying the legendary amount paid by the Dutch to buy Manhattan Island and given by the Museum of the City of New York for contributions to the quality of life in a city now worth considerably more.
Contemplating his prize, Mr.
Cronkite said the other day, "I have been looking forward to winning such an award for some time; my investment in the state lottery hasn't paid off. I intend to invest it well. I won't go off and spend it wildly."


Dance Theater Benefit
Dance Theater Workshop is to celebrate its 29th anniversary with "States of Grace," a benefit performance tomorrow at 7 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues.
Performers include Ann Carlson, the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company, Ulysses Dove, Steve Elson and David Parsons.
The program is a tribute to Stephanie French, vice president of corporate contributions and cultural affairs at Philip Morris Companies Inc., one of the largest donors to dance in New York.
Tickets are from $200 to $3,000 for the program and a post-performance dinner; $50 for the performance alone.
Information and reservations: (212) 691-4823.


Clement Greenberg, 85, Critic; Ally of Abstract Expressionism
Clement Greenberg, the art critic who propelled the career of Jackson Pollock and helped to establish Abstract Expressionism as a major artistic movement, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from a four-year bout with emphysema, said his daughter, Sarah Dora Greenberg.
He was taken to the hospital from his apartment on May 2 because he had trouble breathing.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Martinez Topples Navratilova in Italy  Conchita Martinez successfully defended her Italian Open title by defeating Martina Navratilova, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, yesterday in Rome.
The top-seeded Martinez, ranked No. 3, had won their last two meetings in Rome.
But with the crowd behind her, Navratilova led, 3-0, with two breaks.
At 5-4, 30-30, she made a spectacular volley but netted the next one on set point.
"I just looked up to see where Conchita was, and took my eyes off the ball," she said.
Martinez broke there and when Navratilova served for the set again at 6-5, and controlled the tie breaker.
At 4-4 in the second set, Martinez easily broke and held serve for the title.
Medvedev Wins German Open: Andrei Medvedev made better use of the wind yesterday to defeat a friend, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, in the German Open final in Hamburg.
Medvedev and the 20-year-old Russian had practiced together all week, and before the final, the two played a badminton match.
In winning at Monte Carlo two weeks ago, Medvedev, a 19-year-old Ukrainian, beat Kafelnikov in the semifinals. (AP) A First for Palmer: Jared Palmer, a third-year pro, won his first ATP tournament, answering top-seeded Todd Martin's powerful serves with an all-court game in a 6-4, 7-6 (7-5) triumph yesterday in the U.S.T.A.
Clay Court Classic in Pinehurst, N.C.
In the first set, Martin had two break points for a 5-2 lead.
Palmer saved the game with the help of a backhand winner and a service ace, then rallied to win the set. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Last-Event Triumph Lifts Princeton  Ugwunna Ikpeowo led the Princeton men's track team to a dramatic last-event victory in the Heptagonal track and field championships at Columbia's Wien Stadium yesterday.
Ikpeowo, a Nigerian sophomore who has lived in Los Angeles since 1982, won the triple jump with a fourth-round leap of 52 feet 1 1/4 inches to give Princeton a 124-120 1/2 edge on Pennsylvania, with Dartmouth a distant third at 81.
Earlier, Ikpeowo had finished second in the long jump and fourth in the 200 meters.
Tanya Hall, a sophomore sprinter, paced Brown to a second straight women's title.
She won the 200 meters in 25.02 seconds, won the 100-meter hurdles in 14.16 and finished a close second in the 100 meters.
She also anchored Brown's victorious 400-meter relay team.
A Move Up and a Victory: Jawauna McMullen, a sophomore at Christ the King High School, moved up to the open competition yesterday and won the 400 meters at the Metropolitan Athletics Congress New York relays.
Her winning time at the Downing Stadium meet was 55.53 seconds.
Tameika Grizzle, a student at George Washington High, also won in the open division, taking the 800 meters in 2 minutes 11.54 seconds.
Ric Liddie of the New York Pioneer Club was a three-time gold medal winner in the men's open events: the 100 in 10.66 seconds, the 200 in 21.52 seconds and the 400-meter relay.
DOG SHOWS  Cocker Spaniel Takes Top Honors  An English cocker spaniel, Ch.
Stage Door's Hoist the Flag, who answers to the name of Waldo, yesterday was gaited by Bonnie Threlfall to the best-in-show honors at the 65th all-breed show of the Trenton Kennel Club at Mercer County Park in West Windsor Township, N.J.
It was the 10th top award for the 4-year-old blue roan dog, owned by Martin Sellers, Susan Ostermueller and Garrett Feather.
LACROSSE Syracuse Draws Top-Seeded Position  Syracuse was seeded No. 1 yesterday followed by Loyola College in Baltimore, Princeton and North Carolina in the draw announced for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament.
The four teams received first-round byes.
The Orangemen are the defending champions.


Patents; A portable no-hands computer for consulting manuals and keeping records while out on a job.
COMPUTERS go a long way toward replacing paper files, but the user generally still must sit at a desk and type commands to retrieve and scan data.
That can be cumbersome for technicians working with repair guides and operational texts on a factory floor.
With computerized or book-style manuals, those workers have to stop their tasks so they can refer to the guides.


Hawaii Leads the Way On Same-Sex Couples
To the Editor:
Having read "After a Ruling, Hawaii Weighs Gay Marriages" (front page, April 25), on efforts by Hawaii's legislators to bring the state into conformity with a State Supreme Court ruling that to refuse a marriage license to same-sex couples violates the due process clause of the Hawaii Constitution, I must admit confusion.
Opponents of gay and lesbian marriages assert that such unions are threats to the family and contrary to public policy.
While these arguments are familiar, they seem inconsistent with today's reality.
Our society's traditionally homophobic attitudes have done more to tear apart families than gay marriages could.
Ignorance and intolerance lead heterosexual parents to disown their gay and lesbian children, who take to the streets or take their own young lives in disproportionate numbers.
Heterosexual bigots are more a threat to the American family than same-sex couples ever could be.


Review/Music; Hard Rock From Seattle With a Need to Be Loved
One of the differences between Candlebox and other rock bands to come out of Seattle in the past few years is that Candlebox isn't success-shy.
The band wants to be liked, and isn't afraid to let it show.
On Friday night at Roseland, the quartet went out of its way to make the audience feel special.
Candlebox thanked its fans three times for coming to the concert, helped potential stage-divers climb onto the stage and held up a set of lost keys and announced that it could be picked up at the box office.
This type of public service announcement usually isn't made at hard-rock shows, where there are often as many lost shoes and keys in the mosh pit as people.
Candlebox specializes in hard-rock entertainment.
It plays well-rehearsed blues-infused rock-and-roll anthems that never get too indulgent or too soft.
Kevin Martin, the singer, and Peter Klett, the guitarist, seem to have spent a lot of time rehearsing to Led Zeppelin records.
They've also been taking lessons from alternative rock success stories like Pearl Jam and Soul Asylum.
During its encore, Candlebox brought together its 1960's classic rock and late 1980's alternative-rock influences by performing the Doors' "Roadhouse Blues" and following it with Jane's Addiction's "Mountain Song."


Ex-Communists Leading Ballot In Hungary
Hungary's former Communists, swept from power four years ago, appear likely to be the dominant partner in a new coalition government after voting today in the first round of parliamentary elections.
With more than 80 percent of the vote counted, the Socialists, as the former Communists have renamed themselves, led with 32.7 percent; their likely coalition partner, the Alliance of Free Democrats, stood at 19.8 percent.


Red Sox Lose Series, But Not Their Spirit
Before the finale of his team's three-game series at Yankee Stadium yesterday, Red Sox Manager Butch Hobson taped up a simple message on the door of the visitors' clubhouse.
It read: "Keep your heads up. You're still in first place."
Eight home runs by both teams and an 8-4 Yankee victory later, the Red Sox were still in first place -- barely, a half-game up on the Yanks.
Their heads were still up -- at least judging from their comments afterward -- even though they had just been swept at the Stadium for the first time in nine seasons.


Traffic Alert
Because of President Clinton's visit to New York today, delays are expected in and around Cherry Street on the Lower East Side in the early afternoon, and around the New York Hilton, Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street.
Closings are expected along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive in the early and late afternoon.


Pressure Grows On Fed to Raise Rate Yet Again
For the fourth time in four months, the Federal Reserve is preparing to raise short-term interest rates.
But its orderly plan to contain inflation might be disrupted by turbulence in the bond and currency markets, which is putting great pressure on the central bank to act more quickly and raise rates more sharply this time, economists said this weekend.
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, has signaled for a year, in appearances before Congress, an intention to raise interest rates before inflation begins to creep up again.
But a spectacular rise in long-term interest rates on Friday and the sagging value of the dollar in international trading have shown a broad lack of confidence by many investors in the Fed's ability to control inflation, economists said.


Crows Tell Us We're Altering the Environment; Wise and Witty Birds
To the Editor:
There is no reason to react in a mean-spirited fashion to the apparent growing presence of crows in Manhattan (letter, April 25).
Having observed crow culture for many years because of the close proximity of a winter roost near my office, I can attest that crows are respectful of human impatience and wrath, anxious to avoid us and full of intelligence and playfulness.
In St.
Petersburg, Russia, crows have worn stained-glass windows smooth from sliding down them on their bottoms in fun, and they are notorious for the often-complicated tricks they play on dogs and other animals for their own amusement.


Police Problems' Scale Eludes Senior Officials
With 25 officers already arrested or removed from duty in a corruption investigation in a Harlem precinct, senior law-enforcement officials with access to intelligence information and personnel files acknowledge that even they are not sure about the extent of the problems in the New York City Police Department.
But they and outside experts agree that the scandal, whatever its full dimensions, will be tough to overcome because the roots of the problem are varied and run deep into the historical and cultural core of the department.


Observers Enter Hebron To Help Restore Calm
An international force entered the occupied territories today for the first time since they fell to Israel in 1967.
A contingent of 117 unarmed foreign observers moved into this troubled city to try to help restore normal life after the massacre here two and a half months ago.
They quickly got a first-hand look at the tensions simmering here since Feb. 25, when a Jewish settler killed at least 29 Muslims at prayer in a mosque.


Crows Tell Us We're Altering the Environment; The Distressed Hawk
To the Editor:
After having read Brooks Rogers's "The Crows Are Coming, Be Prepared" (letter, April 25), I was walking on Lexington Avenue at 61st Street in Manhattan about 4:45 P.M. and heard a lot of noisy crows.
At about the same time, I noticed people surrounding an injured bird on the sidewalk.
I recognized it as a red-tailed hawk.
The crows had attacked the hawk, forcing it into the side of a building, knocking it to the sidewalk.
A few minutes later the hawk recovered enough to fly directly above onto an awning.
With crows pursuing at every move, the hawk then flew half a block and landed in a tree.


Talk of Life And Death Of Firefighter From Widow
On a somber day of leaden skies and bittersweet remembrance, the widow of Capt.
John J. Drennan stood in the portals of her husband's firehouse in SoHo yesterday and spoke quietly of the life and death of a firefighter, of courage and the limits of endurance in his 40-day ordeal with overwhelming burns.
"It's a good ending to a good life," Vina Drennan said of her husband's intense struggle for survival, which began March 28 with burns over 65 percent of his body in a blaze that killed two other firefighters and ended with his death on Saturday at the burn unit of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


U.S. Businesses Flocking to Brazilian Ventures
Business people from the United States are flocking to Brazil in a new display of confidence that economic ties between the two giants of the Americas will now revolve around trade and investment.
Even before Brazil's $49 billion commercial debt was rescheduled on April 15, Brazilian and foreign businessmen detected the thundering hoofs of United States investors and exporters.


What to Give Mother? How About Peace?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new effort tries to remind commuters where rock resides in the New York metropolitan area.
A radio station once promoted to listeners and advertisers as the place "where rock lives" is returning to that theme to help itself live.
WNEW-FM, which has been playing rock music in metropolitan New York since 1967, has resumed advertising for the first time in about three years with a campaign by Gianettino &amp; Meredith Advertising of Short Hills, N.J.


CHRONICLE
When FELICE PICANO gets up to read this evening at the bookstore, A Different Light, in its new location at 151 West 19th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, he will invoke the names and the writings of comrades lost to AIDS.
The event will be a reading from a new anthology of works by members of the gay literary salon known as the Violet Quill.


Haiti: Sanctions at Last
The Clinton Administration has finally admitted that its Haiti policy is failing.
Mr.
Clinton announced yesterday that America would cease sending Haitian refugees home without a hearing.
The Administration's most visible symbol, the U.S. special envoy, Lawrence Pezzullo, has been replaced by William Gray, president of the United Negro College Fund and former Democratic whip in the House.
Mr.
Clinton has refused to rule out the use of force to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
And the U.N.
Security Council has passed a U.S. resolution mandating stiffer sanctions to back up the current embargo on oil and weapons.
The President's increased resolve is welcome.
But it would be disturbing if the Administration's long and fruitless experiment with weak sanctions led to a premature military adventure in Haiti.


Businessman Appears to Oust 'Old Guard' in Panama Election
A left-of-center businessman who remade the image of his party after its disgrace under Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has won Panama's first democratic elections in more than a quarter of a century, according to exit polls and early official results this evening.
The expected victor, Ernesto Perez Balladares, 48, an American-educated banker and former Government minister, overcame the stigma attached to General Noriega by recalling the image of another former dictator, Gen.
Omar Torrijos.


Dance in Review
Igor Zelensky and Ben Huys  'The Sleeping Beauty'  New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


Embassy in Haiti Doubts Aristide's Rights Reports
Although President Clinton reaffirmed his support of Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide today, the United States Embassy in Haiti asserted in a cablegram in April that the exiled Haitian President and his supporters were exaggerating and even fabricating reports of human rights abuses.
The cablegram, signed by Ambassador William L. Swing and sent to Secretary of State Warren Christopher on April 12, acknowledges that violence by criminal elements in the Haitian police has sharply increased in recent months.
But it suggests that the situation is not as bad as reported by Father Aristide, his followers, non-governmental organizations, an international monitoring mission in Haiti and the news media.


2 Groups Announce Winners of Awards
Two more organizations have announced winners of their annual awards.
Cole &amp; Weber of Seattle and Portland, Ore., took top honors, capturing 48 awards, at the Northwest Addy Awards ceremony sponsored by District 11 of the American Advertising Federation.
Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland was second with 30 awards.
Sandstrom Design in Portland won the Best of Show award for a sales promotion for KINK-FM in Portland.


Richer's Breakaway Sets Up Breakthrough
Stephane Richer lives for the dramatic moment, and the scene was set perfectly for him here Saturday night, just as it was three springs ago when the flamboyant wing played for the Canadiens.
The Devils and the Bruins were tied, 4-4, in overtime of Game 4 in their Eastern Conference semifinal series, and this was Boston Garden, a place Richer reveres as much as the Forum in Montreal.


Hunger Strike on Haiti: Partial Victory at Least
Day 27 turned out to be the final day of tomato juice and water for Randall Robinson.
Mr.
Robinson, the executive director of TransAfrica Forum, a research and lobbying group, had adopted the liquid diet to protest the Administration's policy of returning refugees to Haiti without hearings on asylum.
In the last week, particularly after he was hospitalized for a day for dehydration, reporters increasingly asked whether the fast was worthwhile -- a question that irked him.


World Economies


Yankees Go the Extra Distance in Sweep
Within the carefully constructed environment of the Yankee clubhouse, the mantras are what get them through the oh-fers, the traffic on the George Washington Bridge, the static on the talk shows and the grind between now and the moment when we learn the magic numbers for those wild-card playoff spots.
And perhaps the most frequently repeated mantra is the need to win each series.
That is one level of significance to attach to the 8-4 Yankee victory yesterday over the Red Sox, which completed a sweep of a series against a team that entered the Bronx with a seven-game winning streak and the best record in the major leagues.


Tempest in Court: An Ousted Judge; Metuchen Officials Want More Fines From Municipal Court
Metuchen calls itself the "brainy borough" of central New Jersey, a haven of petite streets, petite stores and grand self-esteem.
It hardly seems like one of those fabled backwaters where out-of-towners are summarily ticketed to fatten the coffers of the local chieftains.
But that was the impression that lingered recently after some officials in Metuchen squashed the reappointment of their municipal judge because, they suggested, he had failed to wring enough fines from his part-time court on Main Street, which handles traffic violations, petty theft, zoning disputes and other offenses too trifling for the judicial big leagues.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; The monitoring of violence in TV programs and video games may be a new growth industry.
LIKE to play games and watch television?
Think you know the difference between violence that is "necessary" and violence that is "gratuitous"?
Don't mind writing voluminous reports of uncertain impact?
There may be a job for you in the entertainment industry.


Opportunities' Knocks Put Judge High on Lists
Fifteen years ago, a young lawyer working as Yale University's general counsel noticed that job opportunities tended to hit him like tornado winds -- all at once and from every direction.
At the time, Jose A. Cabranes was given the unusual and luxurious option of becoming a Federal District Court judge in one of two states -- Connecticut or New York.
Now, after years of service on the bench in New Haven, Judge Cabranes has been swept up with even greater force, mentioned prominently for at least two high judicial posts: seats on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and the Supreme Court.


People
*
William J. Whitehead, chairman of BSB Canada, Toronto, and regional director of the BSB Latin America region, was named to the additional position of executive vice president and executive director of worldwide client services at Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York.
He succeeds Timothy Corrigan, who took a medical leave from day-to-day duties but continues as a member of the worldwide operating committee and on the Mars account global board. *
Michael Draznin was named senior vice president and corporate communications director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, succeeding Herb Katz, who resigned.
Mr.
Draznin was previously executive director of public relations at Landor Associates, San Francisco. *
Thomas E. Lawson, managing director of McCann-Erickson Universal Group, New York, was named to the additional position of president of McCann-Erickson North America, New York, succeeding John F. Fitzgerald, who was recently named president and chief executive at McCann Japan in Tokyo. *
Patricia Cameron was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of strategic planning for Campbell Mithun Esty, Minneapolis.
She was previously executive vice president and director of planning and research for TBWA Advertising, New York, which recently named Jeffrey Wolf to the new position of senior vice president and strategic planning director, from a similar position with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York. *
Philip Franznick, president of F&amp; D Advertising Inc., Westbury, L.I., was named to the additional new position of chief executive.
Robert Singer was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of integrated services.
Mr.
Singer was previously a senior vice president and group creative director for Earle Palmer Brown, New York. *
George Poulakos was named to the new position of managing director for Triclinica Communications Inc., New York.
He was previously program planning director for Health Education Technologies, New York.


On Way to U.S. Open, A Dispute Breaks Out
The head honchos of the United States Tennis Association, trying to blend a new tradition into a lucrative United States Open television package, claim they cannot understand the ATP Tour's reluctance to allow several top players to participate in a charitable exhibition they are hosting on the eve of the Open.
The head honcho of the men's tour, Mark Miles, claims he isn't convinced the exhibition is so charitable.


Search Continues for Missing Queens Girl


A Portrait Of a School In Trouble
Silence pervaded classrooms and hallways last week as the students of Intermediate School 193 in the Bronx sat at desks, puzzling over the two-hour reading test administered to all New York City lower school students each spring.
Only occasionally did sounds intervene: the hallway tread of a teacher delivering bundles of pencils, the buzz of a faltering fluorescent bulb, the chatter of the walkie-talkie carried by Alan Brandt, the principal, on his rounds through the building.
The moment the test concluded, however, there was mayhem, teachers said.


A City Under Wraps


Enforcement of Scofflaw Penalties Is Sought
The chief architect of New York State's six-month-old statute designed to mete out swift punishment to unlicensed drivers is calling for a special state inquiry concerning enforcement of the law.
"We have the toughest scofflaw driving law in the country and it doesn't seem to be working, and I want to know why," said Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat and chairman of the New York State Assembly Committee on Codes.


GAY TROOPS SAY CLINTON'S POLICY IS OFTEN MISUSED
In its first two months, the Clinton Administration's policy on homosexuals in the military has not made life easier for many gay servicemen and women and in some ways has made it worse, gay service members and their advocates say.
The policy -- nicknamed "Don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" -- was meant to allow homosexuals to serve without fear of persecution if they kept their sexual orientation private.


Crows Tell Us We're Altering the Environment; Cleanup Crew
To the Editor:
Re "The Crows Are Coming, So Prepare," (letter, April 25):
I live in Santa Barbara, Calif., sharing my space with the city cleanup crew -- our local crow population.
They nest in our palms, bathe in the trash-infested creek, and early every morning they patrol the streets, cleaning up Kentucky fried chicken bones and the rest of the edible garbage thrown out by our citizens the night before.
Most of this is unnoticed and unobserved by the humans they live with and above.
We need them.


Casinos Became Big Players In the Overhaul of Welfare
Earlier this spring, Senator Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat, stood on the White House lawn and issued a threat.
If President Clinton went forward with part of his contemplated welfare plan, he said, "I will become the most negative, the most irresponsible, the most obnoxious person of anyone in the Senate."
Nevada politicians are not known for being passionate about welfare.
But Mr.
Reid was incensed that the Administration was considering a gambling tax to pay for part of the plan, and he and other allies of the gambling industry around the country set out to do something about it.


Crows Tell Us We're Altering the Environment
To the Editor:
Brooks Rogers is correct in "The Crows Are Coming, So Prepare" (letter, April 25) that crows are intelligent and becoming more abundant, but that is only part of the story.
Garbage from landfills, dumpsters, cans and other sources, along with road-killed squirrels, rabbits and other animals, are abundant food sources for crows, generating vast numbers of crows, many times greater than were ever in the New York City area before.


Martha Graham's Centenary To Merge Past and Future
Martha Graham would have been 100 years old on Wednesday.
The anniversary is being celebrated not only with a party -- a gala on Tuesday at the Rainbow Room -- but also with long-term programs to preserve the dances and the company created by this American modern dance pioneer, who died in 1991.
The Martha Graham Centennial Celebration projects announced last week by the Graham company range from a new work by Robert Wilson and a line of dance and casual clothes inspired by Graham's costumes to a five-year, $10 million fund-raising campaign.
"The overall position of the centennial year is more than just a celebration," Ron Protas, the artistic director of the Graham company, said in a recent statement.
"It is the beginning of the steps to preserve Martha's legacy of technique and ballets." The Centennial Celebration is being sponsored by the Philip Morris Companies.


Dow Corning Had Conflicting Findings on Silicone
Twenty years ago, the world's largest maker of silicone products made a fateful decision.
Two scientific teams for the company had worked side by side for a decade on the nature of silicones, had talked to each other frequently and had come up with very different conclusions.
One group found that some forms of silicone -- including a type used in the manufacture of breast implants -- are biologically active and alter the immune system.
The other group determined that silicones were inert and could be used safely in implants.


Sports of The Times; Where Nobody Yells, 'Hey, Down in Front!'
WHAT a seat!
Down there next to the Knicks' bench for last night's opener with the Bulls.
Nothing in front of you except the Garden's glossy court.
It's an even better seat than all those vermilion chairs in section 15 going for $105 a pop in the playoffs, with waiter and waitress service.
Those customers not only can order golden chicken fingers at $6.95 or a vodka and tonic at $5, they can almost reach out and touch the orange "New York" lettering on the backs of the Knicks' white warmup suits.


No Headline
This was Jericho today under the Palestinian self-rule that went into effect four days ago:
Israeli soldiers set up roadblocks along the main roads outside town and, offering no reasons, declared the area to be a closed military zone.
No one could be found at the local office of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Hawks Cruise Into Round 2 With Blaylock at Throttle
Hawks 102, Heat 91
The top-seeded Atlanta Hawks, extended to a deciding playoff game by the eighth-seeded Miami Heat, used an outstanding performance by Mookie Blaylock for a 102-91 victory at home and advanced to the second round for the first time since 1988.


Hill and Packwood: Divergent Commentators on Harassment
If this country is ever going to come to grips with sexual harassment, Prof.
Anita F. Hill suggested today, Americans will have to put aside their predilection for villains and heroes and face the fact that "sometimes people who we admire and respect and we want to do well may engage in behavior that is objectionable and maybe even against the law."
Asked about the way liberals had quickly backed her accusations of harassment against a conservative Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas, and the way conservatives have quickly backed a woman's accusations of harassment against a Democratic President, Ms.
Hill said that partisan motives could undermine efforts to get at the truth.


Tyson Foods Behaved Properly With Clintons
To the Editor:
With regard to "Mrs. Clinton Steps Forward" (editorial, April 24):
(1) The poultry industry is heavily regulated, but it is regulated primarily by the Federal Government, not by individual states.


Celebrating Tchaikovsky
American Ballet Theater is to celebrate Tchaikovsky in a gala to benefit the company tonight at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Excerpts from ballet classics and works by George Balanchine and James Kudelka set to music by Tchaikovsky will be performed.
Tickets for the program and a post-performance dinner-dance in Damrosch Park are from $650 to $1,500.
Information: 477-3030, ext. 246.


Joe Layton, Choreographer And Director, Is Dead at 64
Joe Layton, the award-winning director, producer and choreographer, died on Thursday at his home in Key West, Fla.
He was 64.
He died after a long illness, said his press agent, Michael Sterling.


Hillman Tries Peace Pitch
Eric Hillman refuses to get into a war of words with San Francisco outfielder Barry Bonds, who threatened the Mets' pitcher Saturday in response to having been hit on the elbow with a Hillman pitch during the Mets-Giants game last Wednesday at Shea Stadium.
"You don't want it to go back and forth," Hillman said today in a phone conversation from New York, where he returned this weekend to be treated for an inner-ear problem.
"He can say what he wants to say, I had no intention of hitting him. After the game, I talked to Matt Williams and I explained that to him."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday None Wednesday None Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Producer Price Index April Retail Sales April Friday Consumer Price Index April Business Inventories March


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Deluxe Corp


Lord Sharp, 77, A British Leader In Communications
Lord Sharp of Grimsdyke, former chairman and chief executive of Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British-based international telecommunications company, died last Monday in London.
He was 77.
The cause was a heart attack, The Times of London reported.


A Shift of Power in Pharmaceuticals
In a tectonic shift of industrial power, drug manufacturers have lost control of the sale of their products to a handful of upstart managed-care companies, which have rapidly taken charge of more than half the nation's $60-billion-a-year drug business.
Trying to regain control of their market, some drug companies have acquired managed-care drug companies of their own.
On Tuesday, SmithKline Beecham bought Diversified Pharmaceutical Services for $2.3 billion, following the lead of Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, which acquired Medco Containment Services last November for $6.6 billion.


Daly Packs Up His Troubles and Wins Again
John Daly took another giant step on the long road back today.
He took an emotional walk across the minefield, from alcoholism, from suspension and, ultimately, from self-doubt, all on one cool, spectacular afternoon, and he won the BellSouth Classic at the Atlanta Country Club the way he has never won a golf tournament in his life.
He won it sober.


With New Bid by G.E., Kemper Invites Buyers
Faced with a $190 million increase in a hostile takeover bid from the General Electric Company and the likelihood of losing a crucial proxy fight, the Kemper Corporation yesterday formally put itself up for sale.
The action, which Kemper's management and board had resisted for months, opened the door for a bidding war involving G.E. and other potential suitors for the insurance and investment company, which is based in the Chicago suburb of Long Grove, Ill.


Accounts
*
Cobra Golf Inc., Carlsbad, Calif., to Ground Zero, Venice, Calif., to create a brand positioning campaign, previously handled on a project basis.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million. *
Honeywell Environmental Air Control, Hagerstown, Md., to Richardson, Myers &amp; Donofrio, Baltimore, to handle its Enviracaire air cleaner account, previously at the Reeves Agency, Baltimore.
Billings were estimated at $4 million.


At Last! A Game of Their Own Against Men
One team complained about its accommodations, having to change in the lavatory.
There was talk of salaries, and the disparities, what with one club's pay limited to $700 to $2,000 a month as opposed to $20,000 a year on the other side, scandalously rich for the minor leagues.
The rich kids, meanwhile, out to make an impressive debut, wondered if the veterans were a little more veteran than they were supposed to be, what with former big leaguers like Oil Can Boyd and Leon Durham brought in to lead the competition.


Bosnians' 2d Wind; Muslim Forces Seem to Be United In Seeking to Reclaim Lost Towns
The Clinton Administration and NATO have identified the northern town of Brcko as a likely next point of confrontation in the Bosnian war.
But Brcko is much more than the site of a possibly imminent battle: it is a symbol of why the war, already two years old, is still far from over.
Lying on the Sava River on Bosnia's northern border, Brcko was a mainly Muslim town before the war.
Then, in April 1992, Serbian forces evicted or killed the Muslims, and took control of a narrow corridor that is a vital link between Belgrade and Serb-held land in western Bosnia.


Dance in Review
'Pop Dreams'
David Rousseve La Mama Theater Annex


Freshman Withstands Volley of Calls on Guns
Connie Szeibl was having fun.
The threats from opponents of gun control, the invective, the words she had to lower her voice to repeat: she typed them up faithfully -- "you jackass" and all -- and passed them on to her boss, Representative Steve Horn.
"You don't know the threats we received," said Mrs.
Szeibl, who is the the Congressman's district director and who rarely hears such colorful language in the normal course of business.
"For four days we did nothing but answer phone calls, one after another after another."


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages rose by 8.3 percent, to 16,379.42, in April from April 1993.
For the first four months of 1994, total pages rose by 3.2 percent, to 55,882.49, from the corresponding period a year ago.


Abroad at Home; Words, Words, Words
President Clinton is under heavy attack these days for his handling of foreign policy.
The reason why was perfectly demonstrated last week in his appearance on CNN's "Global Forum."
As a performance it was impressive; Mr.
Clinton is never at a loss for words.
But when he was asked about the war in Bosnia, the flood of words revealed a confusion of substance, an emptiness of will.


Pilot Diverts Plane From Cuba to Miami
A Cuban plane taking 23 people from Havana to Nassau, Bahamas, was diverted to Miami by the pilot, officials said today.
Paul Miller, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said the pilot, Basilio Garcia-Breto, had requested asylum.
Lemar Wooley, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, said the pilot would be released.


Talk Radio Gets a Spirited New Voice From the Left
Angry about crime?
On America's talk-radio circuit, conservatives have solutions, and they don't take up a lot of air time, either.
The death penalty.
Cane them as they do in Singapore.
One strike and you're out.
Liberals typically take more time to explain themselves, offering eight-point plans, and they sound more defensive.


Giuliani Broadens Crackdown To Banish All Illegal Vendors
Just a few weeks after the city moved to crack down on food vendors in several areas in Manhattan, the Giuliani administration is now carrying out a broader policy to banish all peddlers from streets throughout the city where they operate illegally and, ultimately, to relocate many of them to open-air-style markets far from areas of heavy pedestrian traffic.
The administration contends that its strategy could ultimately lead to the removal of virtually all unlicensed vendors from New York City's streets and to the opening of as many as two dozen of the open-air markets throughout the city.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the expected struggle for a strategic town in Bosnia depicted control of nearby territory incorrectly.
Circles around the cities of Sarajevo and Gorazde depicted NATO-imposed "exclusion zones" from which heavy weapons have been barred.
The circles did not correspond to areas of Bosnian Government control.


Honda Plans Auto Plant In Mexico
In a sign of growing confidence in the Mexican auto market, the Honda Motor Company said today that it would begin building a small assembly plant there in July.
Honda said it planned to assemble Accord cars at the plant, beginning in November 1995, for sale in Mexico and possibly for export to other Central and South American countries.


Back in the Lineup, Millen Ends Drought
Corey Millen's moment came at last.
At 1 minute 23 seconds into the second period tonight, the chunky, spunky skater scored the first and winning goal for the Devils in their 2-0 victory over the Boston Bruins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Crackdown on Illegal Apartments Stirs a Dispute
Vanessa Merton has lived in a Tudor house on the Hudson River overlooking the sheer face of the Palisades since Harry S. Truman was President.
Throughout her childhood, her college years and now that Ms.
Merton is raising her own children in the house, her family has always rented out a three-bedroom apartment over the garage.
But in September, Village of Hastings officials notified her that the garage apartment was illegal and would have to be vacated.


Woman Is Held in Slashing of 14-Year-Old Girl
A teen-age girl staying with a Brooklyn family suffered slashes requiring more than a thousand stitches when she tried to shield two small children from their deranged mother, who attacked the three children with a knife, the police said yesterday.
The police had only a sketchy account of the incident, but relatives of the teen-ager said the ordeal began on Friday and continued until early yesterday morning.
It was not clear exactly when the children's injuries were inflicted, but the woman apparently kept them captive in the apartment for the entire weekend.


A School Attempts to Live Up to Its Name


Review/Music; Dirty and Noisy, on Purpose
Unsane, a New York City rock band that performed on Sunday night at Wetlands, makes music that reflects life on the streets of the East Village.
It's dirty, noisy and cluttered.
This is not an insult; it's Unsane's musical objective.
The band, which lost its original drummer, Charlie Ondras, to a heroin overdose in 1992, has experienced the brutality of city living firsthand.
Though Unsane is only a trio of bass, guitar and drums, it raised a racket on Sunday.
Its drummer, Vinnie Signorelli, pounded his kit constantly, even between songs.
Chris Spencer hammered only the low notes on his guitar while Peter Shore played his bass as if it were a second lead guitar.
No one used his instrument merely to keep time, and no one soloed.


Abortion Foes Ordered to Pay Clinic Damages
In what abortion-rights advocates hailed as the largest civil award ever against the anti-abortion movement, a state jury in Houston today ordered two anti-abortion groups to pay more than $1 million in punitive damages to a Planned Parenthood clinic whose operation was disrupted by protests during the 1992 Republican National Convention here.
The size of the award, which was slightly more than Planned Parenthood had sought, elated advocates of abortion rights and raised the prospect that people who had contributed money to anti-abortion causes could see some portion go to abortion clinics in the form of damages paid by anti-abortion groups.


Estee Lauder Puts Account in Review
The Estee Lauder Companies said yesterday that it would place in review the bulk of its $75 million account, which has been handled for 28 years by AC&amp;R Advertising in New York.
The announcement came as the agency's chairman, Alvin Chereskin, who has long been central to the account, officially said he would retire at the end of the year.
"As a result of Alvin's upcoming retirement, and in order to optimize our future plans, we have decided to put the Estee Lauder account in review," said Leonard A. Lauder, president and chief executive at Lauder, in a statement.
He added that AC&amp;R had made "a major contribution to our business, and this decision is no reflection on them and their work for us, which has always been outstanding."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  MANDELA VICTORY AFFIRMED  A Parliament as diverse as any in the world took office in South Africa and proclaimed Nelson Mandela the country's President.
A1


SOCCER
United States
The American team and its coach, Bora Milutinovic, got mixed news from Europe over the weekend about two key midfielders.


Sturm Ruger &amp; Co. (RGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


One Man's Prison Release Is His Brother's Undoing
Buddy Dixon (Ron Cephas Jones), the sleazy villain and occasional narrator of "Murder Magic," is a character who doesn't beat around the bush.
In the film's opening scene, Buddy, who has just been released from prison after serving three years, turns to the camera and announces cheerfully that he is on his way to New York to kill his brother.
Moments later, he hitches a ride with a silly European woman who asks him if he is Jack Kerouac.
He convinces her that he is the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The sole item Buddy carries with him on the road is a magician's bag of tricks.
His favorite stunt, used to seduce women, is conjuring a long-stemmed red rose out of thin air.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the death of a Staten Island man in the custody of the police misstated the affiliation of Dr.
Mark Taff, the forensic pathologist hired to conduct a private autopsy.
He is an associate clinical professor of pathology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, not a former associate professor.


Olajuwon Named N.B.A.'s Top Defender
Houston Rockets center HAKEEM OLAJUWON, who says scoring is secondary to him, earned his second straight National Basketball Association defensive player of the year award yesterday.
The honor came with the Rockets trailing the Phoenix Suns, 1-0, in their four-of-seven-game Western Conference semifinal series that resumes tomorrow night at the Summit.


OHM Corp.(OHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


3 Rival Offers For Macy Are Revised
Proponents of three competing plans to move R. H. Macy &amp; Company out of bankruptcy raised the ante yesterday, but many creditors continued to play coy in hopes of attracting even sweeter offers.
Macy, the committee representing its bondholders and Federated Department Stores Inc., a rival retailer that is seeking a merger with Macy, each submitted revised reorganization plans to Cyrus R. Vance, the count-appointed mediator in the case.


Long Lost Notebooks Of Egyptian Expedition
MORE field notebooks written during a major archeological excavation in Egypt, long feared to have been destroyed in World War II, have turned up in Germany.
The recovery of the daily excavation logs and artifact lists, with other materials discovered more than a year ago, should enable archeologists to complete their interpretation of the tombs, temples and other sacred remains at Medinet Habu, an important ancient site on the west bank of the Nile River, near Luxor.
The excavations were conducted from 1927 to 1933 by the University of Chicago with the assistance of German archeologists.


Howard Johnson Benched by the Rockies
HOWARD JOHNSON has been pulled from the Colorado Rockies' starting lineup until he adjusts his hitting style, Manager DON BAYLOR said yesterday.
ERIC YOUNG started in Johnson's place against San Francisco last night, and MIKE KINGERY has been penciled into the lineup for today.


Mercury General (MRCY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Communing With Nature and Nearby Desktop
IN the spring, a keyboarder's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of decktop computing: communing with keyboard and trackball en plein air in chaise longue while sipping a kir.
Such charming notions quickly evaporate when one discovers that the best and brightest color displays of today's laptop computers are virtually unreadable outdoors.
Memo to anyone considering open-air computing: Haul the machine outside and try it.
What you see, or more accurately what you do not, will probably send you running back indoors for a different model, possibly monochrome.
Like vampires, the color screens of laptop computers must shun the light of day.


Clinton Nears a Court Choice As Lobbying Becomes Intense
From the moment that Justice Harry A. Blackmun announced his intention to retire at the end of the current Supreme Court term, several groups have rushed to press the White House on behalf of, and sometimes against, the candidates believed to be on a list of finalists.
White House officials said today that President Clinton was close to making his selection for the Supreme Court and that he was scheduled to meet with his advisers again on Tuesday for what was to be a final discussion on the matter.


Continental Corp.(CIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cablevision Systems Inc.(CVC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For the Suit, a Shapely New Life
The suit lives.
Not only did it rank high among the fashions that customers bought to wear this spring, but it is also prominent in sales as designers take their fall collections to stores all over the country.
At the fall fashion shows last month, a good deal of attention was paid to adventurous, even flamboyant, coats and to a revival of the dress.
But when store buyers went to manufacturers' showrooms to put in their orders, the suit was at the top of their lists, as it has been for more than a decade.


AT&amp;T Wins $4 Billion Saudi Project
After heavy lobbying by top officials of the Clinton Administration, Saudi Arabia selected the AT&amp;T Corporation today to modernize its entire telecommunications system -- a deal the company said would be worth $4 billion over the next six years.
The decision marks another major example of the Administration's determination to campaign for American companies in winning big contracts from foreign governments.


Giuliani Plans License Sale Of WNYC
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that his administration planned to sell the license for WNYC-FM, the New York City-owned classical-music station, to help close the budget deficit for the next fiscal year.
But Mr.
Giuliani said the city would strive to keep the station -- one of only two that still broadcasts classical music -- on the air by buying a less expensive license from a nonprofit station.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.78
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.32
4.15
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.81
4.61
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.48
7.34
5.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.63
7.54
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.35
7.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.48
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Honors for Northeast's American Indians


Browning Has Freak Injury And Leaves on a Stretcher
Reds 3, Padres 2
Brian Dorsett went 3 for 4 and scored the winning run on a wild pitch as the Cincinnati Reds beat San Diego, 3-2, last night, a victory tarnished by a frightening injury to starter Tom Browning.


Leetch's Presence Enough
There they were, about to clinch the conference semifinals on their raucous home ice, about to venture farther in the post-season than they had in seven years.
Why, then, did the Rangers all look periodically fragile in the act of eliminating the Capitals by 4-3 last night?
If not for Brian Leetch, they probably would have ventured into Game 6 instead of receiving two vacation days before starting preparations for the conference finals.
"You're looking for your best players to be at their best and come up with the big play, and Brian served up the biggest play of his playoff career to this point," Rangers Coach Mike Keenan said of Leetch, the understated hero with the overstated playoff ambition.


GBC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Observer; The National Pastime
Because it was Topic A in the weekend sex news I wrote a column on the latest sexual harassment charges, which was a waste of four good hours.
After reading the finished opus, I recoiled.
With all the solemnity of a papal bull I had weighed the significance of the ineffable Bobbitts, of Anita Hill's story about Justice Thomas, of Gary Hart's destruction by a righteous press and much more that was extremely important, not to mention grave and vital to the American soul.


Healthsource Inc.(HS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On My Mind; The Haitian Mirror
Haiti holds up a mirror to Americans and tens of millions should look away in shame.
They live in freedom and safety because their parents or grandparents had the strength to flee pogroms or travel thousands of hard miles in search of work and bread.


Stocks Fall Over Fears Of Inflation
Inflation fears hit the financial markets hard for a second straight session yesterday.
As long-term interest rates soared to a 19-month high in the bond market, stock prices declined sharply.
Blue chips like Caterpillar, interest rate-sensitive utilities like Duke Power and high-technology stocks like Intel all were hurt.
For traders, yesterday was a replay of Friday's market, only worse.
Then, stronger-than-expected data from the Government on job creation led to renewed inflation fears, a rout in bond prices and a 26-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average.


Finchem Selected as P.G.A. Commissioner
Opting for continuity over change, the Tournament Policy Board of the PGA Tour named Timothy W. Finchem yesterday to succeed Deane Beman as the commissioner of the multimillion-dollar organization that oversees touring professionals.
Finchem, 47, the deputy commissioner and chief operating officer of the PGA Tour, had been rumored to be the frontrunner for the job ever since Feb. 28, when Beman announced his intention to step down.


Yemenis Battle For the Control Of a Major City
Yemen's rival armies, locked in a deadly struggle that threatens the disintegration of the Arab world's poorest nation, battled for control of the strategic southern port city of Aden today as hundreds more foreigners fled.
Hundreds of people have been killed or wounded during five days of fighting between army units from the formerly Marxist Southern Yemen and the conservative north.
Electricity, water and telephone services have been cut in much of the country.
Gasoline and diesel fuel are in short supply.
Schools and businesses are closed and many Yemenis have fled to remote villages.


Infectious Diseases on the Rebound in the U.S., a Report Says
DOZENS of healthy people become acutely short of breath and die from a new virus, which turns out to belong to a group of viruses known to cause kidney disease and bleeding.
Why the new virus attacks the lung, not the kidneys, is a mystery.
A parasite rarely known to affect humans causes the largest outbreak of waterborne illness in this country.


Avery Fisher Memorial
A memorial concert for the philanthropist Avery Fisher is to be held on Friday at 3:30 P.M. in the Lincoln Center hall that was named for him.
The cellist Yo-Yo Ma, the pianist Emanuel Ax and the Juilliard String Quartet are to perform, and the recipients of the $25,000 Avery Fisher Prize (last awarded in 1991) and the annual Avery Fisher Career Grants are to be announced.
Free tickets will be available at 3:15 P.M. on the day of the concert, first come first served.


Panel Recommends New Smithsonian Head
A search committee recommended yesterday that I. Michael Heyman, a former chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley, become the 10th secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, but the governing Board of Regents postponed a final decision.
At a news conference in Washington yesterday, Robert McC.
Adams, the present secretary, or director, of the Smithsonian, said the Regents withheld their choice in deference to a request by Vice President Al Gore to be included in the selection process.
Mr.
Gore, who as Vice President is on the 17-member board, is in South Africa.
Mr.
Adams previously announced his intention to resign in September.


G.M. Is Again Raising Prices Of Vehicles in Short Supply
The General Motors Corporation announced its second round of price increases in a week today by adding as much as $310 to the prices of another group of popular cars and trucks.
As was the case with the G.M. models whose prices climbed last week, the vehicles included this time -- including the Chevrolet Camaro sports coupe and the GMC Jimmy compact sport utility vehicle -- are in high demand and short supply.


U.S. Sees New Policy on Haitian Refugees as Buying Time
Administration officials said today that their new policy on Haitian refugees might buy time for economic efforts to squeeze Haiti's military leaders from power, but they acknowledged that they still faced the fundamental question of what to do if that plan failed.
Even as officials from Florida began to warn about a new flood of refugees, aides to President Clinton said the most important effect of his decision to provide asylum hearings at sea to those fleeing Haiti might be to quiet American dissent.


Newark Gunman Kills 3 While Abducting His Son
A man angered over a breakup with his girlfriend and the loss of contact with his son shot and killed three people in Newark yesterday, stole a car and kidnapped the boy, the police said.
Jose Luis Beroa, 33, who the police said was a resident of New York City, went to the home of his girlfriend's family in Newark, saying he wanted to discuss a reconciliation, said Detective Derek Glenn.


Sports of The Times; The Case Of the Absent 7-Footers
THE inscribed lines begin, "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. . . . "
And so Phil Jackson, the coach of the Chicago Bulls, figured where better to take his tempest-tossed team yesterday than to the Statue of Liberty?


Deal Reported on Bank Regulation
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury have reached the broad outlines of a deal to combine bank regulatory agencies, and hope to present comprehensive legislation to Congress soon, a top Fed official said today.
John P. LaWare, the Fed governor who heads the central bank's committee on bank regulation, said that the Fed and Treasury were now working on what he described as "technical details" as they hammer out a voluminous proposal to Congress for legislation.


Rams' Owner Calls a Move 'More Likely'
GEORGIA FRONTIERE, the owner of the Los Angeles Rams, says it is looking more likely that her team will move out of Anaheim Stadium after the 1994 season.
"It seems like that's the way it's going; we're losing money," she was quoted as saying in Sunday's issue of The Los Angeles Times.


Anger And Grief Over Use Of Force
The mother of the man who died in police custody last month on Staten Island lay on her bed yesterday, clutching a copy of the city Medical Examiner's Office's findings and speaking of murder.
Some other residents talked of a double tragedy, sobered by the young man's death but also concerned for the officers involved in the April 29 incident.
A young girl said the issue was not race -- one of the officers was black, as was the dead man -- but the unnecessary use of force.
A young man said such a use of force was too typical for there to be a margin for sympathy for the officers.


Casino Magic Corp.(CMAG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


By Design; The Espadrilles of Summer
Espadrilles, those soft canvas shoes with rope soles that have been a fixture in rural France and Spain for centuries, find their way onto fashionable American feet every decade or so.
This is one of those times.
Of course when espadrilles become chic, they undergo certain changes.
The soles may get a water-resistant coating that renders them hardy enough to wear on pavement.
Then, the soles may be elevated to platforms, and the canvas may be printed or replaced by macrame, crochet work, suede or leather.


Italians Look at the New, and Wonder if It's the Old
On the surface, much seems to have changed in Italy since landmark elections in March consigned a whole generation of postwar politicians to history and thrust Silvio Berlusconi, the tycoon-turned-politician, into the job of Prime Minister.
Even Mr.
Berlusconi's adversaries acknowledge that just as he parlayed modest financial beginnings into a huge business empire, the Prime Minister-designate has turned the novelty of his three-month-old Forza Italia party into political power.


Armstrong on a Rise As Tour Goes Uphill
On this, the sixth and most dramatic day so far of the 12-day Tour DuPont, some of the world's best bicycle riders experienced various degrees of euphoria or disaster.
It was a great day for Vyacheslav Yekimov of Russia, who rode the fastest time of the day and became the overall leader.
It was a really good day for the world champion, Lance Armstrong of Austin, Tex., who was third today and moved into third over all.
It was a bad day for last year's winner, Raul Alcala of Mexico; bad for Greg LeMond of Medina, Minn. ("I'm out of contention now," he said), and bad for Malcolm Elliott of England, who started the day as the overall leader and ended it in 38th place.


Jury Convicts Rifkin, Rejecting Insanity Plea
Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who led a secret life of killing prostitutes and keeping their corpses for days, was found to be legally sane today by a jury that took only two hours to convict him of murder.
Mr.
Rifkin, 34, who stood expressionless as the jury read its verdict, had admitted killing 17 women, so the facts of the case were never at issue in the two-week trial.


Central Garden &amp; Pet Co.  (CENT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 28


Review/Music; Dawn Upshaw as Soloist With Orpheus
To say that the film cameras at work on a documentary about the conductorless Orpheus Chamber Orchestra missed the best parts of the group's concert on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall is accurate as far as it goes.
In fact, they helped determine the best parts by finally absenting themselves from the stage after the first two pieces.
In a crude, commonplace parallel to Heisenberg's principle of physics, the act of observation altered the thing being observed.
The filming caused a reordering of a nicely balanced program and distracted the audience throughout Stravinsky's "Dumbarton Oaks" Concerto.
In Ravel's "Pavane for a Dead Princess," some uncharacteristically tentative attacks and careless balances suggested that the ever more intrusive cameras were unsettling the players as well.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP., El Segundo, Calif., was awarded a three-year contract valued at about $37 million from Belgacom, Belgium, a state-owned telecommunications operator, to develop a billing system and related support systems.
GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP., West Lafayette, Ind., a specialty chemicals concern, announced that its board had authorized the repurchase of up to one million common shares.


Midwest Grain Products Inc.(MWGP) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Krzyzewski Rules: School Before Travel
Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI has canceled a series of games for the Blue Devils in Australia against that country's national team because Duke's players have not performed up to expectations in the classroom.
The Blue Devils, who lost in the National Collegiate Athletic Association final last month, were to play the Australian national team in Adelaide, Canberra, Melbourne, Newcastle and Sydney between May 19 and June 2.


Modine Mfg. Co.(MODI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Moscow Journal; Where Politicians Sometimes Tote Assault Rifles
In the early morning on a not quite empty city street a week ago, two men fired at each other with Kalashnikov assault rifles in a shootout that left one of the gunmen, a reputed member of organized crime, dead.
As slayings go, it was not an unusual confrontation in the new, crime-ridden Russia -- except that the one who walked away was a young, reform-minded member of Parliament.


The Quirk of Quarks
To the Editor:
Re "Top Quark, Last Piece in Puzzle of Matter, Appears to Be in Place" (front page, April 26):


Sun Healthcare Group Inc.(SHG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The obituary of Richard M. Nixon on April 24 referred incorrectly to part of a 1958 trip he made to South America as Vice President.
While there were "sessions of crowd-mingling" by Mr.
Nixon and few problems in some countries, that was not the case in Caracas, Venezuela.
There, crowds along the motorcade route attacked the vehicles, and Mr.
Nixon took refuge in the United States Embassy.


The Scramble for Money: One Candidate's Struggle
As he trolls for donations, Ken Harper sounds like a dealer at the new riverboat casinos anchored here on the Mississippi River.
But he is a candidate for the United States Senate.
"I don't care if you're a Republican or not," Mr.
Harper, a Democrat, tells one prospect on the telephone.
"I just want my $500 check." To another he implores in his Delta drawl: "You've got more money than Jesse James. Just write me a little check for $500."


From Absolut To Stolichnaya
Arnie Arlow, executive vice president and creative director on the Absolut vodka account at TBWA Advertising in New York, will join Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York to become creative director on that agency's new Stolichnaya vodka account.
Mr.
Arlow's departure has been expected since Michel Roux, the president and chief executive of Carillon Importers Ltd., lost the American distribution rights to Absolut and gained the American distribution rights to Stolichnaya.
Mr.
Arlow, 60, and Mr.
Roux have worked closely together on the innovative and successful Absolut advertising campaign.


Soccer's Melting Pot -- A periodic look at the World Cup teams and their fans in the metropolitan area; 1 Team, but 150 Million Coaches
The decorator is coming.
Via Brasil restaurant in midtown is getting its party face on, the atmospheric volume pumping up from sedately tropical to riotously soccer.
Posters will adorn the walls, trophies will be brought in, goal nets will be strung up like bunting.
The World Cup is coming in June.
That's when the seven-foot television screen will unfurl from the ceiling, and for a month soccer will be the main item on the menu.
Along 46th Street, between Fifth and Sixth avenues, at restaurants such as Via Brasil and Ipanema, at stores such as Coisa Nossa and Emporium Brasil and the Brasil Way Pharmacy, at the BACC Travel Agency, there is feverish anticipation for the calypso beat of Brazilian soccer.
Brazil has won the World Cup three times, but not since 1970.
This will be the year, that is the word on 46th Street.
With the magnificent, creative Romario and Bebeto at forwards, this is Brazil's time.


Jawboning's Limits; Some Say It's Time That the Administration Rethought Its Trade Policy Toward Japan
After almost a year of jawboning and negotiating, the Clinton Administration has little to show for its trade policy toward Japan, and some Administration officials and analysts are beginning to wonder aloud whether it is time for the United States to rethink its strategy.
The combination of the weak new coalition Government in Tokyo and the turmoil in world currency markets has seriously weakened the Clinton Administration's ability to get Japan to open certain of its closed markets and reduce its huge trade surplus with the rest of the world.


Hollywood Discovers a New Subject: Overweight
You can't be too thin or, for that matter, too rich in Hollywood. Ask Andrea King.
Ms.
King, a former journalist and now screenwriter, says she's certainly not rich (by Hollywood standards) and obviously not thin.
She views the weight issue with a mixture of pain and dark humor.


Republicans' Gubernatorial Ad Wars Heat Up
Two weeks before the Republican State Convention, Herbert London announced a television advertising campaign today aimed at challenging the independence of his main rival for the gubernatorial nomination, State Senator George E. Pataki.
In the advertisement, which does not refer to Mr.
Pataki by name, Mr.
London calls himself "the one truly independent candidate for governor," according to a transcript.
"I've never been controlled by party bosses and I never will be," he says.


KENNEDY PROPOSES EXPANDED CHOICES FOR HEALTH PLAN
Edward M. Kennedy, the Senate's senior campaigner for national health insurance, today proposed changing President Clinton's health care plan to broaden individuals' choice of insurance and to lighten the burden on very small businesses.
The Massachusetts Democrat worked out his proposal in consultation with the White House and with Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader.
It would require all but the smallest employers to buy insurance for their workers and would offer any American the same insurance choices Federal workers have.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the transition to self-rule in the West Bank town of Jericho referred incorrectly to civil servants there.
They are Palestinians, not Israeli Arabs.


President Feels Under Assault
President Clinton suggested to a sympathetic audience at a televised "town hall meeting" here tonight that he had been subject "to more assault than any previous President," but that he was prepared to put up with it as long as the American people wanted him to.
The President, who capped an intensely campaignlike day with the meeting, made his comment in response to a woman who asked if he thought he was "being held on a higher standard than previous Presidential families."


I.B.M.-Apple Venture To Cut Back Activities
Three years after setting out to establish a software standard for "interactive" television and computing through a joint venture called Kaleida, Apple Computer and I.B.M. have decided to scale back Kaleida's activities substantially, curtail spending and reduce its 125-member staff by more than 20 percent, according to people familiar with the decision.
The decision to rein in the venture comes when the industry's development of interactive television is being slowed by regulatory uncertainty, concerns about the high costs involved and various technical issues.
It also comes when both Apple and the International Business Machines Corporation are experiencing pressure on profit margins in their personal computer business.


Word Processing Without Bells and Whistles
YOU write a report with Wordperfect.
Track expenses with Lotus 1-2-3 and customers with Borland Paradox.
Do presentations with Microsoft Office.
Or maybe you use the top programs, bought as a cut-rate "suite," from one publisher.
But realistically nobody with anything else to do plays all the bells and whistles of advanced applications in two, three, four or more fields.
And plenty of people run a small business or a life with less computer power than those space-, memory- and speed-hogging programs assume to be an inalienable right.


Score It 3 TKO's for Lack of Punch
After Julio Cesar Chavez's head-butt aided victory Saturday over Frankie Randall for the World Boxing Council superlightweight title, ESPN's boxing analyst, Al Bernstein, called the decision one of boxing's "five worst travesties."
Here's a sixth: the abysmal performance by SET's announcing threesome.


Books of The Times; The Lives and Crimes of 2 Women
Split Skirt  By Agnes Rossi  223 pages. Random House. House. $20.
In her last book, a wonderfully swift, elliptical novella called "The Quick," Agnes Rossi demonstrated her mastery of ventriloquism, her ability to create a fictional narrator and a voice seemingly capable of confessing an entire life.
By cutting back and forth between the narrator's efforts to cope with her father's death and her memories of the death of her best friend's husband, the novella opened out seamlessly to become both a moving portrait of a woman and a musical meditation on the themes of loss and grief.


Honors
*
Advertising Age's Business Marketing magazine named Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston as agency of the year. *
Celestial Seasonings Inc., Boulder, Colo., was named New Products Company of the Year by Food Business magazine. *
Deborah A. Newkerk, president and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct North America, New York, was named the 1994 general chair of the John Caples International Awards. *
Torre Renta Lazur, Parsippany, N.J., was named 1994 Agency of the Year by the trade publication Med Ad News. *
Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., took top honors at the 1994 National Public Service Competition sponsored by the American Advertising Federation, Washington.
The agency won for a public service campaign to promote diversity in the workplace. *
DDB Needham Copenhagen took top honors in the first annual "Out of the Box" creative thinking contest sponsored by the Integrated Marketing Communications Department of Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill.
The agency won for a campaign for the Volkswagen Vento.
Houghton Mifflin, Boston, was second for an American Heritage Dictionary campaign, and Chiat/Day Venice, Calif., placed third for a Nissan Altima campaign. *
Bret Marks, manager of new media at Lintas New York, was named the agency's 1993 Creative Media Person of the Year. *
Philip B. Dusenberry, chairman and chief executive at BBDO New York, will be honored by the National Conference of Christians and Jews of the Greater New York Region at a dinner on June 8 at the New York Hilton.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Most American business executives oppose President Clinton's health care plan, especially its requirement that companies insure all their workers and pay most of the costs, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.  [ Page D1. ]


Executive Changes
AVX CORP., Myrtle Beach, S.C., a unit of Kyocera Group, promoted John Gilbertson, its executive vice president, to the additional position of chief operating officer.
DOVER CORP., New York, named its president, Thomas Reece, to be chief executive, succeeding Gary L. Roubos, who continues as chairman.


Review/Music; Strains of Celtic Kinship
Johnny Cunningham, one of three fiddlers in the Celtic Fiddles concert of the World Music Institute on Saturday night at Symphony Space, made a mock confession: "All the tunes we're playing tonight are basically the same tune in different keys." Actually, the concert revealed both differences and kinship in music from Brittany, Scotland and Ireland.
The fiddlers -- Mr.
Cunningham from Scotland, Kevin Burke from Ireland and Christian Lemaitre from Brittany -- played music meant for dancing, designed for open-ended variations and perpetual motion.
Their tones echoed the cutting drones of bagpipes and bombardes (French oboes).
And they harmonized easily when they shared tunes for the concert's finale.


In New York, Haitians Are Skeptical
In the last two years, the effort to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power has kept Haitians in New York on an emotional roller coaster.
They have seen the United Nations impose an embargo on their impoverished country, they have seen unfulfilled accords and broken promises.


METRO DIGEST
DEATH IN CUSTODY IS CALLED HOMICIDE
The Medical Examiner's office said a Staten Island man who died in police custody suffocated because of pressure on his chest and neck while his hands were cuffed behind his back.
A1.
"Rudy Giuliani's New York's finest took my aunt's one and only," said one relative.
B4.


Review/Music; Rebuilding Rock-and-Roll Fromthe 50's Up
Shonen Knife has nothing to hide.
When the Japanese rock trio performed on Saturday night at Irving Plaza, it told its audience exactly what each song was about.
"This is a song about a dog," "This song is about my cat," "I want to play a song about my favorite drink, tomato juice." Shonen Knife sang about the modest joys of life.
It brought together the jukebox dreams of 1950's girl groups with the do-it-yourself energy of punk rock.
Naoko Yamano, the guitarist, played simple, catchy riffs.
Her sister, Atsuko Yamano, rarely embellished her drumming, even though she beat out some complex time signatures.
Along with Michie Nakatani, the bassist, the trio chirped slightly out-of-tune Beatlesesque harmonies throughout many of the numbers.


Corrections
A picure caption yesterday about the civil war in Angola referred incorrectly to an examination being performed on a crying child.
He was being weighed and measured as part of a nutritional analysis, not measured for a coffin.


Daly Is a Long Way From Punxsutawney
On the morning of the day he was to be inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Chuck Daly was in a reminiscent mood, recalling how he decided to become a basketball coach when he was a high school sophomore in Kane, Pa.
"I remember telling my mother, 'Mom, I'm going to be a basketball coach and I bet I can make as much as $10,000 a year at it,' " Daly said here today, hours before he was to be inducted along with another coach, Denny Crum; Buddy Jeannette, regarded as the pre-eminent backcourt player during the pro game's early days; Carol Blazejowski, the former Montclair State star who is the all-time women's collegiate scoring leader, and Cesare Rubini, the central figure in the development of basketball in Italy.


DEATH OF SUSPECT IN POLICE CUSTODY IS CALLED HOMICIDE
The New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday that a Staten Island man who died in the custody of police officers 10 days ago suffocated because of pressure on his chest and neck while he lay in a prone position with his hands handcuffed behind his back.
The Chief Medical Examiner, Dr.
Charles S. Hirsch, called the death a homicide because, he said, it was caused at least in part by the action of the officers, who were members of an anti-narcotics squad who had gone to a low-income housing complex on northern Staten Island to make drug arrests.


IMO Industries Inc.(IMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Silver Screen, Black Lungs
The cigarette industry is under siege.
The Food and Drug Administration is investigating whether nicotine should be declared a controlled substance.
Industry scientists have admitted that more than a decade ago studies found a less-toxic nicotine substitute but were suppressed.
Congressional testimony by cigarette company executives about the safety of their product left the public profoundly unimpressed.
Nick Naylor, the main character in Christopher Buckley's new novel, "Thank You For Smoking," is chief Washington spokesman for the tobacco lobby.
In the book, Congress has threatened the industry with a total advertising ban, so Nick proposes to his boss, BR, an end-run around the impending ban.


Trade Center Defendant Agrees to a Plea Bargain
A Jordanian immigrant who has been in police custody for more than a year in connection with the World Trade Center bombing pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal court to immigration fraud as part of a plea agreement with prosecutors.
The man, Bilal Alkaisi, told Judge Kevin T. Duffy in United States District Court in Manhattan that he had lied on immigration papers to improve his chances of gaining permanent residency in the United States.
He also agreed to submit to deportation to any country except Jordan after serving a yet-to-be-determined sentence.
In return, the Government dropped the seven conspiracy charges against him connected to the bombing.


George Peppard Dies; Stage and Screen Actor, 65
George Peppard, the actor who played a would-be writer smitten with Audrey Hepburn in the 1961 film "Breakfast at Tiffany's" and was better known to younger generations as the cigar-chomping, tough-guy commander of "The A-Team" on television, died on Sunday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center.
He was 65 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was pneumonia, said his press representative, Cheryl J. Kagan.
He was admitted to the hospital on Thursday because he had trouble breathing, Ms.
Kagan said.
In 1992, a cancerous tumor was removed from Mr.
Peppard's right lung, she said.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc.(FCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


To End Welfare, Create Real Jobs
To the Editor:
The prospect of eliminating welfare, discussed in your April 22 article on Charles Murray of the American Enterprise Institute and his decadelong campaign to let poor women and children fend for themselves, sounds exciting.
But history has proved that the recommendations offered by Mr.
Murray and others are misdirected and will not work.


Market Place; Macy argues that Federated just isn't up to the job of merging.
AS the battle for R. H. Macy &amp; Company intensifies, the bankrupt retailer has begun circulating a tract that makes clear its distaste for its longtime rival and would-be suitor, Federated Department Stores.
Macy says a merger would hurt Federated stockholders because it would greatly dilute the value of their stock.
The booklet also disparages Federated, contending that it is inept at consolidating divisions, bereft of senior merchandising and management talent and unlikely to grow much in the future.
In short, one creditor said, "it paints a pretty negative view of Federated."


Patterns
Engineered Athletic Wear
Nautilus knows what its name means to those who have worked their way up the ladder of its high-tech weight machines.
So when the company decided to produce a line of athletic clothes, it decided to make another kind of patented "machine," of fabric.
"We come at it from an engineering point of view," said Nicholas J. DeMarco, the president of Nautilus Wear International.
"It's function before fashion."


2 Officials Are Charged After Inquiry Into Schools
A senior lawyer for the New York City Board of Education and an assistant director in the board's buildings management division have been charged with crimes as a result of a Federal investigation of corruption in school leasing, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday.
Neither Mr.
Cortines nor Federal officials would say yesterday exactly what the charges against the two men were.
The lawyer, Sheldon Rosenblum, who was one of the board's four deputy general counsels, left a handwritten letter of resignation that the board's legal director found on his desk at board headquarters in Brooklyn yesterday morning, Mr.
Cortines said in a statement.


Brodeur Lets Devils Zero In on Rangers
Jacques Lemaire pushed three key buttons tonight -- the most crucial one in goal -- and the first-year coach hit the jackpot.
Lemaire decided to start Martin Brodeur, who took the place of Chris Terreri after Terreri earned the two victories in Boston.
The 22-year-old rookie made 22 saves to key a 2-0 victory over the Bruins before a sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A magazine taps a $2 billion captive market, and it's likely to grow.
RESTRICTED as they are, prisoners still eat.
They also smoke, read, listen to music, and if the latest edition of Prison Life magazine is any indication, study languages and play the harmonica.
"The average prisoner spends $1,200 to $1,500 a year at the prison commissary," said Joe Strahl, who ran one for five years in Danville, Ill.


Testosterone May Avert Heart Attack
A SURPRISING new finding by researchers in New York City challenges the long-held belief that the male sex hormone, testosterone, is important in causing heart attacks in men.
Rather, the researchers conclude, testosterone may help protect men against heart attacks, which are the leading cause of death in the United States and many other countries.


Frustrated, Gazans Battle The Israelis
Frustrated as yet another day passed without the much-awaited arrival of Palestinian police officers, several thousand young Gazans battled Israeli soldiers today in a familiar scene that is supposed to be relegated soon to history.
That anger and fear were not about to disappear soon was reinforced tonight when Israeli settlers were reported to have killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy when they fired on Gazans throwing stones at the Neve Dekalim settlement.


Review/Music; Debut of Tashkent Pianist
The rippling through piano circles lately is that Eldar Nebolsin, a 19-year-old pianist from Tashkent, Uzbekistan, has a talent as startling as that of Yevgeny Kissin.
Two years ago, Mr.
Nebolsin won the Santander International Piano Competition, and he has lived in Madrid since then.
He recently began making recordings for Decca/London.
Mr.
Nebolsin's New York debut recital on Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y confirmed that there was reason for the excitement.
In matters of technique, he seems to have everything: velocity, an ear for color and balance that brings transparency and coherence to the thickest textures, and the ability to project power and volume without letting those attributes overwhelm the music.


Dr. Lester Gelb, 74, Head of Programs In Mental Health
Dr.
Lester A. Gelb, a former director of clinical services in the Department of Psychiatry and, since 1987, consultant emeritus at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 74 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Fashion Post Is Filled At Barneys
Barneys New York said yesterday that it had hired Michele Smith, a top merchant at I. Magnin, as its senior vice president and general merchandise manager in charge of women's fashion.
Effective next week, she will replace Connie Darrow, who left the company in December to join Prada, the Italian leather goods house.


List Is Out And So Is New York
Despite winning the Presidents' Trophy for the best regular-season record, the Rangers have no candidates among the three finalists for any of the National Hockey League's major awards announced yesterday.
Here are the awards, the finalists, and the Rangers who won't win, place or show:


Mandela Is Named President, Closing the Era of Apartheid
The power that had belonged to whites since they first settled on this cape 342 years ago passed today to a Parliament as diverse as any in the world, a cast of proud survivors who began their work by electing Nelson Mandela to be the first black president of South Africa.
Unopposed, Mr.
Mandela was proclaimed president without a word of dissent or even a show of hands, then sat, strangely grim-faced, while his giddy followers whooped in unparliamentary delight.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Russia Seeks Help to Fix Its Phones
Boris Y. Nemtsov, the Governor of the Nizhny Novgorod region 250 miles east of here, introduced a novel program recently: selling, for up to $450, a certificate that promises purchasers they will get telephones installed in their homes within six months instead of the years they would normally wait.
Officials said residents were snapping up the certificates.
The money raised will be spent improving the region's decrepit telephone system.
By paying interest at 1 percent a day for any delay beyond six months, the plan provides considerable incentive for the local telephone company to speed its work.
Though the method may be unorthodox and the scale relatively small, the plan indicates the huge demand for improved communications in a country where getting a dial tone can be a triumph of will, and of the lengths Russia is going to in addressing the problem.


Reporter's Notebook; Apartheid's Outcasts Have Come to the Fore
Joe Slovo may be the world's last jubilant Communist, as he demonstrated today when he wore his Marxist-red socks to an honored seat in the halls of power after 40 years of surviving all manner of political pestilence, from Stalinism abroad to apartheid at home.
"I arrived with them in 1990," said Mr.
Slovo, leader of the South African Communist party, raising his pants cuffs to show the socks that he wore back from exile four years ago when apartheid began collapsing.


American Box Turtles Decline, Perishing Cruelly in Foreign Lands
WHILE not exactly the American eagle or the Bengal tiger, the common box turtle, one of the most familiar and benign animals in the United States, may have a stronger hold on the memories and affections of millions of Americans.
Now its very appeal has subjected it to a savage assault that threatens the future of the breed.
Box turtles by the thousands are being killed each year as the result of a booming wildlife trade that sends them to Europe as pets, say scientists, conservationists and officials on both sides of the Atlantic.
Many die or are greatly weakened when jam-packed together without food or water for shipping, and many more succumb to an unsuitable European climate and to mistreatment by pet sellers and owners ignorant of the turtles' needs, they say.


No Headline
"Planned Parenthood was given a judgment for $1 million because we preached the Gospel on a public sidewalk across the street from an abortion mill." -- THE REV.
FLIP BENHAM, of Operation Rescue.  [ A16:1. ]
"Your First Amendment rights do not include the right to block access to a place of business. -- KATHY PATRICK, an attorney representing abortion clinics.  [ A16:2. ]


Fila Holding S.p.A. (FLH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A to Z Plan Spells Fiscal Responsibility
To the Editor:
The A to Z spending-cut plan, which would allow the House of Representatives to vote separately on any amendments proposed for the budget bill from A to Z, has been endorsed by a majority of the members.
Yet it fails to win your endorsement in "Foolishness, From A to Z" (editorial, May 2) because the plan represents a radical departure from business as usual in the House.
This is the point.
Our bill compels Congress to do what state and local governments, businesses and families throughout the country have had to do -- go through each item in their budget and decide if they can afford it.


Independence Bancorp Inc.(INBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pursue the Gay-Baiting Commanders
The Administration's new policy toward homosexuals in the military was given the pithy title of "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" -- signifying a willingness to tolerate gay men and lesbians as long as they kept quiet about their sexual preferences.
But bigoted commanders are pursuing homosexuals with a vengeance that appears to violate both the spirit and letter of the law.
There is one sure way for Commander in Chief Clinton and the Pentagon to stop this betrayal of the new policy: punish any commander who defies it, severely.
The new policy -- a compromise hammered out by the Administration, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Congress -- falls far short of President Clinton's original goal of allowing homosexuals to serve openly.
Instead, it bans homosexual conduct and tolerates gay service members only if their orientation remains covert.


Lamson &amp; Sessions (LMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Wave of Anticrime Fervor, States Rush to Adopt Laws
The Florida Legislature has voted to increase the size of the state's prison system by nearly one third and to try juvenile criminals, regardless of their age, as adults when they commit three felonies.
Texas has approved "no bail" provisions for sex offenders and other violent criminals, and proposals known as "three strikes and you're out" and "truth in sentencing" are finding support in state legislatures from coast to coast.
While much of the nation's attention has been focused on the Federal anticrime package to be negotiated by the House and the Senate, state legislatures have been moving even more quickly and aggressively to address the issue.
Responding to what they describe as a state of alarm among their constitutents, lawmakers are writing tough new bills and supporting ballot initiatives intended to punish criminals more severely while they are in prison and make it more difficult for them to get out.


Anni Albers, 94, Textile Artist And the Widow of Josef Albers
Anni Albers, a leading textile artist of the 20th century, died yesterday at her home in Orange, Conn., near New Haven.
She was the widow of the abstract artist Josef Albers and was 94 years old.
Mrs.
Albers was cured of lymphoma 20 years ago and died of old age, said Dr.
Samuel Bobrow, her physician.


Clinton in New York: Traffic, Tributes
President Clinton moved his health care campaign to New York City yesterday, and literally stopped traffic in midtown Manhattan for part of the morning.
He also paid quiet tribute to three fallen firefighters.
It was a day with a clear national message intended to make the case for requiring companies to contribute to the cost of their workers' insurance, the so-called employer mandate.
In an effort to show that many businesses support the idea, Mr.
Clinton visited the Pathmark supermarket at South Street and Pike Slip, on the Lower East Side.
Standing before gleaming rows of fruit and vegetables, he spoke to a small group of Pathmark workers and a large group of reporters.


Rangers Halfway to 1940 as Late Goal Ousts Caps
So now the Rangers are halfway there, at the midpoint of a journey, with five days off to rest and refresh themselves before resuming the trail.
At the end of it, four or five weeks away, a trophy gleams grail-like, in fuzzy focus, as if in a dream, so near and yet so far.
By beating Washington by 4-3 at Madison Square Garden last night, the Rangers inched closer to a Stanley Cup championship they have not enjoyed since 1940.
They eliminated the Capitals from the second round of the playoffs, the second of four possible foes.
This time it took five games, one more than they needed in the first round when they swept the Islanders in that four-of-seven game series.


Miscellany
*
IQ&amp;J Cipolla Group, Boston, the direct marketing unit of Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, changed its name to Group 121.


Spacecraft Malfunction May Thwart Mission
THE little Clementine spacecraft, which completed mapping the Moon and left lunar orbit a week ago, has suffered a serious malfunction that could prevent it from completing its mission by taking close-up pictures of an asteroid in August, the Defense Department announced yesterday.
Only last week the Pentagon tried to cut off financial support for the rest of Clementine's flight, but influential members of Congress intervened to save the mission.


Thousands of Eyes for State Police
Short of staff and short on money, the Florida Highway Patrol has enlisted a new set of allies to help its officers do battle with drunk and reckless drivers: all one million of the state's cellular telephone users, who are being urged to place a free call to the nearest patrol station when they spot wrongdoing on the highway.
Started in mid-April with the cooperation of all 10 of Florida's cellular phone companies, the "Dial *FHP" program has captured the fancy of motorists across the state and has been endorsed by politicians of every ideological stripe.
Highway patrol officials say the new service has quickly improved their ability to respond to highway offenses and motorists in distress.


Cragin Financial Corp.(MS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Politicizing Privatization
The New York City Council and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani are headed for a showdown this week on one of his key objectives -- privatizing city services.
The Council wants a role in awarding contracts, and is scheduled to vote on a bill to authorize it.
Mayor David Dinkins blocked a similar bill last December, and Mayor Giuliani threatens to veto this one.
Both men argue, correctly, that contracting is the mayor's business, not the Council's.
The symbolism of this issue is as strong as the substance.
City unions are fighting to preserve jobs against a Republican Mayor determined to reduce the payroll; they have sympathetic friends in the Council's overwhelming Democratic majority.
The new Mayor, for his part, is properly concerned with cutting the cost of city services that private contractors might perform as well or better.


Amtran Inc.(AMTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Statesman Group Inc.(STG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brain Locates Source of a Sound With Temporal, Not Spatial, Clues
ROAMING the woods on a lovely spring afternoon, a birdwatcher hears the tat-tat-tat of a woodpecker at work.
His head turns toward the sound, which came from the left, probably near that big oak tree 50 yards away.
Yes, there it is -- a downy woodpecker.
Localizing interesting sounds is an ordinary human experience, but to scientists who study the human auditory system, the feat is mind-boggling.
The woodpecker emits sound waves that travel through air, enter human ears and set off a chain reaction of impulses and computations that result in a person's being able to locate the bird's position, instantly and accurately.
How this occurs remains cloaked in mystery.


Quayle Meets Fans and Foes on 5th Ave.
Dan Quayle -- former Vice President, possible Presidential hopeful and proponent of the humble potatoe -- came to New York City yesterday to sell his book and ended up tangling with yet another nettlesome, three-syllable word.
"What's your name?" the tanned and beaming politician asked a 5-year-old girl who had appeared before him in the Barnes &amp; Noble store on Fifth Avenue, tendering two blank file cards to be autographed.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN, an officeholder who has been more or less out of the public eye since failing to win renomination as New York City's Comptroller, turned up over the weekend to speak at Windsor Castle, one of the British royal family's residences.
The former Congresswoman was at the castle for a three-day conference and retreat given by the Bishop of Oxford and the Christian Ethical Investment Group, where she spoke about ethics in investing by pension funds and charitable institutions.
Last week, she also addressed the Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufacture and Commerce.


Policy Management Systems Corp.(PMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Espirito Santo Financial Holding S.A. (ESF,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CASTLE HARLAN UNIT BUYS TRUCK COMPONENTS INC.
An investment partnership of Castle Harlan Inc., the New York merchant bank, completed the acquisition yesterday of Truck Components Inc., a maker and marketer of truck parts, in a transaction valued at $170 million.
A group of senior managers of the company also participated in the acquisition.
It was the fourth acquisition in five months by Castle Harlan Partners II, a partnership formed in 1993.
Truck Components, a holding company established in 1987, had more than $265 million in revenues in 1993.


Mediplex Group Inc.(MPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Aides Consider Fund To Pay His Private Legal Fees
White House aides are considering a legal defense fund and other ways to help President Clinton pay for lawyers he has hired to deal with both a sexual harassment suit and a special prosecutor's inquiry into his Arkansas land dealings.
Bruce Lindsey, a top aide to Mr.
Clinton, told reporters today that White House lawyers would advise Mr.
Clinton on how to pay bills that are likely to reach hundreds of thousands of dollars.


Postal Service to Resume Mail Sorting in the Bronx
Acknowledging for the first time delays in mail delivery in the Bronx, the United States Postal Service said yesterday that it will resume sorting mail in the borough to speed delivery.
Since last September mail for the Bronx has been sorted in postal processing plants in Queens and Westchester County because of a shortage of sorting capacity at the Bronx General Post Office.
Residents and borough officials said the move caused long delays in postal service, with letters mailed within the borough taking up to several weeks to arrive.


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.(VSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Awards for Mobium
The Mobium Corporation in Chicago took top honors, winning four awards yesterday at the 16th annual New York Ace Awards ceremony sponsored by the Business to Business Advertising Association of New York.
ID magazine, published by Bill Communications in New York, followed with three awards.
FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York was honored for the best full communications program under $150,000 for work done for AT&amp; T. Griffin Bacal in New York won for best full communications program over $150,000 for Associated Air Freight.


Health Plan Is Opposed


No Harm Found in Quinoline Yellow Dye
To the Editor:
Re "A Carcinogenic Dye" (letter, April 28) by Michael A. Weiner: Mr.
Weiner, a senior research fellow in the health sciences, should be well aware that medical studies with human subjects have enormous uncertainty because we can never control all the variables.
However, that he disagrees with the (uncertain) results of an (incomplete) study of vitamin supplements in Finland does not justify his dragging quinoline yellow dye into the argument.
By reading the "fine print" in the article in The New England Journal of Medicine, he learns that the vitamins that were given in the study were colored with quinoline yellow.
At this point, his imagination takes over, repeatedly indicting quinoline yellow (without supporting evidence) as "carcinogenic" and as "toxic."


Tejas Gas Corp.(TEJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unwelcome Focus on a New Anti-Drug Unit
Ernest Sayon died in the custody of a special anti-drug unit that had been in existence only three weeks, police officials said yesterday.
All nine members of the unit in the 120th Precinct known as the Street Narcotics Enforcement Unit -- a sergeant and eight officers -- were volunteers who joined the team on the recommendation of previous superiors.


Is There One More Title in Morris?
The sight of Jack Morris on the mound at Yankee Stadium last night, perhaps for the last time, prompted thoughts to leap back to that December day in 1986 when Morris was in another Yankees-related location.
He was in a conference room at the Bay Harbor Inn in Tampa, Fla., and he was prepared to shake hands with another man in the room and go to work for him.
Except George Steinbrenner let Morris walk out of the conference room and out of his hotel that day without hiring him.
Considering the affinity the Yankees' principal owner had for free-agent pitchers and winning, it was mind-boggling to watch Morris leave without a Yankee cap on his head and a Yankee contract in his pocket.


Verdicts on Heroin Sales
Six defendants were convicted and four others were acquitted yesterday in a heroin sales conspiracy case in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Eric Millan, who was charged with supervising a ring that sold heroin through a network of outlets in the Bronx, Queens, Manhattan and Brooklyn, was found guilty and faces life in prison without parole.


A Custodian Is Revealed As the Artist He Really Is
JACQUES MIDI goes about his business at the Greenburgh Town Hall as if nothing has changed.
Every night, it's pick up the trash, empty the trash cans, sweep the floors, mop the floors.
In by five, out by one.
An article about him, with one of his sculptures, is tacked up in the lobby.
But he refuses to notice that he has become the most celebrated person in the building.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed John Valentin, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 4.
Recalled Gar Finnvold, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.


Rates Continue to Rise; Traders Still Nervous
Interest rates continued to surge yesterday, rising to their highest levels since shortly after President Clinton was elected.
The most obvious source of upset during yesterday's session seemed to be the Federal Reserve Board.


An Appreciation; The Art Critic Whose Viewpoint Remains Central
Clement Greenberg, who died on Saturday at the age of 85, rose to prominence after World War II with the Abstract Expressionists he championed, to become the most important art critic the United States has produced.
Almost half a century has passed since he wrote criticism regularly -- he gave up his post as a reviewer for The Nation magazine in 1949 -- but he remains at once the most admired and excoriated writer on art, as much a touchstone of postwar American painting and sculpture as any of the painters and sculptors in whose circle he moved as an oracular presence.
Why is he still so potent a figure?
The reasons are many; it is not simply that he backed the right horses, by identifying before others did the painter Jackson Pollock and the sculptor David Smith as the ones on which America should stake its claim to artistic primacy after the war.
He did back them, strongly and effectively, and even at the risk of a certain critical inconsistency.
He often repeated his suspicion of Surrealism and his dislike of art that he saw as violent and horrific, yet both Pollock and Smith were undeniably indebted to Surrealism.
Greenberg chose to sidestep that fact (as he chose to praise the Surrealist Joan Miro by calling him a "late Cubist").


The Great Republican Gubernatorial Road Show; Six Candidates Travel the State, Seeking Convention Support, Money and Credibility
They came more for prime rib than for state politics, but the 250 people at the annual Otsego County Republican dinner here seemed pleased enough to meet George E. Pataki.
And it would be fair to say Mr.
Pataki, chewing on his ambition to become the next Governor, seemed positively thrilled to meet them -- each and every one of them.
"Nice to see you -- don't get up!" he beamed beside a full table in the stately Otesaga Hotel ballroom.
"I've got a complaint here. Not one of you has eaten your potato skins. It's the healthiest part!"


Car 54, Where Are You?


CHRONICLE
Dog bites Nobel laureate.
MOTHER TERESA, 83, has learned that not every creature responds well to human kindness.
She had to be given a rabies shot last week after a dog bit her finger.


To End Welfare, Create Real Jobs; Colombia Targets Lawyers for Terror
To the Editor:
Your April 26 article about the increased pressure that human rights groups are putting on the Colombian Government, with details of Colombia's sorry human rights record, sheds welcome attention on a serious problem that goes virtually unreported in the North American press.


Martin Marietta Materials Inc.(MLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hubert P. Earle, 75, Turnpike Official
Hubert Potter Earle, a Philadelphia lawyer and former general counsel of the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, died on Saturday in Bryn Mawr Hospital.
A resident of Bryn Mawr, he was 75.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Yankees Are Perched In Highest Spot Around
The Red Sox were not in town anymore, there were thousands of empty blue seats at Yankee Stadium and an opposing player received more cheers than any Yankee did.
But that did not detract from the festivities for the home team.
The Yankees continued coasting in the Bronx last night, coasting into first place.
Maybe this is getting serious.
Calm down, it is only May.
Check the American League standings -- the Yankees still have 132 games remaining.
Check out New York's lead, a measly one-half game over the sputtering Red Sox.
But, after defeating the Indians, 4-3, at Yankee Stadium behind Jim Abbott, the Yankees were proud because undisputed possession of first place was foreign territory to them last year.


International Recovery Corp.(INT,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Nice Drive to the Ballot Box
When President Clinton signed the National Voter Registration Act, or "motor voter" bill, into law a year ago next week, it was the final achievement of the 1960's voting rights revolution.
Yet today, resistance from individual states is threatening the law's promise of universal enfranchisement.
Blatant obstructions to the ballot box have been outlawed since 1965, when the Voting Rights Act was passed.
"Motor voter" addresses more subtle obstacles, eliminating the maze of regulations that hamper voter registration in almost every state.
With 40 percent of eligible voters unregistered, the change was long overdue.


Farm Fresh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


New York City Can Have Recycling and a Balanced Budget
To the Editor:
"Needed: A Recycling Compromise" (editorial, April 25) notes the difficulty in implementing New York City's Recycling Law (Local Law 19) at this time, when the city is straining to balance its budget.
Both goals are important and achievable.
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has yet to provide the public with convincing analysis that implementing this law would affect services in the next fiscal year, which begins July 1.


Air Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


LDDS Communications
LDDS Communications, a telecommunications company, bid $2 billion on Wednesday for Wiltel, a rival, and its shares barely budged.
But when LDDS posted lower-than-expected earnings on Friday, its shares fell.
Yesterday, they fell again, complicating the Wiltel deal, which is financed partly by LDDS stock.


Japan to Help Pentagon Acquire Technology
In a development long sought by the Pentagon, Japan's Government has agreed to help the American military acquire advanced Japanese commercial technology, like flat-panel displays and composite materials, for use in American weapons, officials said today.
Washington hopes the new defense-related technology exchange program will allow the United States to lower the cost and raise the sophistication of weaponry by drawing on Japan's expertise in the low-cost manufacture of advanced products.


Q&amp;A
Brothers and Others
Q.
Could a pair of brothers as different as Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito be born, even in separate births?
Since half the genetic material of any individual comes from each parent, is it possible for two siblings to be unrelated?


INSIDE
Rethinking Trade Strategy
The White House is wondering whether it is time for the United States to reconsider its trade strategy with Japan.
Economic analysis, page D1.
Rifkin Convicted of Murder
A Long Island jury took just two hours to find that Joel Rifkin, who has admitted killing 17 women, was sane -- and guilty of murder.
Page B1.
Killer of 33 Executed
Illinois executed John Wayne Gacy, whose convictions for murdering 33 young men and boys made him the nation's worst serial killer.
Page A12.
Sondheim's New Musical
Stephen Sondheim explores the terrain of the heart in "Passion," a tale of obsessive love.
David Richards reviews the Broadway show.
Page C15.
Rangers Go Another Round
The Rangers eliminated the Washington Capitals four games to one, advancing to the semifinals of the Stanley Cup hockey playoffs.
Page B9.


A.L. Primary Slights O'Neill
Paul O'Neill said he was not bothered by it, but the outfielder's omission from the 1994 All-Star ballot is glaring.
Blame the Yanks and bad luck.
While the balloting began yesterday, it began without the leading hitter in the major leagues being included because O'Neill lost when four Yankees drew straws for the three outfield spots the team could nominate.
It was Manager Buck Showalter's way of solving the problem.


Warming of Deep Sea Is Surprising
THE waters of the Atlantic Ocean deep below the course of Christopher Columbus's 1492 voyage have warmed by nearly six-tenths of a degree Fahrenheit in the last 35 years, oceanographers have discovered, a finding that has important implications for the study of global climate change.
The oceans are a critical part of the climate system because they absorb, store, move and eventually release heat, the system's main driving force.
Mathematical models of the system predict that sea-surface temperatures should rise by 3 to 7 degrees if, as many scientists expect, atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide double in the next 100 years.
The gas, which traps heat in the atmosphere, is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and natural gas.


Review/Theater; Sondheim Explores the Heart's Terrain
For years, people have accused Stephen Sondheim of being all head and no heart.
Whenever the subject of love arose, it seemed, he had difficulty hiding his skepticism.
He could already see the bitter end in the rosy beginning, the inevitable disenchantment lurking under the transports of ardor.
No one was cleverer at dissecting feelings.
As for feeling feelings, well, presumably that just wasn't his forte.
In "Passion," however, Mr.
Sondheim has dropped his defenses.
With the playwright and director James Lapine, he has written an unalloyed love story, one that wants to penetrate the heart's deepest mysteries.
Ironically, he has come up with his most somber musical since "Sweeney Todd." But was it supposed to be this somber?
I think not.


Chess
Quick play is the current wave splashing over the chess world.
Its time limit of 25 minutes for all moves is sufficient to satisfy the spectators who want everything to happen at express pace, and yet it is not too quick to grasp.
The Professional Chess Association opened a new cycle of Active Chess Grand Prix tournaments, sponsored by the giant computer chip maker, Intel, in the Kremlin in Moscow, from April 17 to 24.
The 24-year-old Indian grandmaster Viswanathan Anand took first prize, $30,000, out of a total purse of $160,000.
It was his second consecutive victory in a quick-chess event; he won the Melody Amber Tournament in Monaco earlier in April.


Review/Television; Case of the Missing Mason
On television's crime-drama circuit tonight, contrived fiction turns out to be more diverting than based-on-fact dithering.
NBC's middling "Perry Mason: The Case of the Lethal Lifestyle," at 8, looks positively sophisticated next to CBS's "Getting Gotti," at 9.
Can the Perry Mason franchise be salvaged after the death of Raymond Burr?
A 1973 revival of the Mason series without Mr.
Burr in the title role (he was then starring in "Ironside") faded quickly.
The producers of this evening's two-hour movie, Dean Hargrove and Fred Silverman, take a different tack.
Their new hotshot defense lawyer is Bill McKenzie (Hal Holbrook), who gets a call at his Utah ranch from his old buddy Mason, unexpectedly summoned to Washington and needing someone to cover for him at a speaking engagement in a new California hotel.
Wild Bill jumps off his horse and onto a Harley-Davidson.
Malibu, here we come.


Financing for Poor Schools Is Back in New Jersey Court
In the latest round of a dispute that has confounded the state's leaders for two decades, New Jersey will return to court next week to defend the way it finances poor school districts.
In a hearing before the State Supreme Court scheduled for Monday, the state intends to argue that it has made progress toward fulfilling the court's 1990 mandate to equalize vast disparities in spending between rich and poor districts.
New Jersey's richest schools spend $8,486 a pupil on average, and some districts much more.
The poorest spend an average of $7,058.


Critic's Notebook; The Influence of Stravinsky's Russian Roots
"The Russian Stravinsky," the theme of a series of lectures and concerts by the Brooklyn Philharmonic last weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, might seem a redundant label for a composer who was born and trained in Russia.
But of course we never think of Stravinsky as a Russian first and foremost; he was the arch-cosmopolitan, the modernist in perpetual exile, a principality unto himself.
As Robert Craft, the composer's closest associate, has observed, he was a dandy, forever reinventing himself.
He was also an imponderable legend; in the 1960's he was asked for an autograph by a man who turned out to be Frank Sinatra.
The Brooklyn program made a selection from Stravinsky's plurality of selves.
Far more serious and cohesive than standard-issue thematic programming, the series drew on recent researches into the Russian national roots of Stravinsky's early radical period (1909-1917).
The musicologist Richard Taruskin presented conclusions from his unpublished study "Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions." And the Pokrovsky Ensemble of Moscow, a group that re-enacts peasant singing and dancing, demonstrated the folk sources of "The Rite of Spring," "Renard" and "Les Noces."


Dell Computer Creates Two-Man Chief's Office
Michael Dell, whose fast-growing company suffered a humbling setback last year, has decided to share the top management duties at the Dell Computer Corporation.
The computer maker named Morton L. Topfer, an executive vice president at Motorola Inc., as the vice chairman of Dell yesterday.
The 57-year-old Mr.
Topfer will join Mr.
Dell, who is 29, in a newly formed two-member office of the chief executive.


Man Who Killed 33 Is Executed in Illnois
John Wayne Gacy, convicted 14 years ago of the sex-related killings of 33 young men and boys, was put to death by lethal injection early today as the nation's worst serial killer on record.
The execution, which took place in the old Stateville penitentiary here, followed last-minute appeals filed by Mr.
Gacy's lawyers, asserting that their 52-year-old client was mentally incompetent, that he was out of town at the time of 16 of the slayings and that Illinois' method of execution was unconstitutional.


Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.; Where Monuments Speak of a U.S. Defeat, the Talk Is of 'Peaceful Contacts'
In Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City there are Vietnamese who wash down pizza with Coke, pay for things with American dollars, wear American flag patches on jackets and yell "hello!" at any "big nose" foreigner they see.
But the country still raises patriotic banners gloating over what the Communists regard as America's defeat in the Vietnam War.
Beneath an outwardly friendly curiosity many Vietnamese display toward Americans, a predatory undertone tinged with bitter resentment is often detectable.
There are many reminders for Americans visiting Vietnam of the lacerations left by a war that ended nearly two decades ago but that still colors Vietnamese attitudes.


Suspect Is Accused Of Smuggling Aliens
A man described as a major figure in the smuggling of illegal Chinese immigrants into the United States has been arrested in New York, Federal officials said yesterday.
They said that the arrest of the man, Chen Guo Ping, who was taken into custody Friday, was a significant step in combating the problem of alien-smuggling from China.


Sea Sanctuaries Expand in U.S., Offering Refuge to a Riot of Life
IT is a hidden part of America bigger than the combined areas of Connecticut, Massachusetts and Rhode Island.
It harbors a greater diversity of life than the national parks, including odd creatures that glow in the dark and mammals the size of apartment buildings.
Its forests can grow up to two feet a day.
One of its fissures is deeper than the Grand Canyon.
And it is attracting teams of scientists eager to fathom its riches and help preserve them for the future.
This secret paradise is a network of 11 marine sanctuaries that dot the coastal waters of the United States and its territories, covering more than 14,000 square miles in all.
The sanctuary program, run by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, is in a phase of rapid expansion.
New sanctuaries are being added, budgets are growing, and teams of scientists are forming to assess the abundant wildlife.


Parks Chief Calls Gettysburg Excavation Mistake
The director of the National Park Service told a Congressional panel today that the excavation of part of the Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg, Pa., was "a tragedy" that Government procedures had failed to avert.
He also outlined new safeguards intended to insure closer cooperation between historians and planners to protect Federal parklands.


What's That You're Saying, Mr. Jackson?
Pat Riley spent today preparing the Knicks for Game 2, and he turned a deaf ear to Phil Jackson's complaints about Sunday's officiating.
Jackson, the Bulls' coach, was unhappy with several crucial fourth-quarter calls during Chicago's 90-86 loss to the Knicks Sunday in Game 1 of their four-of-seven-game playoff series.
Riley, of course, saw things differently.


Lautenberg Formally Begins Seeking Third Term


Unitil Corp.(UTL,A) reports earnings for 12mos to Mar 31


Accounts
*
National Pork Producers Council, Des Moines, to Bozell Chicago, to retain its advertising, marketing and public relations account, after a review that also included six other agencies.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $15 million to $20 million. *
Berlex Laboratories, Wayne, N.J., to Dugan/Farley Communications, Upper Saddle River, N.J., as the first agency to handle advertising and promotions for Climara, a drug awaiting Federal approval.
Billings were not disclosed.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the Mayor of Newark, Sharpe James, misstated the year that Newark received two awards.
It was 1991, not 1992, when Newark won an All-America Cities award from the National Civil League and was honored as one of the nation's most livable cities by the United States Conference of Mayors.


Finding on Turtle Evolution
AN ancient, fist-size skull discovered in South Africa sheds new light on the turtle's evolution, establishing a link between the most primitive fossil specimens and modern turtles.
Dr.
Eugene S. Gaffney, curator of the American Museum of Natural History's department of vertebrate paleontology, said the find he and a colleague are reporting revealed that major structural changes in the turtle's cranium occurred much earlier than had been believed.


Clinton, Visiting Manhattan, Says Medicaid Should Pay More in States Like New York
President Clinton said yesterday for the first time that the formula for distributing Federal Medicaid money should be changed to provide larger amounts to states like New York with large numbers of poor people.
New York officials welcomed the President's commitment, but said his pledge was not specific enough for them to endorse his health plan at this time.


New Editor Named for Observer
The New York Observer announced yesterday that Peter W. Kaplan, the executive producer of Charlie Rose's talk show on PBS, will become editor of the Manhattan-based weekly.
Mr.
Kaplan, 40, worked as a magazine editor at such publications as Conde Nast Traveler and Manhattan Inc., before he went to work for the Rose television program in September.
Earlier he was a reporter covering television at The New York Times.


More Ways to Pop Corn
To the Editor:
The popcorn alarm triggered by the Center for Science in the Public Interest (The Week in Review, May 1) unjustly implicates all movie theaters that don't air-pop in the arterial goo of coconut oil.


Unitor AS reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jim Finks, 66, Football Player Who Became N.F.L. Executive
Jim Finks, the New Orleans Saints executive who moved in pro football from player to coach to general manager to club president and almost to commissioner of the National Football League, died Sunday night at his home in Metairie, La., outside New Orleans.
He was 66.
The cause of death was lung cancer, according to Rusty Kasmiersky, a Saints spokesman.


Dial Corp.(DL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Communists as Market Reformers
Hungarians voted Sunday to put former Communists -- now called Socialists -- back into power.
As in Poland and Lithuania, market reformers had promised economic miracles they could not possibly deliver and voters vented their frustration, bringing back "professionals" who "know how to make government work."
The West need not despair the resurrection of Hungarian Communists.
Their pledge to keep Hungary headed toward democracy and markets is credible.
The former Communist Government brought Hungary modest market reforms in the 1970's.
And the Socialist leader, Gyula Horn, as Foreign Minister in the former Communist Government, smashed a gaping hole in the Iron Curtain when he opened Hungary's border in 1989 to refugees fleeing from East Germany.


Mercantile Stores Co.(MST,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
When LES ASPIN resigned under pressure as President Clinton's Secretary of Defense last December, he said, "It's time for me to take a break and to undertake a new kind of work."
His "new work," it turns out, is a continuation of the career he had before he decided to run for Congress in 1970: he is returning to academe.
Marquette University, in Milwaukee, announced the appointment of Mr.
Aspin as Distinguished Professor of International Policy.
He will also work with the newly established Marquette University Washington Center for Government, an academic program that places students in internships with national political leaders.


Perini Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bank United of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Southern Electronics Corp.(SECX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


It's Franco To Rescue As Mets Triumph
John Franco had wanted this one for personal redemption almost as much as he wanted it for the Mets.
Three days ago, Franco blew a one-run lead in the worst fashion -- he walked four Cardinal batters to give away two runs.
Two days ago, Franco watched Bobby Jones close his own one-run game in St.
Louis.
On Sunday, Josias Manzanillo was the one to hold a one-run advantage and earn the save.
Tonight at Olympic Stadium, Franco got a second chance.


Executives Balking At Clinton Health Plan
As Congress moves toward a vote on health care, the great majority of the nation's top executives are lining up against President Clinton's plan -- particularly his insistence that companies insure all their workers and pay most of the cost, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Business opposition to the Clinton plan, with its mandatory coverage, appears to have increased in recent months, some executives suggested in interviews after the poll.
Some say they oppose the plan even though it might reduce their health insurance costs, because they are philosophically opposed to giving the Government a greater role in health care, as the President would do.


ABC Announces 6 New Series for Fall
ABC, the broadcast network that most successfully introduced new shows last year, announced a fall prime-time lineup yesterday with just six new series.
Among them are the first situation comedy about an Asian-American, a new drama from the makers of "Thirtysomething" and two new shows featuring stand-up comedians.


Christopher Presses Mexico To Insure Its Election Is Fair
In a sign of growing American concern that political strife could arise from Mexico's coming presidential election, Secretary of State Warren Christopher urged the Mexican Government today to take further steps to assure a credible outcome, officials of the two countries said.
Publicly, Mr.
Christopher took the opportunity of a biannual meeting of senior United States and Mexican officials to praise the economic and political changes undertaken by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and voice confidence that the Aug. 21 vote would be free and fair.


Continental Can Co.  Inc.(CAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


More Rats, Fewer Dollars
"In New York City, as in all great seaports, rats abound. . . . In the whole city relatively few blocks are entirely free of them . . . some authorities believe that in the five boroughs there is a rat for every human being."
Joseph Mitchell wrote those words in "The Rats on the Waterfront," an eerie piece of reportage published in The New Yorker in 1944 -- one year after rats infected with bubonic plague were intercepted on a ship in the harbor and prevented from bringing the disease ashore.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Thrill of the Thaw


Sports of The Times; Phil Jackson Takes a Trip On Zen Ferry
SOMEBODY once told me about a Zen Buddhist teacher who was asked to give an example of true wisdom.
The teacher took an ice cream cone and mashed it into his forehead and watched as the crumbs and the ice cream dribbled down his face and onto the floor.
People giggled, but later they realized that true wisdom often comes from shock and surprise.
The ice-cream-cone story slipped into mind the other day when Phil Jackson took his Chicago Bulls for a ride on the Staten Island Ferry instead of going to practice.
"Phil had the tendency to do weird things," Horace Grant said yesterday, getting the point.


China Allows a Prominent Dissident to Leave
A onetime Communist propaganda chief who became a vociferous advocate of democracy in China and whose case has been followed by the Clinton Administration will be allowed to leave the country this month to study and lecture at Columbia University, Western diplomats said today.
Ten previous petitions by the dissident, Yu Haocheng, to go abroad were refused by Communist authorities.


CHRONICLE
Princess Elizabeth may happy to be getting an award, but BRIGITTE BARDOT, who was made a knight of the Legion of Honor last year, is threatening to renounce her prize.
The 59-year-old former movie star, who has spent 20 years lobbying, writing and protesting on behalf of animals, said on Monday that she would turn in her Legion of Honor, France's top civilian award, unless the Government changed its policies toward animals.


A Collapse at Christie's: Half of Offerings Unsold
The crowd packing the salesroom at Christie's last night watched in amazement as the market for Impressionist and modern art fell like a house of cards.
Although the auction house had some of its best offerings in years, 38 of the 76 works offered failed to sell.
The auction totaled only $50.6 million, far below Christie's estimate of $88.04 million to $119.6 million.


Glendale Federal Bank (GLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.69
3.77
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.23
4.32
2.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.75
4.81
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.31
7.48
5.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.63
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.45
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.49
6.52
5.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Kent Electronics Corp.(KNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Mobil Has Begun a Review That May Lead to Cost Cuts
The Mobil Corporation has begun a review that may lead to cost reductions and asset sales at its $3.45 billion chemical business.
Mobil's chemical unit is one of many chemical producers weakened by an oversupply of worldwide manufacturing capacity.
Earnings at Mobil's chemical unit fell to $44 million last year from $217 million in 1991, according to the company's annual report.
In the same period, Mobil tied up $1 billion on capital expenditures at the chemical business.


Pitcher's 15th-Inning Bunt Boosts Braves
Braves 9, Phillies 8
The Atlanta Braves overcame a seven-run deficit in the ninth inning, then beat the visiting Philadelphia Phillies, 9-8, last night when pitcher Mike Stanton bunted over the head of third baseman Tom Quinlan in the 15th inning.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  MANDELA TAKES OFFICE
With the commanding dignity that has carried him through more than half a century of defiance, captivity and conciliation, Nelson Mandela was sworn in as the first black President of South Africa.
A1


Rangers Kick Off Skates and Wait
Once again, the Rangers benefit from a break of their own making.
They rest and wait between rounds, while their next opponent expends extra energy to advance in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
While the Devils and the Bruins battle tonight (and, possibly, Friday night) for the right to meet them, the Rangers have two days away from practice followed by three days of workouts before opening the third round of the tournament with home games at Madison Square Garden on Sunday and Tuesday nights.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FEDDERS CORP., Peapack, N.J., a manufacturer of room air-conditioners, said its Fedders International unit would move its headquarters to Liberty Corner, N.J.
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP, Cincinnati, agreed to acquire the closely held Mutual Federal Savings Bank of Miamisburg, Ohio, in a stock swap valued at $21.2 million.


Gacy, Killer of 33, Is Put To Death as Appeals Fail
John Wayne Gacy, convicted 14 years ago of the sex-related killings of 33 young men and boys, was put to death by lethal injection early today as the nation's worst serial killer on record.
The execution, which took place in the old Stateville Penitentiary here, followed last-minute appeals by Mr.
Gacy's lawyers, asserting that their 52-year-old client was mentally incompetent, that he was out of town at the time of 16 of the killings and that Illinois' method of execution was unconstitutional.


Air Canada To Buy Jets From Airbus
After intense trans-Atlantic competition among aircraft manufacturers, Air Canada announced today that it would replace its fleet of 35 aging American-made DC-9's with the A319 airplanes produced by Airbus Industrie, the European consortium.
Air Canada said it would acquire 25 of the A319's, which are twin-engine, 112-seat aircraft, and had taken an option on an additional 10 of the planes.
The carrier, based in Montreal, did not announce a price, but the A319 is listed in the Airbus catalogue at $39 million, which would value the initial order at about $1 billion.


Boys Choir at the Apollo
The Boys Choir of Harlem is celebrating its 25th-anniversary season with two performances at the Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
The concerts, the choir's first appearances at the Apollo, will include spirituals and classical, gospel and hip-hop selections.
Tickets are $10 to $27.50.
Information: (212) 864-0372.


Giuliani's Budget Proposes Cuts For Spending and Work Force
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed a $31.6 billion budget for New York City yesterday that would reduce spending slightly for the first time in 16 years and sharply cut the municipal work force in almost every major agency except the Police and Fire Departments.
Submitting his first executive budget to the City Council, Mr.
Giuliani said the city "has been spending itself beyond its economy" for more than a decade, creating perennial gaps between what it spends and what its tax base can support.
The Mayor said the city's overspending had drained the local economy, driving private industry from the city.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
DEAR DIARY:
The other day I was in the window-side bed of a semi-private room at Lenox Hill Hospital, awaiting the surgeon's decision on when to separate me from my gallbladder.
It was about 9 A.M.
The dreary rain of the two previous days had passed, and the sun was starting to disperse the remaining clouds.
It mattered little to me, stuck in my ninth-floor room, unable to enjoy the change beyond an occasional waft of breeze.


Key Chip Ratio Gained in April
The Semiconductor Industry Association's closely watched book-to-bill ratio edged up to 1.14 in April from 1.13 in March, as chip orders set a record for a second month.
A book-to-bill ratio of 1.14 indicates that for every $100 in semiconductor shipments to the United States market, chip makers received $114 in new orders.


A Utility Gets Ready to Compete
In California, a new world of power is taking shape, and none of the state's three big private utilities may be as ready as the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, which has been preparing for the last eight years to compete with outside rivals.
The California Public Utilities Commission said last month that it was considering issuing an order in August allowing electric producers other than P.G.&amp; E. and the two other state-regulated utilities to sell power starting in 1996 to large industrial and commercial customers.
Outsiders can now sell power to the three state utilities, but not directly to customers.


God of Islam Didn't Command Shootings
To the Editor:
The claim that God told Colin Ferguson to catch the Long Island Rail Road train and kill white people, attributed to Khalid Muhammad, a former spokesman of the Nation of Islam, and the wide coverage of that absurd claim (front page, April 21), damages the reputation of the religion of 10 million United States Muslims and 1.5 billion Muslims around the world.


Teamwork Takes On a New Meaning
On the streets of midtown Manhattan this week, John Paxson keeps running into perfect strangers who act as if he is a neighborhood acquaintance out for a stroll with the dog.
They make easy eye contact with Chicago's veteran shooting guard.
They tend to smile.
"Nice shot," say the hardened, Bulls-hating New Yorkers.


Kriva Palanka Journal; On Patrol (U.S. Style) in the Balkans
About 12 miles northwest of this village in the mountainous Balkan corner where Macedonia, Serbia and Bulgaria meet, a little bit of America has sprung up, heavily motorized and heavily armed.
The soldiers of what is, as far as their officers know, the first American ground combat unit ever to serve in the Balkans have brought with them comforts that are most uncommon in the mountain villages of one of Europe's most backward regions.


BBC Plans International Expansion
In an effort to take a bigger share of rapidly growing television markets around the world, the British Broadcasting Corporation said today that it planned to create news and entertainment channels in Europe, Asia and the United States.
The BBC said its international expansion, which would put it in more direct competition with the likes of Ted Turner, Rupert Murdoch and the American broadcasting networks, would take place through a partnership with Pearson P.L.C., one of Britain's largest communications companies.


Posthumous Heirs
To the Editor:
The legal question of how long after one's death can heirs be created from frozen sperm, which is raised in "15 Vials of Sperm: The Unusual Bequest of an Even More Unusual Man" (Law page, April 29) was anticipated more than 250 years ago by Jonathan Swift in his description of the Struldbruggs in Gulliver's Travels, part III: "A Voyage to Luggnagg."


Sharpe James Wins a Third Term as Mayor of Newark
Mayor Sharpe James of Newark easily turned aside challenges from three opponents tonight to win a third term as leader of New Jersey's largest city.
In Atlantic City, the state's seaside gambling resort where four of the last seven mayors were convicted on corruption charges, Mayor James Whelan was rewarded for four scandal-free years with a second term in office.


Diet Drug May Harm the Brain
A widely used diet drug may cause lasting and possibly harmful changes in parts of the brain that regulate appetite and mood, according to a report on studies in monkeys that is being published today.
The drug, dexfenfluramine, is widely used in Europe.
Although not yet approved for use on its own in the United States, it is found in a 50-50 combination with levofenfluramine in its sister drug, fenfluramine, which is marketed here as Pondimin.
Both dexfenfluramine and fenfluramine are appetite suppressants that act on nerve cells in the brain that release serotonin, a nerve messenger that influences appetite, mood and sleep.
The nerves found damaged by dexfenfluramine play "a role in regulating mood, appetite, sleep, impulse control, sexual activity, aggression and some hormone action," said one of the researchers, Dr.
George Ricaurte, an assistant professor of neurology at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.
In a study in which high doses of dexfenfluramine were given to squirrel monkeys for four days, Dr.
Ricaurte and his collaborators at the National Institute of Mental Health and National Institute on Drug Abuse in Bethesda, Md., found extensive damage to nerves in the animals' brains for as long as a year and a half after brief treatment with the drug.
Although the dose used in the study was higher than people take, Dr.
Ricaurte noted that people often took it twice a day for six months or longer and that the drug stayed in human tissue about seven times longer than in that of the test animals.
"Toxic doses could be reached, and there is definite cause for concern that humans treated with dexfenfluramine may be at risk of brain injury," he said.
The findings appear in The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington, Mass., has applied to the Food and Drug Administration for approval to market dexfenfluramine in the United States.
William Boni, corporate communications executive for Interneuron, said: "Our new drug application is under review. We don't think it is appropriate to discuss the drug's safety publicly." JANE E. BRODY


Books of The Times; One Disney Character's Real Life
A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes  My Story  By Annette Funicello with Patricia Romanowski  Illustrated. 237 pages.
Hyperion. $22.95
Who's the little lady
who's as dainty as a dream?


Perrigo
The Perrigo Company, a nonprescription drug concern, reported record third-quarter earnings yesterday.
But it also warned of a slowdown in the fourth quarter.
And that was the news analysts paid attention to as they cut their ratings and profit projections.
Perrigo shares lost 30 percent of their value.


U.S. Is Urged To Allow In More Haitians
Because of the new policy announced by President Clinton to grant hearings to all Haitian asylum seekers, the top United Nations official on refugee matters and numerous human rights groups are pressing the United States to let more Haitians in.
Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said in an interview on Monday that in light of the recent surge of violent repression in Haiti, the Administration should admit a higher percentage of Haitian refugees than the 5 percent of applicants it has accepted so far.


Theater in Review
Wilderness  Pan Asian Repertory Playhouse 46, St.
Clement's Church 423 West 46th Street Clinton


Review/Rock; Shellac Plus Three
The basic pop song has been under assault since the 1960's.
Psychedelic jamming, extended disco vamps, hard-rock riffs and hip-hop jump-cuts have dismantled the old structures.
Now listeners grab the beat and hold on.
At the Thread Waxing Space on Monday night, four alternative-rock bands riffed, ranted and droned in songs that ignored pop's rules.
Shellac is led by Steve Albini, now known as the producer who put the punk-rock bite into albums by Nirvana, P. J. Harvey and others.
But he made his name in the 1980's leading Big Black, a belligerent post-punk band powered by a drum machine.
With Shellac he has a human drummer, Todd Trainer, who wallops the beat in tandem with Bob Weston's bass lines.
Mr.
Albini sings, in conversational tones or with punky aggression, while he doles out guitar chords and bursts of noise.


British and Irish Afraid Ulster Peace Proposal Is Losing Impetus
British and Irish officials fear that the peace proposal put forward by their Governments in December is losing impetus, dimming widespread hopes that the proposal had raised for an end to the 25-year guerrilla war that has killed more than 3,100 people in this British province.
After a relative lull in killing that lasted more than four months, the lack of political progress between the Governments, the Irish Republican Army and the I.R.A.'s political wing, Sinn Fein, has led to a new surge in violence.
The killing involves the I.R.A., which wants Northern Ireland to join with the republic, and Protestant paramilitary groups that want the province to remain British.


Press Balks at Security Plan for World Cup
A dispute over an unusual demand for security checks of reporters who want to cover the coming soccer World Cup matches is threatening to disrupt news coverage of the international sports event.
Citing a need to deter terrorism, the organizing committee of the soccer championship is requiring reporters seeking press credentials to sign waivers authorizing law-enforcement agencies to provide any information they may have about the reporters.


Israeli and Palestinian Officials Tour Jericho on Eve of Its Transfer
On the eve of a long-awaited transfer of power in Jericho from Israel to the Palestinians, officials from both sides toured government offices, a hospital and archeological sites today to prepare a handover to a Palestinian administration.
Authority will officially change hands after the expected arrival of several hundred Palestinian policemen, who could start entering from Jordan on Wednesday, the officials said.
"These offices have to be secured by the police force," said Jamil Tarifi, the head of a Palestinian liaison team on civilian affairs.


United Retail Group Inc.(URGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Eating Well
THIS is the season when suburbanites drag out the barbecue that they forgot to clean before they put it away last fall.
Certain apartment dwellers are actually jealous and would love to have a grill to clean.
But the wonderful flavor that grilling imparts to food seems out of reach without a backyard or terrace.
It's top-of-the-stove grills into the breach.
While not offering the opportunity for showmanship that a cook can achieve outdoors, the grills have two of the more important advantages of backyard cooking.
There's the health aspect: grilling requires little fat.
And there's taste: indoor grilling produces a very respectable version of the flavor resulting from outdoor grilling.


Thermo Instrument Systems(THI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


The Charming Rebel Behind the Camera
At the age of 85, his bright blue eyes still twinkling with mischief, Henri Cartier-Bresson continues to enjoy playing the rebel.
So it seemed quite in character that arguably the most famous photographer alive today should announce that he wanted to talk about drawing.
"I've never been interested in photography per se," he said.
"I don't know anything about photography. I'm interested neither in my photographs nor those of others except close friends. For me, photography is instant drawing. My real obsession is drawing."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Tom Browning, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


You Had to See It, No Matter How You Looked at It


Primark Corp.(PMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Norman J. Garrett; Press Officer, 67
Norman J. (Skip) Garrett, a press officer for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation for the last 23 years, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer of the salivary glands, his office said.


Loewen Group (LWNGF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Joe Layton, the director, producer and choreographer, misidentified the lyricist for the 1962 Broadway musical "No Strings." Richard Rodgers wrote the lyrics as well as the music.
The lyricist with whom Rodgers had often collaborated, Oscar Hammerstein 2d, died in 1960.


Ex-Trader Proclaims Innocence
In his first public appearance since being accused of a $350 million fraud by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, Joseph Jett, a former bond trader, said yesterday that he was innocent, and asked a court to order Kidder to release nearly $5 million of his money frozen in accounts at the brokerage firm.
Outside the courtroom in the New York State Supreme Court building in lower Manhattan, Mr.
Jett emphatically denied any wrongdoing, and said he hoped to tell his whole story later.
"I do hope to be able to comment," he said.
Until yesterday, Mr.
Jett had offered no public response to the charges by Kidder, and its parent company, General Electric.


Elbit Ltd. (ELBTF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 Shops to Promote Public Service Ads
The Advertising Council said yesterday that it had selected the Seattle office of McCann-Erickson and BBDO San Francisco to become the first agencies to represent and promote the use of its public service campaigns in local markets.
Previously, an in-house team at the council's office in New York had handled efforts to encourage the media in local markets to donate space and time to running the council's public service announcements.
As part of the initial effort in the two cities, McCann Seattle and BBDO San Francisco will represent, on a pro bono basis, commercials and print advertisements featuring familiar figures like Smokey Bear, McGruff the Crime Dog and Vince and Larry, the crash dummies.


Central Reserve Life Corp.(CRLC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sphere Drake Holdings Ltd.(SD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The main article yesterday about the South African Parliament's election of Nelson Mandela as President misstated the site of an assassination attempt against a former Prime Minister, Hendrik F. Verwoerd.
He was wounded by a gunman in 1960 at an exposition in Johannesburg, not at Parliament. (In 1966 he was stabbed to death in the parliamentary chamber called the House of Assembly, in Cape Town.)


Denver's New Airport Still a 'Field of Dreams'
When Denver officials started selling the idea in the early 1980's that the city needed a new airport, they built their pitch on some basic promises: build it and they will come; build it and it will work; build it and it will be completed on time and for the price we have projected.
But the biggest public works project in Colorado's history -- financed by investor bonds and $500 million in Federal grants -- is having trouble delivering on those promises.


The Plot Thickens For Knicks And Bulls
They butt heads and then each team retreats, plotting their next moves and preparing for the coming collision.
Thus we have the Knicks and the Bulls on the eve of Game 2 in the Eastern Conference semifinals.
The Knicks' preparation today at their SUNY-Purchase practice site included what Derek Harper called the "soft trap," intended to put pressure on players bringing the ball upcourt.


Giuliani Rejects Contract With School Custodians
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday rejected a tentative contract agreement between the Board of Education and school custodians that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines had praised as a breakthrough for the school system.
Mr.
Cortines responded by defending the agreement and by saying to City Hall, "Let's not reject a pact that offers us so much."


A Rare Sight


The Terrorists Turned Italy Against Them
To the Editor:
Having lived in Italy in 1978 during the kidnapping of the Christian Democratic leader Aldo Moro, I found "The Education of an Assassin" (Op-Ed, April 23), Robert Katz's apologia for Moro's murderer, Mario Moretti, unfortunate.
Mr.
Katz uncritically presents Mr.
Moretti's justification for killing Moro and blames Christian Democratic leaders, who refused to negotiate with the Red Brigades.


Expanding the Reach of New York Wine
IF a novel venture in the Finger Lakes succeeds, residents of New York State will soon have a chance to buy the broadest array of the state's wines ever.
Joyce and Arthur Hunt, the owners of Hunt Country, a small winery in Branchport, N.Y., are tackling a problem that has long beset much of New York's wine industry: the timely delivery of wines to stores and restaurants statewide.
The wineries now sell most of their output in their own tasting rooms and in their region.


In School; With many battles won, a retired professor of children's literature fights fiercely for peace.
The white Buick was speeding through Connecticut toward Harvard University shortly after dawn yesterday.
Francelia Butler, 81, retired professor of children's literature, had just finished telling stories about the time she persuaded Isaac Bashevis Singer and Big Bird to lecture at her University of Connecticut classes and about how she fled Paris in 1940 as the Nazis marched in, and about her efforts to singlehandedly desegregate a Washington hotel during the Depression, when suddenly something shocking occurred right there on Interstate 84.
Francelia Butler stopped talking.
Sitting quietly in the front passenger seat, she pulled out some note cards and studied them.
Later in the morning she was to be honored at Harvard before a thousand fifth and sixth graders, as founder of the Peace Games, an annual role-playing festival that teaches children the value of cooperation and nonviolence.
"They just want me to speak for a couple of minutes," she said, fingering the cards.
"Oddly enough, I get very nervous and shy before crowds."


Seeing a U.S. Policy Shift, Traders Push Dollar Higher
The dollar moved sharply higher against the German mark, the Japanese yen and other leading currencies yesterday, as traders around the world began to conclude that recent signals from the Clinton Administration favoring a stronger dollar constitute a shift in exchange-rate policy.
In a rally that started overnight in Tokyo, the dollar gained momentum through the day.
Its rise yesterday was widely seen as the catalyst that prompted a strong performance by world stock and bond markets.


President Mandela Takes Over
Inaugurations unite winners and losers, proclaim new eras and provide a snapshot, a moment frozen in time, for a huge audience.
Nelson Mandela's inaugural in Cape Town yesterday was all of that and more.
Over a billion television viewers around the world, surely a record in this department, saw him take the oath as South Africa's first black President.
It was like being alive in the time of Lincoln, whose great address Mr.
Mandela echoed in affirming that South Africans finally had a government of, by and for the people.
Most remarkable was the orderly way in which old white political citadels fell overnight to new black majorities in both national and provincial parliaments.
Former prisoners mingled civilly with their erstwhile oppressors, and new anthems and flags became part of the rites.
In a striking and moving gesture, Mr.
Mandela even paused to thank the white warders who had become his friends during his 27 years in prison, forming a bond that surmounted the walls of apartheid.


Lois G. Forer, 80, a Judge and Author, Dies
Lois G. Forer, an author, a retired Philadelphia judge and a lifelong advocate for the young, the elderly and the poor, died on Monday at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
A Philadelphia resident, she was 80.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, her family said.


Form of Insanity Defense Planned for the Next Rifkin Trial
Joel Rifkin's new lawyer says he expects to pursue another form of insanity defense when the convicted murderer goes on trial again this summer in the killing of two women he buried in Suffolk County.
The court-appointed lawyer, Martin Efman, said today that he planned to show that Mr.
Rifkin suffered from an "adopted child syndrome" and a multiple-personality disorder and was therefore legally insane when he killed 17 women.


Marchette Chute, 84, Biographer Of Shakespeare and Chaucer
Marchette Chute, a biographer of Shakespeare, Chaucer and Ben Jonson, died on Friday at the Madison Nursing Home in Montclair, N.J.
She was 84 and lived at the nursing home.
She died of pneumonia, said Elizabeth Hauser, her niece.


SOUTH AFRICANS HAIL PRESIDENT MANDELA; FIRST BLACK LEADER PLEDGES RACIAL UNITY
With the commanding dignity that has carried him through more than half a century of defiance, captivity and conciliation, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela became the first black President of South Africa today.
He stood before a crowd of world leaders who shunned this capital during its decades of infamy, and in a husky, resolute voice swore the oath to become the 10th leader of South Africa since its union in 1910, but the first elected with the participation of the black majority.


William Dickey, Poet and Teacher, Is Dead at 65
William Dickey, a poet whose work spanned more than four decades, died on May 3 at Kaiser Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 65 and lived in San Francisco.
The cause was complications from surgeries, said his companion, Leonard Sanazaro.


Dance for Joy! Come Dance a Toyi-Toyi!
Hours before Nelson Mandela took possession of the Government, and had his air force delight an outdoor throng with a fly-over wafting rainbow-hued vapors, Elsie Njokweni was dancing her shoes off in the most fitting of places.
She was a bobbing, crooning blur aboard one of the packed commuter trains from the Soweto ghetto, traditionally a sardine-can affair for the ostracized black underclass of apartheid, but today a vessel of historic exultation.


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Brown
The Bears, left out of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament last year, found themselves in the right niche, the No. 7 seeding, this time when the selection committee matched up the 12 teams for the 24th annual event.


Remembering Pericles
To the Editor:
Much as I applaud John Newhouse's motive and message in celebrating the union of Pericles and Aspasia in "The First Power Couple" (Op-Ed, May 1), 1994 is not a particularly elegant anniversary of Pericles' birth in 494 B.C. -- precisely 2,488 years ago -- because counting backward (from the beginning of our era) is not at all the same as counting forward.
I hope to be on hand when we can all celebrate the 2,500th anniversary of Pericles' birth -- in the year 2006.
BEN DICKINSON  New York, May 2, 1994


LeaRonal Inc.(LRI,N) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 6
Apr. 29
May 7
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.0
Gasoline stocks
220.4
215.7
220.5
Distillate stocks
105.0
103.6
99.0
Crude imports, daily
7.5
7.3
6.5
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.6
1.5
Crude stocks
335.2
338.5
346.3
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
96.2
94.8
89.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


CHRONICLE
With the Andy Warhol Museum about to open in Pittsburgh, MICHAEL CHOW, the artist's longtime friend, decided it was unthinkable to let the occasion pass unnoticed in New York.
"I think it is a pity that New York is not celebrating this, so I took the opportunity to do so," Mr.
Chow said yesterday as he described his plans for a party tonight at his restaurant on East 57th Street.
"Andy spent the 1960's, 70's and 80's doing different things, so I am bringing all the people he knew together in the dull 90's to reminisce about him."


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Legislator Urges Diplomacy to Improve Rights in China
The chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee said today that he expects China to meet President Clinton's human rights demands as a condition to renewing Beijing's trade status.
If it does, he said, the Administration should stop threatening China with sanctions and use other means to promote human rights.
The chairman, Representative Lee Hamilton, an influential foreign-policy voice, also urged President Clinton to lay the groundwork for a policy that will take account of United States trade, security and political interests.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH DE CROY, the Princess of Solre, a descendant of Hungarian kings from the Holy Roman Empire, has a mission that has occupied her for almost 25 years.
She saves animals who are abandoned, abused or wounded by operating a shelter called the Refuge de Thiernay in Nevers in central France.
Today, she will be honored for her efforts at the Metropolitan Club, on East 60th Street, when she receives the Founders Award from the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.


A Treasure Hunt For Korean Foods
WHAT Asian cuisine is more fiery than Chinese, heartier than Japanese and faster to prepare than Indian?
The answer is Korean.


Limited Inc.(LTD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Albany Court Backs Ruling On Homeless
The state's top court ordered New York City today to pay more than $3.5 million in fines to 5,000 homeless families that have been forced to spend nights on tables, chairs and floors in city offices rather than in suitable shelters.
Advocates for the homeless said the 7-0 ruling by the Court of Appeals was a stinging condemnation of former Mayor David N. Dinkins's management of homelessness policy, and said that it could undermine plans by his successor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, to overhaul the shelter system.
Coming less than a week after Mr.
Giuliani announced a tough new homeless plan, the ruling, critics said, served as a reminder that New York's courts will force the city to provide emergency housing immediately to families in need.
Advocates Are Confident
Mr.
Giuliani said last week that the city would begin denying shelter to homeless families who refuse to participate in drug and alcohol treatment and job training programs.
But advocates for the homeless, including those who filed the lawsuit that led to today's ruling, have predicted that New York's courts will not allow homeless families to be tossed into the streets.
They said that today's ruling reinforces their case.


A Pair of Comebackers Come Way Back
At last, just when the formlessness of the 1994 season threatened to spread into summer torpor, we have two signal golf occurrences on two different continents on the same day.
A happy convergence on Sunday provided victories by John Daly in the BellSouth Classic in Atlanta and by Seve Ballesteros in the Benson &amp; Hedges International in England.
These victories could not have come sooner, both for the men involved and for the golf public.
A return to form of Daly, he of the Promethean drives, and of Ballesteros, the brooding artist of the fairways, is fortuitous.


Chambers Development Co.  Inc.(CDV.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Simon Property Group Inc.(SPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a jury award of more than $1 million in punitive damages to a Houston abortion clinic referred incorrectly to the history of such actions.
This was not the largest civil award against the anti-abortion movement; on Feb. 11, 1991, a jury in Portland, Ore., ordered an anti-abortion group and more than 30 opponents of abortion to pay a clinic $8.2 million in actual and punitive damages.
Last week the Supreme Court, without comment, refused to consider an appeal of that award.


It's Spring Fever For Sports Fans; Hailing Knicks and Rangers
James Rossi felt a little guilty about skipping his daughter's 10th birthday party Monday evening to catch the Rangers on television.
His best friend, Rusty Liberatore, assured him it was fine.
"Don't you realize it's been 54 years since the Rangers last won the Stanley Cup?" Mr.
Liberatore said.
"You're allowed to do these things."


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a little girl who battled the wind as her mother hailed a taxi misidentified the avenue.
It was Riverside Drive, not West End Avenue, at 86th Street.


Camera Maker Signs Lease to Stay on L.I.
Spurned last year when it tried to build a new corporate headquarters on state-owned land in Melville, Olympus America said today that it had signed a six-year lease to occupy a former Grumman Corporation building in a nearby commercial area and that it would remain on Long Island.
The signing caps an intense effort by Suffolk County, New York State and the Town of Huntington to find an alternate site for the Japanese-owned manufacturer of cameras and medical equipment, and to provide incentives to keep the company, which employs more than 600 people on Long Island, from moving away.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.(ECO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treasuries Surge, Aided By Dollar and Auction
Prices of Treasury securities surged more than a point yesterday as a rebounding dollar and a well-received three-year note auction helped sentiment after two-days of sharp losses.
The buying came from both retail and institutional bond traders and allowed the market to recoup almost half of the losses sustained on Friday and Monday.


Ericsson (ERICY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Central Park, Volunteer Unit Aids the Hapless of In-Line Skating
In knee and wrist guards and helmet, George Gianaris, a vice president at Smith Barney Shearson, is demonstrating how to brake.
Knees bent slightly, arms extended forward, Mr.
Gianaris, 47, glides down the hill near the West 72d Street entrance to Central Park.
With a forceful snap of his left heel, he pushes the rubber knob on the back of his skate into the pavement and screeches to a stop.


McDermott International Inc.(MDR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The 2d Step in the Budget Process
The executive budget that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani released yesterday is essentially the second step in a long process by which the New York City government determines its budget for the next fiscal year, which begins on July 1.
In February, the Mayor presented a fiscal plan with projections of spending and revenue for the next four years.
Its details provided a preview of many budget elements announced yesterday.


Perrigo Co.(PRGO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yekimov Shadows Armstrong In Mountains
Although 106 bicycle racers started today's sixth stage of the Tour DuPont, Vyacheslav Yekimov had eyes only for Lance Armstrong, Armstrong had eyes only for Yekimov and Andrea Chiurato almost stole the overall lead.
This was the seventh day of the 12-day stage race, the most important outside Europe.
The day's 138-mile stage, the longest of the tour, was also the first of three consecutive long races in the mountains.


Review/Theater; Musical Visit to Southwestern Bordello
Jogging and step aerobics notwithstanding, it is likely that there are still tired businessmen in the world.
The question is, are they tired enough for "The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public," a glitzy musical that tries very hard to live up to the lower standards of Las Vegas.
It's got the leggy showgirls, the glowing neon, the costumes cut up to here and down to there, the M.C. with the frilly tuxedo shirt, the clink-clink-clink of slot machines paying off, and Siegfried and Roy (portrayed by one actor, half of whom is made up as Siegfried, the other half as Roy).


A Lack of Money and Edgy Dissent Delay the P.L.O.'s Assumption of Power
On Sunday night a distress cable from Nabil Shaath, the chief Palestinian negotiator in Cairo, landed on the desk of Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman in Tunis, detailing the trouble the organization faced as it tried to carry out a peace agreement with Israel after 46 years of conflict.
"I have just sent $60,000, all secured through personal guarantees and loans, to finance the entry of some of our troops into Gaza," Mr.
Shaath's cable read.
"I cannot do more. Please send money; otherwise the situation will become very difficult."


Egyptians Protest Death of Lawyer
Some 2,000 lawyers shouted anti-Government slogans at the offices of an Egyptian bar association today to protest the death in police custody of a lawyer who represented Muslim militants.
Human right groups in Egypt and abroad said they suspected that the Government had tortured the lawyer, Abdel-Harith Madani, to death.


Uni-Select Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT LUNCH WITH: Andrew Young; A Preacher Had a Friend Called Martin
Andrew Young makes his way across the main dining room at Paschal's with an easy stream of how-ya-doing's and hey-how-are-ya's, ever the low-key pol.
It is a gentle spring afternoon, and this restaurant seems as good a place as any to sit and talk about movement days, when the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was a controversial young man and Mr.
Young was his friend.
Back then, the black-owned Paschal's was one of the only places in Atlanta where they and the other young organizers of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference could meet.


In Very Fine Print, the Treasury Defines a Lobbyist
Congress repealed the tax deduction for lobbying in last year's budget legislation, but in the fog of lawmaking it neglected to say just what lobbyists do that is now taxable.
So today the Treasury Department issued a 30-page definition of lobbying, imposing a micrometer's precision on an activity that could be likened to an old description of pornography: indefinable but plenty apparent to anyone who saw it.


Accounts
*
Polymer Technology Corp., Wilmington, Mass., to Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for its Boston Envision contact lenses, previously at Brugnatelli &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.


Food Notes
. . . And the Grilling Is Easy
Memorial Day and the start of the outdoor grilling season are almost here, and so is help.
Grillers, those who are seasoned and those making their debuts, can have their questions answered by experts at Weber-Stephen Products Company in Palatine, Ill., the country's largest maker of barbecue grills.
The toll-free help line number is (800) 474-5568.
Copies of a free booklet, "Backyard Barbecue Basics," are also available.


What the Staten Island Grand Jury Faces
A grand jury considering whether to indict New York City police officers in the death of Ernest Sayon, who died on Staten Island two weeks ago, will ultimately have to decide: What would a reasonable police officer have done?
On Monday, the city's chief medical examiner ruled that Mr.
Sayon's death was a homicide, a medical term meaning that Mr.
Sayon died at least in part because of the actions of another person.
But the finding, which is usually brought before a grand jury, does not automatically translate into criminal charges.
Legal experts say that in such a case, a grand jury might decide to indict on charges ranging from criminally negligent homicide to second-degree murder.
Or, it might choose not to indict at all.


Israeli Warplanes Hit Guerrilla Targets At Bases in Lebanon
Israeli warplanes pounded Palestinian guerrilla targets south of Beirut today, killing at least two guerrillas, security officials said.
Five others were wounded in the raids, in which at least a dozen rockets were fired at bases of the Syrian-backed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, the officials said.


Review/Music; Quirky Harmony: Maracas and Synthesizer
John Cage's "Third Construction" was the perfect opening work for the Bang on a Can Marathon at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday.
Besides being the only piece in which cans were actually thwacked during the eight-and-a-half-hour program, its underlying philosophy has much in common with that of this eclectic new music series.
When Cage composed this percussion quartet 53 years ago, he retained ties to the conventional music world and produced a fully notated score.
Eventually, he would grant his interpreters considerable leeway.
But in 1941 he was breaking away from the mainstream in other ways.
Advancing the notion that music can be wrung out of anything, he proposed an ensemble in which found objects augment a standard percussion battery.
He also celebrated the primacy of rhythm.
In "Third Construction," melody is an illusion, suggested by the different pitches of the instruments, and harmony is frozen out entirely.
And another of its elements -- its edgy, unflagging energy -- was ably conveyed by the Talujon Percussion Quartet.


Republican Gathering Raises Money, and Tensions
In a hotel ballroom decorated in red, white and blue, more than 800 Republicans gathered here today at what looked like a mini version of the Republican National Convention, not another technique to raise money.
But rather than encourage Republican unity, the two-day fund-raising event, billed as a midterm convention, produced new tensions in a party that is still searching for its place 19 months after losing the White House.


Schools All Over the Country Demand More From Students
To the Editor:
I commend and support Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's ambitious undertaking to stiffen rules for graduating from New York City high schools (news article, May 2).


Cuts to Be Felt Here, There and Everywhere
From a reduction in summer jobs for youths to longer waits for social services to less frequent repairs of potholes, the impact of the budget that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed yesterday would probably be felt by many New Yorkers.
Some of the deepest cuts would fall in the Department of Social Services, which provides programs and assistance to more than one million New Yorkers.


ECI Telecom Ltd.  (ECILF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Loughery's Coaching Clock Keeps Ticking
Miami Heat Coach KEVIN LOUGHERY will meet with team management tomorrow to discuss his future.
Loughery's three-year contract expires July 14, but a decision on whether to retain him as coach could be made this week.
Loughery led Miami to a franchise-record 42 victories this season.
The Heat then took top-seeded Atlanta to five games before losing. (AP)


Jails Head to Settle Officer's Battery Suit
The New York City Correction Commissioner, Anthony J. Schembri, yesterday agreed to pay $25,000 to settle a civil lawsuit after a Westchester jury found he had committed battery on a police sergeant when he was police commissioner of the city of Rye.
In a lawsuit filed in 1987, George DeVito, a Rye police sergeant and the former head of that city's Police Benevolent Association, accused Mr.
Schembri of slapping him during a confrontation in 1986, and sought $1 million in damages.
Mr.
Schembri's lawyer said all his client did in the incident, in which Mr.
Schembri confronted Sergeant DeVito over his work outside the police department, was touch Mr.
DeVito's cheek.


From Texas to Queens, And Now Stony Brook
When Dr.
Shirley Strum Kenny arrived in Flushing nine years ago to assume the presidency of Queens College, she knew she faced a formidable task, not only because the fiscal crises of the 1970's had left the school so demoralized, but also because some on campus might have had a stereotypical impression of her.
"If you have a Southern accent and you're a woman, they assume you're a powder puff," said Dr.
Kenny, a former English professor, native of Tyler, Tex., and the new president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook.


Pennsylvania Enterprises Inc.(PENT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


William Carlson, 88, Educator Who Headed 4 State Universities
William S. Carlson, who served as the second president of the State University of New York and as president of three other universities, died on Sunday at his home in Belleair Bluffs, Fla.
He was 88.
He died of lung cancer, said his wife, Claire Callan Carlson.


U.S. Blunders on Computer Screen Subsidy
To the Editor:
"U.S. to Aid Industry in Computer Battle With the Japanese" (front page, April 27) raises again the following question: Can this Government, or any government, pass highly technological and, ultimately, highly political judgments on which industries are in the country's or taxpayer's best interest to subsidize, and which are not?
It is a job that the Clinton Administration is not set up to do.
Its early judgments already appear flawed for the future.


Sneering At a Virtual Lynch Mob
Angry mobs pursue Laurence Canter and Martha Siegel from network to network.
Electronic mail bombs and fax attacks rain down upon them.
Their digitized photos are posted on computer bulletin boards around the world, like "Wanted" posters on the electronic frontier.
Other than the occasional death threats, obscene phone calls and anti-Semitic hate mail that they say they receive, Mr.
Canter and Ms.
Siegel say they enjoy the attention they have attracted by flooding the Usenet portion of the Internet last month with advertisements for their law firm.


Nordstrom Inc.(NOBE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Western Gas Resources Inc.(WGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Dinner Starring Lesser-Known Ingredients
THE new nonstick surfaces make it possible to cook potatoes until they are golden brown using very little fat, as today's menu demonstrates.
It calls for two ingredients -- Hungarian peppers and portobello mushrooms -- that may not be familiar to everyone.
The peppers are long, thin and light green, and are much milder than green bell peppers.
If they are not available, just use more red pepper in the potatoes, beef and peppers dish.
Portobello mushrooms are very large and have a very meaty flavor.
They retain their shape and firmness even after cooking.
Fried Potatoes, Beef And Peppers  1 pound new potatoes  2 teaspoons canola oil  8 ounces very lean beef (like round steak or flank steak)  8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut onions (1 2/3 cups)  8 ounces whole red, yellow or orange peppers, or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut peppers (1 1/2 cups)  4 ounces Hungarian peppers (2 peppers)  1 pound ripe tomatoes  1 teaspoon dried thyme  1/4 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1.
Scrub potatoes, but do not peel.
Slice them thinly in food processor.
Heat a nonstick pan large enough to hold all the ingredients, over very high heat.
2.
Add oil, and reduce heat to medium high.
When oil is hot, add potatoes, and brown, stirring often.
3. Grind beef in food processor.
4. Chop whole onion.
5. As potatoes begin to brown, stir in the beef and brown it.
6.
Wash, trim, seed and slice both kinds of peppers into thick strips, and then slice in food processor.
7. Add onion and peppers to the pan, and stir well. Continue cooking over medium heat.
8.
Wash, trim and dice tomatoes and add to the pan with thyme, salt and pepper.
Cover, and continue cooking over medium-low heat until vegetables are soft and flavors are well blended.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 600 calories, 15 grams fat, 60 milligrams cholesterol, 360 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 80 grams carbohydrate.
Broiled Portobello Mushrooms 2 portobello mushrooms Few shakes of salt.
1. Turn on broiler in toaster oven or oven.
2. Wash and stem mushrooms; dry.
3.
Arrange under broiler close to source of heat, top side up.
Broil mushrooms 5 to 7 minutes, until they soften a little, turning once.
4. Sprinkle lightly with salt, and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 30 calories, 0 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 70 milligrams sodium (before salting), 2 grams protein, 5 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan: Turn on broiler.
Prepare potatoes and beef through Step 7.
Prepare mushrooms, and broil.
Finish potatoes and beef.


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries(TEVIY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Theater in Review
Liar, Liar  Manhattan Class Company 120 West 28th Street Chelsea Through May 21


Hallway Horse-Trading on Health Care


Seeking Out Small Pleasures Keeps Immune System Strong
The small boost to the immune system offered by a pleasant event can persist as long as two days, while the negative effects of a stressful encounter mainly take their toll on one day, according to new findings.
And while stresses like a conflict at work can make people more vulnerable to infectious disease, so can missing customery pleasures like getting together with friends, the studies show.
The findings add to the growing evidence for the health consequences of day-to-day events.


Study Praises Day Care Plans
Family day-care providers in low-income neighborhoods can offer good child care if they are given support from the community, a study released yesterday says.
The study, conducted by the National Center for Children in Poverty, a research group affiliated with Columbia University, describes and analyzes 10 community programs in nine states, including New York, that organize and help people in poor neighborhoods provide child care in their homes.


3 Officers Are Arrested And Charged With Graft
Raiding an apartment where they believed a fugitive from Florida was hiding, three Mount Vernon police officers stole $10,000 from a gym bag filled with cash last week and the incident was captured on videotape, Federal prosecutors said today.
The officers, including the department's chief of detectives, left the apartment unaware that they were the victims of an elaborate F.B.I. sting operation.
But today, all three were arrested on Federal corruption charges, including stealing Federal funds.
They each face a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison, if convicted.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Seeking Out Small Pleasures Keeps Immune System Strong
The small boost to the immune system offered by a pleasant event can persist as long as two days, while the negative effects of a stressful encounter mainly take their toll on one day, according to new findings.
And while stresses like a conflict at work can make people more vulnerable to infectious disease, so can missing customery pleasures like getting together with friends, the studies show.
The findings add to the growing evidence for the health consequences of day-to-day events.


Signaling a New Era in Gaza, First Palestinian Police Arrive
The first Palestinian police officers crossed the border from Egypt on Tuesday, and their arrival signaled that the transition to Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho had begun in earnest.
Thousands of exuberant Gazans, most of them young men and boys, filled the main road leading to this border crossing, trying to get close to the point where the 148 officers had arrived.
But the Gazans were pushed back by Israeli soldiers, who occasionally sprayed water and fired percussion grenades at rock-throwing youths.


Civic Duty Calls. Bring A Book.
DEAR Diary,
Was summoned to appear as potential juror at Federal District Court at Foley Square in Manhattan.
After years of ducking similar invitations, decided to become good citizen and embrace civic duty.
Showed up Tuesday, May 3, eager to be the best juror I could be.
Wondered if I was a wheel of justice.
Wondered if all of us in Room 109 were wheels of justice.
Forgot to bring book to read.
Started crossword puzzle.
Counted 243 chairs, most of them filled by fellow prospective jurors.


Review/Film; Eerie Links Between Living and Dead
The first time Brandon Lee appears on screen in "The Crow," he is climbing out of his grave. (The scene is the first in which his face can be recognized; an earlier scene shows his character's body lying on the street in the shadowy distance.) Lee's ghoulish entrance is the eeriest possible sight, of course, because he was killed by a misloaded prop gun while making this movie just over a year ago.
Now he howls as he stands in the mud and rain in the middle of the night playing Eric Draven, a small-time rock musician who has risen from the dead to get justice a year after he and his fiancee were murdered.
The advance publicity lavished on "The Crow" comes almost entirely from its newsy, tragic sidelight.
Based on a comic-book character created by James O'Barr in the early 1980's, this is definitely a genre film.
It is a dark, lurid revenge fantasy and not the breakthrough, star-making movie some people have claimed.
But it is a genre film of a high order, stylish and smooth.
Its dark look of midnight terror and its skewed cityscape link it to the "Batman" movies, but "The Crow" makes even the bleak "Batman II" seem like a kiddie's playground.


President Is Said to Pick Babbitt For Court Despite Senate Concern
In spite of last-minute concerns expressed by members of the Senate over the weekend, President Clinton has settled on Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt as his nominee to the Supreme Court, officials said today.
A senior White House official said there was a "95 percent chance" that Mr.
Babbitt, a former Arizona Governor and Attorney General, would be Mr.
Clinton's choice to replace Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring at the end of the current term.
Other advisers said Mr.
Clinton was satisfied that Mr.
Babbitt could face down any objections.


2 Weather Satellite Systems Will Merge to Save Money
The Government will combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems into a single unit that should operate more efficiently and save hundreds of millions of dollars, Federal officials announced today.
The merger will place under civilian control four weather satellites, two now operated by the Defense Department and two by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
In about a decade, the operation will be reduced to three more advanced satellites to avoid duplication.


After 3 Years, McGhee Can't Cut It for Giants
Four days after cutting loose wide receiver Mark Jackson, kicker David Treadwell and tackle Clarence Jones, the Giants cleared some more room under their salary cap yesterday.
They withdrew a tender offer previously made to linebacker and defensive end Kanavis McGhee.
Although the Giants had tried to find a niche for McGhee, using him variously at linebacker and defensive end during his three years in New York, the 6-foot-4-inch, 247-pounder from Colorado never quite lived up to the team's expectations in making him a second-round draft pick in 1991.


A Responsible Budget
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani proposes to cut $1 billion from New York City programs next year without cutting the services that make life bearable for the city's most vulnerable.
It takes an optimistic nature to believe his administration can raise the city bureaucracy's productivity enough to sustain services while reducing the number of employees.
But, as the Mayor points out, he has already accomplished some things his critics claimed could not be done.
Most notably, he has persuaded unions to accept a severance plan for city employees and to give him extraordinary authority to transfer employees between agencies.
The budget Mr.
Giuliani submitted to the City Council yesterday was his formal plan for fiscal 1995, starting July 1.
He faced an awesome $2.3 billion deficit -- the largest since the city's fiscal crisis in the mid-1970's.
And closing the gap is made more difficult by the public's rebellion against further tax increases.
In contrast to predecessors who raised taxes, the Mayor opts to cut them -- only $35 million next year, but $260 million the year after, and more after that.
He includes long-overdue relief for apartment owners, who pay higher taxes than owners of houses.


Mayor's Bet: Safety Carries More Weight With Public
In proposing his budget for the next fiscal year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made a calculated political judgment: that the voters and their representatives are worried more about safe streets than clean streets and more about fighting fires than maintaining parks, and that ultimately, the City Council will not have the nerve to battle him on public safety issues.
In the $31.6 billion spending plan, two departments -- police and fire -- stood out like beacons as the only two major Mayoral agencies protected from a 7 percent reduction in the municipal work force that Mr.
Giuliani imposed to reduce the $2.3 billion deficit.


Panel Is Told Derivatives Are No Cause for Alarm
E.
Gerald Corrigan, who as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was the senior bank regulator most responsible for raising warnings about the risks of financial products called derivatives, told a Congressional subcommittee today that the potential for problems had diminished and that no new legislation was needed.
"I am hard pressed to think of sensible things that might be done through legislation that would better equip the Fed or other bodies to cope with a financial disruption of consequence," said Mr.
Corrigan, who is now a senior executive with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, a major dealer in derivatives.
An Indirect Instrument
Transactions in derivatives allow users to profit -- or lose money -- from gains or losses in assets like stocks, bonds or currencies, without actually owning those assets.
Several companies, including Procter &amp; Gamble, recently disclosed losses from derivative transactions that they had regarded as ways of reducing their risks from movements in financial markets, but that ended up exposing them to other risks.


Review/Music; Abbreviated Russian Fountainhead
It must take an unusually strong faith to start an opera company in Russia these days.
Even the most established and renowned Russian companies, the Kirov and the Bolshoi, are reeling under economic pressures, and they can at least live on a back list of productions.
Nevertheless, the New Opera of Moscow has been braving this harsh climate since 1991, offering alternative views of standard repertory works.
The company, conducted by its artistic director, Yevgeny Kolobov, made its American debut on Monday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
Its showpiece was an idiosyncratic reconsideration of Glinka's "Russlan and Ludmilla," a mammoth 1842 work that Richard Taruskin, writing in the New Grove Dictionary of Opera, describes as the fountainhead of the 19th-century Russian style.


Heinz-Werner Meyer, 61, Dies; Led German Labor Federation
Heinz-Werner Meyer, the leader of Germany's labor federation in the turbulent years since reunification, died on Monday at a clinic in Siegburg, near Bonn.
He was 61.
He died of a heart attack, said a spokesman for the German Union Federation, or Deutsche Gewerkschaftsbund, known as DGB.
He had been admitted to the clinic last week after collapsing at a meeting with Chancellor Helmut Kohl.


Devils Go With Terreri To Try to Finish Bruins
Coach Jacques Lemaire confirmed today that Chris Terreri and not Martin Brodeur would be in goal Wednesday night when the Devils play the Bruins at Boston Garden in what could be Boston's last game this season.
If the Devils, who lead the four-of-seven-game series, 3-2, can eliminate the Bruins from the Stanley Cup playoffs, they would have a date with the Rangers in the Eastern Conference finals starting on Sunday at Madison Square Garden.
Should the Devils lose, Brodeur would guard the Devils' goal in Game 7 on Friday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, where he stopped all 22 shots the Bruins fired at him Monday night in New Jersey's 2-0 victory.
Seeking an Edge
In these playoffs, coaches and players seek any kind of an edge.
That is why Lemaire turned to a goalie tandem in the midst of a series.
The coach's assumptions were that Brodeur, the 22-year-old rookie who had played well in nine straight games, might be somewhat worn and that Terreri would regard Boston Garden as an old friend.
The Bruins beat the Devils and Brodeur in the first two games here and then New Jersey won twice at Boston, with Terreri playing back-to-back games for the first time since March 12-13.
Terreri, from Warwick, R.I., said today that he was first taken to the Boston Garden at age 6 by his father for a Bruins game.
He knows well the tight rink with little skating space behind the goal from having played there so often in five full seasons with the Devils and in Hockey East games while he played for Providence College.
"Chris is confident," said Lemaire. "And the players are confident in Chris."
Terreri dismisses the reality that his playing time all but disappeared in the last weeks of the regular season.
He's flattered that his coach turned to him when the Devils went to Boston down 2-0. 'I'm Having Fun'
"We were fighting for our lives," said Terreri.
"Of course, you want to play. But you respect what he says.
"I'm thrilled I got a chance to help in the playoffs, that I've got a chance to win this series. It's a team game and I'm having fun."
Terreri added that he is as comfortable as he can be for Game 6 and that his teammates want to end the series Wednesday night.
"Nobody wants to come back here Friday," said Terrari.
And nobody is mentioning the Rangers, just yet.
Lemaire's intentions with his two goaltenders in this series were always apparent to Terreri, who approved of them.
"It gives this team another dimension," Terreri said.
Defensive Gem
According to Lemaire, the Devils played "probably our best game defensively" on Monday night.
The teams played evenly with swift up-and-down movement through the first period.
After the first goal, by Corey Millen at 1 minute 23 seconds of the second period, Lemaire said: "There was a difference. At that moment we started to take charge. I could feel it on the bench."
With 22 seconds remaining in the period, Bobby Carpenter and Claude Lemieux caught the Bruins on a 2-on-1 break.
Lemieux passed the puck to Carpenter, who shot it from near the top of the right circle over Boston goaltender Jon Casey's glove.
The Devils tied up the Bruins at center ice much of the time and Adam Oates, Boston's great set-up man, all but disappeared.
The Boston version, as expressed by Coach Brian Sutter, was that the Bruins stood around too much and stopped skating.


Public &amp; Private; A Tale Of Two Women
Imagine that Anita Hill had come forward with her accusations against Clarence Thomas more than a year after he had been confirmed by the Senate.
Imagine that she had chosen to introduce herself to the American people at a press conference sponsored by the A.C.L.U. and NOW, accompanied by a sworn enemy of Justice Thomas who had made a cottage industry of digging up dirt.


No Rape Charges Against Detective
Prosecutors in California have dropped a rape case against a New York City police detective and two other men, after the woman involved decided not to press charges, the police in Burbank said yesterday.
Lieut.
Larry Koch, who supervised the investigation for the Burbank Police Department, said the Pasadena office of the District Attorney was dropping the case because the woman "no longer wishes to pursue the prosecution" and because of insufficient evidence.


Aloha to a New Chocolate
Talk about paradise.
Now, along with its palm-fringed beaches, dazzling orchids and turquoise lagoons, Hawaii even has chocolate.
Cacao is being cultivated on the Island of Hawaii, and the chocolate produced from it is receiving high praise from chefs for its fruity aroma, silky texture and intense, lingering flavor.
They say the chocolate, the first ever grown commercially in the United States, can hold its own with the best in the world.


No Headline
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another and suffer the indignity of being the skunk of the world. -- PRESIDENT NELSON MANDELA.  [ A1:6. ]


You Gotta Believe! Sharks Grab Lead
Criticism came from all angles, stinging Sergei Makarov and Igor Larionov, San Jose's aging Russian forwards who had been shut out in Games 2 through 4 of the Sharks' Stanley Cup playoff series against Toronto.
But they deflected most of it toward the Maple Leafs and goalie Felix Potvin in Game 5, combining for 3 goals and 5 assists in the Sharks' 5-2 victory over Toronto tonight before 17,190 fans at San Jose Arena.


Fetal Harm Is Cited As Primary Hazard In Dioxin Exposure
In a report on dioxin, scientists at the Environmental Protection Agency have concluded that cancer is not the most serious health hazard at common exposure levels.
Of greater concern, their report said, are subtle effects on fetal development and the immune system that may be the result of very low levels of exposure.
The scientists said that most people already have levels of dioxin in their bodies at or near the concentrations that cause such fetal and immune system problems in laboratory animals.


New York Is a Plus for Joyner-Kersee
The way BOB KERSEE sees it, with the national heptathlon championships set for June 14, barely three weeks after the New York Games on May 22, the New York meet should be an ideal training stop for his wife, JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE, the world heptathlon record-holder.
Joyner Kersee has entered the 100-meter hurdles and the long jump, two of the heptathlon's seven events.
As her coach as well as her husband, Kersee likes to bring her along on a slow, steady pace, not overdoing any individual events when she participates in open competition.


Home Oil (HO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Central Power and Light Co., Corpus Christi, Tex., a unit of Central and South West Corp., is selling $100 million of 7.5 percent first mortgage bonds due in 1999 at 99.79 to yield 7.55 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Ingles Markets Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Mar 26


Ex-Shearson Leader Moves Again
Peter A. Cohen, who resigned under pressure in 1990 as head of Shearson Lehman Hutton, is on the move again.
Mr.
Cohen said yesterday that he was leaving his job as vice chairman of the Republic New York Corporation and head of its securities subsidiary to form his own investment management firm.
But he will still maintain ties with Republic, which has agreed to become a minority investor in the new firm.


Report Criticizes Smithsonian On Hispanic Focus and Hiring
The Smithsonian Institution, perhaps the world's most famous museum complex and the operator of some of Washington's most popular tourist attractions, has done poorly in hiring and promoting Hispanic people and has virtually ignored Hispanic contributions to American art, culture and science, a group appointed by the institution said today.
A report issued by the 15-member task force found that the institution "displays a pattern of willful neglect toward the estimated 25 million Latinos in the United States."


In Race Case, Panel Is Picked to Improve Philadelphia Schools
Having determined that public education here is a tale of two schools -- one poor, black and failing and the other middle-class, integrated and struggling -- a state judge has appointed a panel of outside experts to come up with ways to fix the system.
The ruling comes in a desegregation case that has dragged on for 23 years.
Other Pennsylvania courts involved in the case have ruled similarly on the Philadelphia school system's problems.
But this judge, Doris A. Smith of Commonwealth Court, is the first to mandate improvements in educational quality, not just racial mix.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Markova, No. 88, Upsets Sanchez Vicario  Yelena Markova of Russia, ranked No. 88, stunned Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-4, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5), yesterday at the German Open in Berlin, sending the Spanish star to her earliest exit from a tournament in more than three years.
Sanchez Vicario, the world's second-ranked player, had not lost her first match in a tournament since the Virginia Slims in November 1990.
Steffi Graf, the defending champion, advanced to the third round by beating another German, Karin Schwendt by 7-6 (7-1), 6-2.
Sanchez Vicario had won three straight tournaments, while handing Graf her first defeat of 1994 in the Citizen Cup final on May 1 in Hamburg, Germany. (AP) Sampras Beats Krickstein on Clay: Top-seeded Pete Sampras, playing his first tournament on clay this year, defeated Aaron Krickstein, 6-1, 7-6 (7-2), yesterday in his debut at the Italian Open in Rome.
Second-seeded Michael Stich of Germany also advanced, defeating David Rikl of the Czech Republic, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4.
Third-seeded Jim Courier began his bid for a third straight Italian Open title with a 6-3, 6-3 victory over a qualifier from the Czech Republic, Libor Nemecek. (AP) Seeded Players Advance in Prague: Third-seeded Linda Harvey-Wild lost in straight sets yesterday, and top-seeded Amanda Coetzer of South Africa advanced to the second round of the Prague Open at the Stvanice clay courts tournament in the Czech Republic.
Harvey-Wild, plagued by unforced errors, was beaten by unseeded Asa Carlsson of Sweden, 6-4, 6-0.
Coetzer had no trouble in beating Eva Martincova of the Czech Republic, 6-3, 6-3.
Ruxandra Dragomir of Romania beat No. 5-seeded Emanuela Zardo of Switzerland, 6-2, 6-4; Ludmila Richterova of the Czech Republic outlasted a compatriot, fourth-seeded Radka Bobkova, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), and Marzia Grossi of Italy defeated a qualifier, Marion Maruska of Austria, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4). (AP)


Pepsico expands its snack-food horizons by introducing corn chips to a crisp-loving nation.
THEY eat all kinds of strange snack foods on these shores, including the prawn-flavored crisp -- an acquired taste, to be sure.
But they haven't acquired a taste for that American staple, the corn chip, a failing that the king of salty-snack marketers, Pepsico Inc., is now out to remedy.
Pepsi, the owner of Frito-Lay, will officially introduce Doritos to Britain today.
It is spending $9 million on advertising and promotion to do so, more than half of it on a television campaign from BBDO New York that is scheduled to begin in the next few weeks, not to mention another $18 million it spent to build a state-of-the-art corn chip factory.


Sheffield to Miss Three Weeks
Because of a lapse in judgment, Florida Marlins right fielder GARY SHEFFIELD will be sidelined for about three weeks.
Sheffield and starting pitcher RYAN BOWEN went on the 15-day disabled list yesterday.
Sheffield, slowed by shoulder problems several times since 1991, left Monday's game against Pittsburgh after bruising his left rotator cuff trying to make a diving catch.


Theater in Review
Frustration (Frusta-azioni) La Mama 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday


Pennsylvania's No. 2 Official Is Nominated for Governor
Lieut.
Gov.
Mark S. Singel, trading on his experience as Acting Governor last year, won the Democratic primary for governor today, defeating five opponents, including Lynn H. Yeakel with her anti-incumbent message.
Mr.
Singel will face Representative Tom Ridge, who defeated State Attorney General Ernest D. Preate Jr. for the Republican nomination.


Japan Admits a Plutonium Handling Error
Japanese nuclear officials acknowledged today that a design flaw in the country's plutonium fuel-making plant had made it difficult to track the whereabouts of 154 pounds of plutonium.
But they insisted that tests showed it had not been diverted from the plant.
Officials said the plutonium for Japan's much-criticized program to "breed" plutonium as fuel for reactors had accumulated in the form of dust and waste inside the plant.


Lessons for Chefs in the Old Ways of the Italian Kitchen
PAOLA DI MAURO lives, cooks and makes wine in this small suburban town some 12 miles southeast of Rome on the Via Appia Antica, where the concave shell of the Alban hills rises gently to the heights of Castel Gandolfo, the summer residence of the Pope.
The district is called the Castelli Romani, the Roman castles, and it is still sprinkled liberally with the historic estates and villas of the Roman aristocracy.
Mrs. di Mauro is not an aristocrat, except in the kitchen.
Nor is she a professional chef.
Instead, the vivacious grandmother, who is in her early 70's, is one of a band of cooks, mostly women, stretching back over generations, who have formed Italian cuisine, maintained its traditions and made it what is today -- quite possibly the world's most beloved and sought-after cooking style.


Whole Foods Market Inc.(WFMI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 10


Review/Dance; Celebrating Ballet's Favorite Composer
Good old Tchaikovsky received his due again when American Ballet Theater staged its annual spring gala on Monday night, presumably celebrating the centenary of the composer's death with ballets and excerpts to his music.
The fact that the program at the Metropolitan Opera House came a year late (Tchaikovsky died in 1893) was cheerfully passed over.
Every black-tie benefit for a ballet company needs a theme nowadays, and Tchaikovsky's music is represented by a wide range of choreographers in Ballet Theater's current season.


Diet Drug May Harm the Brain
A widely used diet drug may cause lasting and possibly harmful changes in parts of the brain that regulate appetite and mood, according to a report on studies in monkeys that is being published today.
The drug, dexfenfluramine, is widely used in Europe.
Although not yet approved for use on its own in the United States, it is found in a 50-50 combination with levofenfluramine in its sister drug, fenfluramine, which is marketed here as Pondimin.
Both dexfenfluramine and fenfluramine are appetite suppressants that act on nerve cells in the brain that release serotonin, a nerve messenger that influences appetite, mood and sleep.
The nerves found damaged by dexfenfluramine play "a role in regulating mood, appetite, sleep, impulse control, sexual activity, aggression and some hormone action," said one of the researchers, Dr.
George Ricaurte, an assistant professor of neurology at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.
In a study in which high doses of dexfenfluramine were given to squirrel monkeys for four days, Dr.
Ricaurte and his collaborators at the National Institute of Mental Health and National Institute on Drug Abuse in Bethesda, Md., found extensive damage to nerves in the animals' brains for as long as a year and a half after brief treatment with the drug.
Although the dose used in the study was higher than people take, Dr.
Ricaurte noted that people often took it twice a day for six months or longer and that the drug stayed in human tissue about seven times longer than in that of the test animals.
"Toxic doses could be reached, and there is definite cause for concern that humans treated with dexfenfluramine may be at risk of brain injury," he said.
The findings appear in The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington, Mass., has applied to the Food and Drug Administration for approval to market dexfenfluramine in the United States.
William Boni, corporate communications executive for Interneuron, said: "Our new drug application is under review. We don't think it is appropriate to discuss the drug's safety publicly." JANE E. BRODY


METRO DIGEST
THE GIULIANI BUDGET: PRIORITIES AND POLITICS
Mayor Giuliani proposed a $31.6 billion budget for New York City that would reduce spending slightly for the first time in 16 years and sharply cut the municipal work force in almost every major agency except the Police and Fire Departments.
A1.
The Mayor thinks voters worry more about safe streets than clean streets.
News analysis.
B5.


Stocks Rise on Dollar Rally; Dow Up 27.37
At last the volatility in the international currency markets has helped the domestic stock market.
Yesterday, the dollar rallied to its highest level in more than two weeks, lifting bond prices and thus lifting stocks after four straight declining sessions.
Blue chips like AT&amp;T and General Motors, pharmaceutical companies like Warner Lambert and Bristol Myers, and high-technology companies like Microsoft and Oracle all benefited.


Personal Health
UNTIL recently, little was known about the effects of age on nutrition.
Research into the vitamin and mineral requirements of Americans over 50 lagged seriously even as age distribution in the nation shifted toward the decades beyond midlife.
In devising recommendations about how much of each nutrient should be consumed each day, nutrition experts assumed that people of 70 or 80 were no different from those of 50.
But now researchers seeking to correct this oversight are finding that millions of older Americans are nutritionally deprived either because they consume too little of various vitamins and minerals or because certain medical conditions or treatments prevent them from making full use of the nutrients in the foods they eat.


Thermo Electron Corp.(TMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Wine Talk
JABULANI NTSHANGASE is not, from all outward appearances, an overly emotional man.
But it was clear yesterday that some of the euphoria that gripped South Africans cheering their new president had rubbed off on him.
"This is truly a great day for us," said Mr.
Ntshangase (pronounced chan-GAH-say).
"We are finally free." He was born in Soweto, a black township near Johannesburg, and now lives in New York, where he sells South African wine.


Venture Stores Inc.(VEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Is It Art or Merely a Safety Hazard?
Wherever art and commerce rub together, the potential for conflict lurks.
At the old Macy's warehouse in Long Island City, Queens, the two are digging in for a head-to-head court fight that could test, for the first time, the Visual Artists' Rights Act, a Federal statute that went into effect in June 1991.
On one side are three artists who, over two and a half years, transformed an 18,000-square-foot lobby at 47-44 31st Street into an eye-popping sculptural installation made of recycled materials, scrap and abandoned appliances reconfigured into a huge silver fish, a moon that opens up to reveal an astronaut with a trash-can head, a bathtub sun and much more.


That Faraway Sunny Summer of '43
To the Editor:
As one who was present at the creation of Glenn Miller's wartime orchestra at Yale University in 1943, I read with great interest "A Most Unusual Marching Band" by Richard A. Mooney (Editorial Notebook, April 24).
Readers may like to know that the lead singer with the band that spring and early summer, before going to Officer Candidate Shool in Miami, was Cpl.
Tony Bennett.
I had the pleasure of hearing him on more than one occasion.


Tears for a Woman Who Saved Lives
Arline Joe, who grew up on a corn and cotton farm in South Carolina, spent her recent years here raising 12 children she and her husband adopted from stormy backgrounds.
She died a violent death next to a discarded sofa outside her home Monday night, dragged from her prized 1981 Cadillac and shot twice in the chest by a man who, the police say, had just killed the two brothers of the mother of his child.


Old Republic International Corp.(ORI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Anarchy, a Threat on the Electronic Frontier?
Hostility and repression are spreading in one of the most popular public forums in the global web of computer networks known as cyberspace.
And network experts are worried about the future of this community, whose rapid growth seems to be undermining its tradition of rational self-government and the democratic exchange of ideas.
A certain frontier freedom has always been part of the allure of computer networks, particularly Usenet, a loose affiliation of thousands of computers and electronic bulletin boards that link some 10 million people around the world.


Park Electrochemical (PKE,N) reports earnings for Year to Feb 27


Faulty Instruments in Cockpit Cited in Crash at La Guardia
Faulty instruments in the cockpit of a jet that skidded off a runway at La Guardia Airport in a snowstorm last March led the pilot to abort the takeoff, according to preliminary reports made public today by the National Transportation Safety Board.
As Continental Airlines flight 795 began its takeoff, the instrument panel indicated the air speed was fluctuating between 69 miles an hour and 92 miles an hour, short of the 161 miles an hour needed to lift the MD-80.


Columbia Gas System Inc.(CG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wilander Receives French Open Invitation
MATS WILANDER, a three-time French Open champion, received a wild-card invitation yesterday to this year's tournament in Paris.
Wilander, 29, was the only non-French player to receive one of 15 wild-card berths for the May 23-June 5 tournament.
Among the seven French men receiving wild cards were GUY FORGET, THIERRY CHAMPION and FABRICE SANTORO. (AP)


Award in H.I.V. Disclosure
A California jury has awarded $275,000 to a former Delta Air Lines employee whose name was placed on a company list of employees infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The employee, Joseph A. Sullivan, 39, also asserted that he had been dismissed because he carried the virus.
While the jury deadlocked on whether the airline had discriminated against Mr.
Sullivan, it awarded him damages for emotional distress, finding that the company's list had invaded his privacy.


Corrections
An article on April 21 about Picasso and the identity of a woman in many of his paintings and drawings misidentified the source for a film about the artist to be made by Ismail Merchant and James Ivory.
The film is to be based on the book "Picasso: Creator and Destroyer," by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington, not on "Life With Picasso," by Francoise Gilot.


A Sexual Harassment Case To Test Academic Freedom
As the religion professor delivers a lecture to his students at the Chicago Theological Seminary, a school official sits nearby with a tape recorder, a kind of word cop, in case the professor says anything sexually offensive.
The 63-year-old professor, Graydon Snyder, is being monitored after a sexual harassment ruling in a case that many scholars say illustrates the Orwellian consequences of stringent codes intended to enforce political and moral rectitude on campuses.


Dollar General Corp.(DOLR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


U.S. Ordered to Tell How It Decides to Seek Executions
A Federal judge in Pennsylvania has ordered the Justice Department to explain why it is seeking the death penalty against a black defendant in a murder case.
The order, issued on May 3, is believed to represent the first time a Federal judge has tried to pry open one of the agency's most closely guarded secrets: how the Justice Department decides that some murderers must die while others may live.


Argonauts Are Expected to Sign Graves
The Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League have scheduled a news conference today to announce the expected signing of the former Syracuse quarterback MARVIN GRAVES.
Toronto's general manager and head coach, BOB O'BILLOVICH, said yesterday that the team and Graves's agent were working out the final details of a multiyear contract.
Graves told The Syracuse Herald-Journal that he would sign a three-year contract that guarantees him $75,000 a year and contains incentives that could increase his salary to more than $120,000.
Graves was ignored by the National Football League in its recent draft. (AP)


A Mexican Conflict Over States' Rights Heats Up
When Ernesto Ruffo Appel was elected five years ago as Mexico's first opposition Governor in six decades, he moved to Mexicali, the capital of Baja California State, fully expecting a tough time.
The Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has long governed Mexico, fought desperately to defeat Mr.
Ruffo and his National Action Party, resorting in some cases to fraud.
At one point in the campaign, bodyguards he brought from Ensenada, the city where he had been Mayor, were rounded up and arrested by the state police.


To Sum Up the Derby: There Are No Illusions
So, after all the slipping and shoving in the rough and rainy 120th Kentucky Derby last Saturday, what did it prove?
Jimmy Jones, a Hall of Fame trainer, won the Derby for Calumet Farm eight times in partnership with his father, B. A. Jones.
His superstar, Citation, was the last horse to win it on a sloppy track until Go for Gin did it 46 years later.
After watching the rough-house Derby on Saturday at the age of 85, he said:


Kenetech Corp.(KWND,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Agreement To Utilize S.E.C. Data
Mead Data Central and Disclosure Inc. yesterday announced an agreement to make Securities and Exchange Commission filings available in electronic form over Mead's Lexis and Nexis on-line services.
The new data services will allow businesses to use computer terminals to search through tens of thousands of current and archival S.E.C. documents, including data from the commission's electronic system known as Edgar -- short for Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval.
Disclosure will also provide an index of all S.E.C. documents from 1968 to the present.


Market Place; A relative newcomer is becoming a force in farm equipment.
THE last year has been good to investors in agricultural stocks.
Deere &amp; Company, the largest equipment maker, doubled to more than $90 on the Big Board before settling to its current $70.
Shares of Pioneer Hi-Bred International, the largest seed company, rose about two-thirds, to more than $40, before easing to their current $35.50.
But the blow-out performer has been the little-known Agco Corporation, which said last week that it would buy the tractor maker Massey-Ferguson from the Varity Corporation.
Agco traded as low as $14 last spring, the same price at which it went public slightly less than two years ago.
This month, it topped $46 and continues to lurk near that high, ending trading yesterday on the Big Board at $42, down $1 on the day.


Javelin Victim Is Doing Well
The 8-foot javelin that speared a 17-year-old New Jersey high school athlete missed her brain and its main artery by just a half-inch and the girl could be out of the hospital before the weekend, her doctors said yesterday.
"I really think this is a miracle the way the injury went," said Dr.
GREGORY BORAH, chief plastic surgeon at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.


Handy &amp; Harman (HNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Real Estate; A New Owner of a Philadelphia Development Site Hopes to Build a Large Office Building
ONE of downtown Philadelphia's largest development sites has a new owner who envisions building the city's first large commercial office building in at least two years.
A development partnership, financed primarily by German banks and led by Aby Rosen and Michael Fuchs, bought the site, known as Penn Center West, from the former developer for $8 million.
The price was approved by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which had acquired the mortgage in the takeover of a savings bank.


The Firm of Davis &amp; Davis Leads Pacers Past Hawks
Pacers 96, Hawks 85
Antonio Davis put on a show in the third period last night in Atlanta.
Dale Davis was not quite so spectacular, but was just as potent.


Neo-Fascists In Italy Gain Cabinet Seats
After weeks of wrangling within his right-wing alliance, Prime Minister-designate Silvio Berlusconi announced tonight that he had formed Italy's 53d Government since World War II and the first to include the political descendants of Mussolini's Fascists.
The presentation of a Cabinet list to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro at the Quirinale Palace tonight represented a culmination of Mr.
Berlusconi's lightning rise to power from an indebted millionaire running a broadcasting, publishing, insurance and sporting empire four months ago to the first Prime Minister of what some Italians are calling the Second Republic -- a title supposed to denote a break with the corruption of the past.


Orsulak and Cangelosi Play the Hits for Mets
Joe Orsulak started because Jeromy Burnitz has not been playing up to expectations.
John Cangelosi started because Ryan Thompson has an injured hand.
Together, they do not represent two-thirds of the outfield the Mets envisioned this season.
That did not matter tonight.


Trail of Despair by a Father Leaves 4 Dead and Son Hurt
After being dismissed last week from his $7.50-an-hour job at a paper factory in Brooklyn, Jose Luis Berroa grew despondent about how he would care for his 2-year-old son.
He had lived on the grim streets of New York City with little Carlos before, his friends said, and he could not bear to return.
So he decided to give Carlos back to the boy's mother, Awilda Enriquez.
But something snapped in Mr.
Berroa when he arrived at the home of Ms.
Enriquez's family in Newark, something that caused him to go on a rampage that left a trail of death yesterday, ending when he wounded the child and then killed himself after a confrontation with police officers on a stairwell in Washington Heights.


Japan's Premier Says Reform Effort Is in Danger
Acknowledging that Japan's reform effort is in imminent danger of derailment, the new Prime Minister, Tsutomu Hata, said today that "people are seized with uncertainty and a sense of crisis," and warned that after a year of national upheaval, "the new order is still not in sight."
Mr.
Hata's assessment came amid growing predictions that his minority Government may rank among the shortest-lived in modern Japanese history.
After 12 days in office, his Cabinet has already deeply offended China and South Korea, said it sees no early end to its bitter arguments with the Clinton Administration on trade and reversed itself on how to deal with North Korea.


U.S. Soccer Team Still Shows Insecurity as Armstrong Is Dropped
Tension spread like fissures through the United States soccer team in recent weeks as players have complained that uncertainty about their position on the World Cup roster had left them hesitant and tentative in exhibition matches.
The roster is still not set, but Coach Bora Milutinovic continued to whittle away yesterday, cutting four players, including one surprise, the resourceful defender Desmond Armstrong.
Milutinovic also recalled defender Brian Bliss, who plays in the German second division and has appeared only once with the United States team in the last three years, as the American roster was reduced to 25 players.


In America; Crimson Class
Oh dear! It's the noise, you see. That awful noise. It's absolutely unbearable.
It seems that the incessant racket being made by strikers picketing on West 44th Street is getting on the nerves of the members tucked inside the crimson-carpeted cocoon of the Harvard Club.


Off the Menu
Dinner With Mummy
Could 57th Street be called the Street of Themes?
Le Bar Bat, the Hard Rock Cafe, Planet Hollywood and Le Colonial dot this thoroughfare, with the Harley-Davidson Cafe only a block away, on 56th Street.
Add to the list Jekyll and Hyde, which is to open this summer at 1407 Avenue of the Americas, just north of 57th Street.
It will be the first uptown location for the horror-theme restaurants owned by D. R. Finley's Erie Entertainment.
The company has three restaurants in Greenwich Village: the Slaughtered Lamb Pub, Jack the Ripper Pub and an earlier Jekyll and Hyde.
All serve moderately priced American food and drink, with an emphasis on beer, in settings with special effects like fog machines, disembodied voices, secret passageways to the restrooms, phosphorescent skeletons and other creepy surprises.
The new restaurant will occupy five floors, each with a different decor but connected by a theme of mad scientists and explorers, said Jerry Kouveras, the vice president of Erie Entertainment.
The settings will include a haunted library, a mausoleum, an observatory and an explorer's club with talking tribal masks and mummies, he said.
The company hopes to open in other cities.
"With this move uptown, I think we will be viewed very differently," Mr.
Kouveras said.
"It's important for us before we go national." Honoring Black Chefs
For a second year, the Sonoma County chapter of 100 Black Men, an organization that runs mentor programs for black youth and gives scholarships, is presenting awards to the black chefs the organization considers to be the best in the country.
They are Edna Lewis, formerly a restaurateur in New York and now a consultant for Harry's Markets in Atlanta; Johnny Rivers, the head of food service for Walt Disney Enterprises, and T. J. Robinson, who owns Gingerbread House in Oakland, Calif.
Those being honored will prepare a benefit dinner on Aug. 20 at the Matanzas Creek Winery in Sonoma, Calif.
Tickets are $125.
For information: (707) 528-6464.
Southern Italian Fare
A few months ago, Nicola Marzovilla, who owns Tempo, a Southern Italian restaurant at 30 East 29th Street, signed a lease for a second location.
The new restaurant will open in late summer at 122 East 27th Street and will be called I Trulli, for the dome-shaped stone structures that dot his native Apulian landscape.
Like Tempo, it will feature specialties of Southern Italy, but Mr.
Marzovilla said it will be better equipped to prepare some authentic dishes, with three large rotisseries and a wood-burning oven for clay-pot cookery.
The restaurant will have vaulted ceilings, stucco walls and a garden.
Pizza a la California
California Pizza Kitchen, a chain that opened its first restaurant in Beverly Hills, Calif., in 1985, has made its debut in New York, opening a restaurant last week at 1256 Price Club Plaza, Old Country Road, Westbury, L.I.
The company, which has 51 locations in 12 states, makes pizzas with inventive toppings like barbecued chicken, Peking duck and B.L.T.
Another branch is scheduled to open in November at 60th Street and Third Avenue in Manhattan.
Roger's Redux
As Memorial Day approaches, the season's dining scene in the Hamptons starts to crystallize.
In June, Roger's will reopen on the Montauk Highway in Sagaponack, L.I., where Roger Martin, a publicity agent, had a restaurant from 1971 to 1974.
A few weeks ago Mr.
Martin bought the site from Bruce Weed, who had a restaurant there called Bruce's.
This time around, Mr.
Martin will not do the cooking.
"I'm too old to cook full time," he said.
His daughter, Stacey, who has worked with Drew Nieporent at the TriBeCa Grill, will assist him in running the restaurant.
Chef and Owner
Charles Palmer, the chef at Aureole, 34 East 61st Street, is now the restaurant's sole owner.
He opened Aureole in 1987 with Steve Tzolis and Nicola Kotsoni, and last week reached an agreement to buy out his partners.
At the same time he gave up his interest in Peryali, the Greek restaurant at 35 West 20th Street that the three opened in 1987.
Mr.
Palmer said the dissolution of the partnership was amicable.
Mr.
Tzolis and Ms.
Kotsoni are out of the country and could not be reached.


INSIDE
Italian Government Formed
Italy's right-wing Prime Minister-designate formed a Government after weeks of wrangling, including five seats for neo-Fascists.
Page A5.
Identifying a Real Lobbyist
The Government's new 30-page description of lobbying imposes micrometer precision on an activity that seemed kind of obvious.
Page A16.
Collapse at Christie's
At an auction of Impressionist and modern art, only 38 of 76 works were sold; proceeds fell nearly $40 million below estimates.
Page C18.


Michigan Court Invalidates Law Banning Aid for Suicide
Michigan's law against assisting in a suicide was invalidated on narrow technical grounds today by a three-judge panel of the state court of appeals.
But the court also reinstated two murder charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian that resulted from suicides in 1991, before the law aimed at blocking him from helping others die was passed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
California's Pacific Gas and Electric is preparing for a new world of power, getting ready to compete with rivals that will be allowed to sell power to large customers in 1996.  [ Page D1. ]


Tokyo Stocks Higher
Stocks were higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 232.35 points, or 1.17 percent, at 20,150.13.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei gained 130.82 points, or about six-tenths of 1 percent.


Mr. Kennedy's Health Compromise
Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, a primary advocate of President Clinton's health-care bill, has proposed a useful health-care compromise that could bridge important differences between the President and his critics.
The Senator preserves Mr.
Clinton's pledge to guarantee every American private insurance, but he loosens regulatory restraints that turned off many Democratic and Republican opponents.
His proposal looks like the first serious effort to reach out to Republicans for a needed bipartisan compromise.
Most of the compromises Mr.
Kennedy proposes would improve, or at least not gravely worsen, the President's bill.
But he incorporates two flaws that would undermine the quality of health care Americans would receive and preserve an accounting fiction that makes the proposal look more fiscally prudent than it is.
The flaws are remediable -- giving hope that the Kennedy proposal could serve as the platform for a first-rate bill.


O'Neill Delivers A Double Blastoff
The much-anticipated and seemingly glorious trip into first place lasted another night for the Yankees.
They are not sure whether their stay will stretch two weeks or two months.
They do not know whether weekend discounts are included.
They are also uncertain about those complimentary breakfasts.
Seriously, what the Yankees do know after clipping the Indians, 5-3, last night is that Paul O'Neill is imitating Roy Hobbs and that life in the most prominent suite in the American League East can be thrilling.
Even for two days.
Even if fans have not stormed the turnstiles to witness the jolly journey.
First place is still first place.


Constitution Backs Gun Lobby
To the Editor:
I was disappointed to see an advertisement on guns signed by other professors of constitutional law (National Edition, May 2).
The advertisement made two main points.
The first is that the Second Amendment does not prohibit sensible gun regulations -- something that is undeniably true.
The other is that the Second Amendment merely protects arms ownership by state national guards, not individual citizens -- something that is just as clearly false.


Novo Nordisk (NVO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aegon NV(AEG,N)


It's Smart to Deal With Lead Now
To the Editor:
Re "Boy Harmed by Lead to Get $1.5 Million in Court Settlement" (news article, April 29): If only the damage done to that 5-year-old in Milwaukee by shoddy lead removal were an aberration.
In New York experts estimate that as much as 70 percent of lead-abatement work stems from faulty renovation.
Young children are suffering permanent neurological damage unnecessarily.


Hughes Supply Inc.(HUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Economic Scene; Things were fine until the Fed's foray, a Nobel laureate says.
THE economy is perking right along, but growth is still modest by the benchmark of other recoveries.
A handful of commodity prices are inching up, but there is no evidence that self-sustaining inflation driven by wages is in the works.
The President is a Democrat, but on the critical issues of taxation, spending and regulation he is acting more like a deficit-fearing pre-Reagan conservative.
Why, then, have the bond markets reacted so perversely to what the Federal Reserve labeled a long range pre-emptive strike against inflation?
And why have the big central banks had to intervene repeatedly to stabilize the dollar against the mark and yen, just when the interest-rate advantage to holding assets in dollars is rising?
Some would point to President Clinton's flat-footed policies toward Japan and China, which have unsettled major trade relationships.
And some fear that the Democrats will revert to free-spending form, once they come to their liberal senses.
But a more plausible explanation for the markets' jumpiness is offered by James Tobin, the Nobel laureate in economics who advised President John F. Kennedy.
"The markets are fighting the last war," he argues, behaving as if the inflation of 1979 is just around the corner.


Looking ahead, an industry group rethinks its meeting venue.
CHANGE is slow in coming to the advertising industry.
But as the American Association of Advertising Agencies begins its annual meeting, there are palpable signs that there is indeed change.
For one thing, the Four A's, as the industry organization is known, is taking steps to modernize the meeting, which started yesterday at the Greenbrier resort in White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.


Justice Job for Negotiator
The Clinton Administration is preparing to nominate John R. Schmidt, a top trade official, to take over the third-ranking job at the Justice Department, left vacant when Webster L. Hubbell resigned, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Schmidt is a senior negotiator for the United States Trade Representative's office.
He spent most of last year coordinating the American effort to strike a global trade agreement, reached in April among 116 countries.


U.S. Open Seats Available
Reserved seat tickets to individual sessions of the United States Open tennis championships will go on sale at 9 A.M.
Sunday, May 22, at the National Tennis Center in Flushing, Queens, and by telephone.
Most of the 500,000 or so seats at the tournament, which runs from Aug. 29 to Sept. 11, have been sold in previous mail offerings, including all seats to the five daytime weekend sessions.
According to Phil Molite, the director of ticket sales, about 100,000 seats are available, including some for each of the 20 other sessions, at prices ranging from $18 to $55.


Oops! Snapped With Castro
For decades, American officials have done everything but backflips to avoid even making eye contact with Fidel Castro on the rare occasions when diplomatic duty lands them in the same room.
But who was that bearded man next to Mike Espy, the Agriculture Secretary, in South Africa this week?
It was Mr.
Castro himself, and it left aides to Mr.
Clinton none too pleased about Mr.
Espy's Kodak moment.


Roberds Inc.(RBDS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; The move by utilities to leaner dividends draws mixed reviews.
MANY owners of utility stocks are older people who depend heavily on dividends for income.
They are largely passive investors concerned mostly with cashing dividend checks.
They know little about the companies they own or the trends in the industry because they are apt to have others, such as brokers, choose the companies to buy.
Well, such investors had better start paying attention.
Some utilities, after paying ever-increasing dividends, have begun to cut back those payouts to prepare for tougher competition ahead.


Poor Auction Demand Pushes Up Bond Yields
Bond yields surged yesterday, as the second leg of the Treasury's quarterly refunding drew less demand than expected and the auction of the new 10-year note went poorly.
Expectations of another rise in short-term rates by the Federal Reserve and caution ahead of the release of two key inflation reports today and tomorrow also helped push prices lower and yields higher.


Review/Pop; Streisand Opens American Tour With Optimism
Near the close of Barbra Streisand's frequently thrilling concert on Tuesday evening, she hit the opening notes of "Happy Days Are Here Again," the first song on the first album she recorded.
In her famous 1962 interpretation, the bouncy little proclamation of good times was slowed down and interpreted as the hysterical cry of a woman who disbelieved every word she was forcing herself to sing.
This time, at the 14,000-seat USAir Arena in Landover, Md., the song was rehabilitated into an upbeat pop anthem accompanied by a slide show illustrating reasons for her optimism.
Newspaper headlines with announcements like "Roe v. Wade Upheld" were interwoven with pictures of Ms.
Streisand's heroes, from the Clintons to Nelson Mandela.
The number was followed by Ms.
Streisand's only speech of the evening, a defense of Hollywood that stressed the movie industry's importance to the economy and its sense of moral responsibility in turning out movies about the Holocaust and AIDS.


Personnel Changes At Mademoiselle
Mademoiselle magazine announced a series of personnel changes this week.
Peggy Pollack, 38, advertising director, was named to the new position of associate publisher.
John Messina, 41, advertising manager, was named to succeed her, and Catherine Kruchko, 39, who had been serving as a consultant to the magazine, will take over Mr.
Messina's position.
Also, Warren Dixon, 33, Mademoiselle's marketing manager, was named marketing director, succeeding Nancy Harding, who left after the birth of her child.


Learned Opposition to New Disney Park
Prominent historians and authors with a special interest in the Civil War have formed a group to oppose the Walt Disney Company's planned theme park in a region of northern Virginia of particular historical significance.
At a news conference today, one member after another decried the project as a calamitous mistake.
"We have so little left that's authentic and real," said David McCullough, a biographer and historian.
"To replace what we have with plastic, contrived history, mechanical history is almost sacrilege."


Study Says Two Insurers Show Bias
Two large insurance companies, Allstate and Nationwide, were accused today by a federally financed housing organization of improperly denying homeowners insurance to minorities across the country.
Government officials and various consumer groups asserted at a Senate Banking Committee hearing that many insurance companies discriminated against minorities by either not making insurance available or charging higher prices for lower-quality policies than are available to homeowners in white neighborhoods.


Burnitz to Head for Norfolk
Jeromy Burnitz can't help thinking about Norfolk.
He knows it's not constructive.
He knows it can only upset him.
Still, it's impossible for him to avoid.
"It comes into my head plenty," Burnitz said of the Mets' Class AAA club in Virginia.
"I realize that I should take a step back and put it out of my head. I realize there's nothing I can do about it except try to improve."


Artwork by Refugee Children From Bosnia
SIX-YEAR-OLD Elvis doesn't remember his last name.
No one knows where his family is.
But he hasn't forgotten the beautiful house in Murkovic that he fled and that he paints repeatedly.
His artwork is among that of many refugee children from Bosnia and Herzegovina collected in a show called "War Through Children's Eyes," at the Children's Museum of the Arts in SoHo through May 31.
The art was gathered by Paintbrush Diplomacy, an international children's art and writing exchange program in San Francisco, and the Organization for Aid to Refugees in Prague, a group supported by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.
The children are living in "humanitarian centers" in the Czech Republic.
Their artwork swerves from the heavily warlike to the exhilaratingly hopeful.


U.S. Shoe Corp.(USR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Knick 'D' Impresses Grant
His familiar spaceman's goggles perched on top of his head, Horace Grant, in the Bulls' locker room after the game last night, gave the Knicks what was for him the ultimate compliment.
"They're the best defensive team in the league, and they seemed to put the clamps on when they wanted to," he said.
"In so many ways, they remind me of the way we used to play defense."





From Korea, a Challenge to Japan
Having smashed Japan's control of the computer memory-chip business, South Korea's electronics giants are now poised to break another near- Japanese monopoly, this one over the production of advanced flat-panel computer screens.
The Korean entrance into the flat-panel display business could lead to lower prices for notebook computers.
And it could raise questions about the necessity of a program recently announced by the United States Government to provide up to $600 million over five years to help develop an American screen-manufacturing industry.


Turner Corp.(TUR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


People
*
Larry G. Chiagouris was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of client and strategic services at Creamer Dickson Basford Inc., New York.
He was previously executive vice president and director of strategic planning and research at Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York.


CHRONICLE
LUIS R. CANCEL has moved from a local platform to a national one.
A commissioner of the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs in the Dinkins Administration, he has become president of the American Council for the Arts.
The nonprofit organization, which will mark its 35th anniversary next year, works to promote policies that foster the arts and art education.
In his new position, Mr.
Cancel, 41, a former curator who was also executive director of the Bronx Museum of the Arts for 13 years, is doing considerably more traveling.
"To be an advocate for the arts across the United States is a joy," he said.
"The council has a board of directors representing all regions of the country, so I will visit the heartland and get to know the nooks and crannies of America."


This Furniture Maker's Work Is Palatial
IT felt like the flip side of Twain's "Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court." Here was Viscount Linley, 12th in line to the British throne, having lunch with a reporter at the Four Seasons Hotel, and he was in awe of everything.
New York's skyline was spectacular, he said; the hotel lobby, stunning ("It reminds me of the Armani store in Milan"); the menu offered so many different bottled waters.
The Viscount even marveled at waiting two hours in the greenroom for an audience with the king of late-night television talk, Charlie Rose.
Lord Linley was sequestered with Liz Smith; subsequently, his only comment was, "Who is Roseanne?"


SENATE APPROVES BILL TO BAN GIFTS FROM LOBBYISTS
For members of Congress, the age-old custom of accepting freebies from lobbyists is about to end.
No more free lunches.
No more handsome gifts.
And if the Senate has its way, no more expense-paid vacations at posh golf and ski resorts.
The Senate voted 95 to 4 this evening to prohibit lawmakers from accepting gifts, meals and recreational travel from lobbyists or anyone else except family members and genuine friends.


South Africa's Other Deadly Legacy
The new Government in South Africa will have its hands full trying to overcome decades of apartheid and the hatreds and divisions it engendered.
But South Africa has another legacy to get rid of -- the remains of its secret nuclear weapons program.
With all the urgent tasks before it, Pretoria might need timely help from Washington to lay that legacy to rest.
Under former President F. W. de Klerk, South Africa became the first nation to ban its bombs after building them.
In 1989 Mr. de Klerk halted construction of an atomic bomb and ordered the dismantling of the six bombs already built.
In 1991 South Africa signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, and two years later publicly acknowledged the existence of its weapons program.


Rebuilding a Haven Called Ninevah
FRANK WIMBERLEY, an abstract painter and sculptor, built a rambling ranch home with a wide sweep of windows and a wraparound deck in Ninevah Beach, a predominantly black enclave in Sag Harbor, L.I., in the late 1960's.
It was such a striking departure from the area's quaint clapboard style that his neighbors literally beat a path to Mr.
Wimberley's door, and he had to install a green rug in his living room to hide the grass marks left by the shoes of his visitors.
"I remembered everyone asking if I wasn't afraid to have all those windows, because people could stare inside," Mr.
Wimberley recalled.
Today, the landscape and character of modest Sag Harbor neighborhoods like Eastville, Ninevah Beach, Azurest, Chatfield's Hill, Sag Harbor Hills and Hillcrest Terrace, havens for black families since the mid-19th century, are once again being transformed by young upwardly mobile blacks, many of whom are turning summer cottages into palatial permanent homes.


No Headline
"So often, Americans on the one hand seem catatonic in the face of violence and, on the other hand, ready to entertain the most radical solutions to stop violence." -- SENATOR BILL BRADLEY.  [ A22:3. ]


Knicks' Rallying Cry Is Dee-fense! More Dee-fense!
Another fourth quarter belonged to the Knicks, and so did another emotional victory.
Led by a superlative performance from Anthony Mason, plus two momentum-breaking 3-pointers by John Starks in the fourth quarter, the Knicks overcame the Chicago Bulls, 96-91, last night at Madison Square Garden to take a 2-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series.


Administration Argues in Court for Gay Ban Clinton Opposed
Using legal arguments that Bill Clinton sharply criticized as a Presidential candidate, the Administration was back in court today to defend the old policy that flatly banned homosexuals in the military.
But the Federal appeals court hearing the case was considerably more sympathetic to the Administration than was a smaller panel of the court that struck down the regulations last November.
By the end of the hourlong arguments, it appeared that a majority of the 11 judges would uphold the old regulations.


Another Plan Is Sought For Macy
A big shareholder of R. H. Macy &amp; Company has formally asked to begin discussions with the retailer's management about designing a plan to get the company out of bankruptcy-law protection with additional financing provided by its existing stockholders.
In a letter addressed to Herbert Hellman, Macy's general counsel, John J. Jerome, the lawyer representing Louis Page, a Macy director, wrote, "Our client wishes to discuss with Macy's management and advisers the possibility of stockholder participation in and financing of such a 'stand-alone' plan of reorganization."


Arthur Minasy, 68, The Inventor of Tags To Thwart Thieves
Arthur J. Minasy, an entrepreneur and inventor who developed the surveillance tags used in retail stores to thwart shoplifters, died on Monday in Brussels.
Mr.
Minasy, who lived in Woodbury, L.I., was 68.
The cause was pneumonia, said his daughter, Kathy Nicollette.


Mandela Completes His Cabinet, Giving Buthelezi a Post
President Nelson Mandela consolidated his coalition Government today by completing a Cabinet that included his Zulu rival, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, and naming his estranged wife, Winnie, among a panoply of deputy ministers.
The final Cabinet, sworn in today in Pretoria one day after Mr.
Mandela took his oath, was an eclectic, even explosive mix of personalities, backgrounds and styles that will challenge Mr.
Mandela's promise to govern by consensus.


A Selloff Hits Makers of Disk Drives
Fears that the traditional summer slump in computer sales would lead to a repeat of last year's oversupply and subsequent price wars prompted investors to dump shares of disk drive manufacturers yesterday.
And the selloff was strong enough that prices of stocks in personal computer companies, the largest users of disk drives, were dragged down, too.


Brooklyn Man Held In Killing Near Club
A 19-year-old Brooklyn man was charged yesterday in the wild shootout outside a club early Saturday morning that killed a 14-year-old youth and wounded five other bystanders.
The police said William Norfort is the gunman who, in an apparent argument about a woman, began shooting outside the Club Mahogany, at 1368 Fulton Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Masao Cooper, a 14-year-old from Bushwick, was caught in the rain of bullets and died at St.
John's Hospital.
Five other club patrons, including three teen-agers, were wounded, though none seriously.


AIDS Protesters Arrested at City Hall


Corrections
An article in Business Day on April 29 about China's agreement to buy telecommunications equipment from the AT&amp;T Corporation misidentified one of the four other companies that competed for the sale.
It was the NEC Corporation of Japan, not Fujitsu Ltd.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
A Time to Replace
Q.
Several of my shrubs still show no hint of life.
When should I assume they've had it? -- John Philipson, Philadelphia.


Irkutsk Journal; A Wing and a Prayer: Tragedy Flies With Aeroflot
She stood in the fields sobbing long after the priests had walked away.
She had heard all she could take about the comfort of Christ and the uses of technology.
Softly, she laid a single purple iris on the loamy earth and watched as weeping women climbed into their rented buses and were driven back to town.
But Lyudmila N. Konstantinova had nowhere else to go.
She simply could not bring herself to leave the place where her only daughter died.


Ericsson
Ericsson of Sweden is one of the world's leading makers of telecommunications equipment, especially for cellular telephone networks.
But its stock, traded in the form of American depository receipts, had been mostly inactive until it fell this week after AT&amp;T won a $4 billion contract with Saudi Arabia that Ericsson had wanted.
Ericsson's stock price recovered somewhat yesterday.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Inquiry on Graft May Imperil Convictions
Prosecutors in Manhattan said yesterday that more than two dozen criminal convictions are likely to be dismissed because they relied on the testimony of officers accused of corruption in the 30th Precinct.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said that his office was reviewing more than 1,500 convictions and pending court cases to see if they should be dismissed but that most would stand because there is enough untainted evidence for a conviction.


Defiant Abortion Protester Out of Jail
She was called Jane Doe C, prisoner No. 2447-93, a 40-year-old religious nomad who had been arrested for wrapping herself around the steering wheel of a old Ford station wagon that was blocking an abortion clinic in Cherry Hill, N.J.
It was a minor charge.
But she refused to give her name, saying that she abided only by the law of God, so the judge banished her to jail until she relented.
That was nearly 14 months ago.
Yesterday, after spending more time behind bars than any anti-abortion demonstrator in recent memory, the woman was identified as a Cincinnati native named Chaya Temima Patanelli and was released from the Camden County jail, unexpectedly cutting short a crusade that showed the lengths to which some abortion opponents will go to press their cause.


Anacomp Inc.(AAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a study of family day care providers in low-income neighborhoods incompletely identified the author of the study in some editions.
She is Dr.
Mary Larner, the director of early childhood and education at the National Center for Children in Poverty, a research group affiliated with Columbia University.


Harley Flaum; Advertising Producer, 48
Harley Flaum, who wrote and produced music for radio and television as well as humorous radio advertisements, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 48.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Margie.


Claire's Stores Inc.(CLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget plan misstated the total of the tax cuts he is proposing in some editions.
It is $35 million, not $42 million.


Sterling Electronics Corp.(SEC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Accounts
*
LM Network, Solana Beach, Calif., to Gigante Vaz &amp; Partners Advertising, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising and promotions for Merchandise Entertainment Television, a new interactive cable television channel.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
The Orange County New York Department of Tourism, Goshen, N.Y., to Trombone Associates Inc., New York, to handle its account, previously at Mathieu, Donovan &amp; Associates, Montgomery, N.Y.
Billings were not disclosed.


Vintage Photographs That Capture 'Brown Angels'
A THICK-AS-CUSTARD infant sits in a white basin, a Rubenesque study.
This is just one of hundreds of elegiac, vintage photographs of black children that Walter Dean Myers, a writer living in Jersey City, has found combing through flea markets and antiques stores.
Many of the portraits, from the 1930's and earlier, are in "Brown Angels," an exhibition at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem, and in his book of the same name (HarperCollins; $16), published last fall.
Mr.
Myers, who has written several books about black history, was impressed by photographs he came upon that depicted positive rather than negative images of black children.
"I began to see these types of pictures all over the country, but mostly where middle-class blacks live, like Kansas City," he said.
"They were cute, so I bought them."


Eclectic Cabinet in Pretoria
President Mandela named both his estranged wife, Winnie Mandela, and his Zulu rival to the Cabinet, whose volatile mix will test his commitment to consensus.
Page A8.


Terreri's Spot in Goal Is His Place in the Sun
The forgotten goaltender earned his unforgettable moment tonight.
"This is a dream come true for me," Chris Terreri said, "to be able to come in here and help my team win in Boston Garden."


Buried at Grant's Tomb: Talk About High Court
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt kept trying to talk about history yesterday -- some anniversary involving Ulysses S. Grant.
But the people he was talking to kept trying to get him to talk about history in the making.
Over and over again, he said that making history was something he did not know much about, an answer that lacked the cleverness of the old Sam Cooke Top-40 lyric.
But it also lacked the inside-Washington acumen about his prospects for a Supreme Court nomination that his listeners clearly craved.


Review/Dance; Ritual and Commentary By Urban Bush Women
Urban Bush Women received the 1994 Capezio Award on Monday night for outstanding service to American dance.
On Tuesday night, the modern-dance company opened at the Joyce Theater.
The program suggested that while that august prize was well deserved, the troupe had not abandoned its magically earthy ways.
Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, the choreographer and performer who founded the black, all-female company in 1984, has a distinctive way of blending everyday and theater life to create dances that seem to unfold in real time and to refer to nothing but themselves.
The four pieces on the Joyce program were about dance, music and the performance of those art forms, for instance, as much as they were about Rastafarian ceremony, big bottoms, slumber parties and the homeless.


Lewis Puller Jr., Vietnam Hero And Biographer, Is Dead at 48
Lewis B. Puller Jr., who won the Pulitzer Prize for chronicling his fight against despair and alcoholism after he lost both legs while serving in Vietnam, died this afternoon.
He was 48 years old.
A spokesman for the police in Fairfax County, Va., said Mr.
Puller died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound at his home in Mount Vernon, Va., just outside Washington.


Review/City Ballet; Baryshnikov, an Evening's Guest
The New York City Ballet, which seldom invites guest dancers, had one on Tuesday night when the company offered the first repertory program of its spring engagement at the New York State Theater.
Mikhail Baryshnikov starred in "A Suite of Dances," the solo by Jerome Robbins, which he performed this season with his own White Oak Dance Project.
The occasion was something of a homecoming for Mr.
Baryshnikov, who was a member of the City Ballet from 1978 to 1980.


Books of The Times; A Brother and Sister Excavate Their Past
School for the Blind
By Dennis McFarland
287 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.
Vivid memories of the past are said to be a recompense of old age, but what happens to Francis and Muriel Brimm in Dennis McFarland's accomplished new novel, "School for the Blind," may be too much of a good thing.
At the age of 73, Francis has retired to the Florida town of his youth, where his spinster elder sister, Muriel, has spent her entire life.


Still Waiting for the Walls of Jericho to Fall
At cassette stalls around Jericho's central square, loudspeakers blare a song that has become something of an anthem here.
"The whole nation awaits you," it goes, aptly describing the state of anticipation in this West Bank town as it awaits the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the arrival of the Palestinian police.
The song was actually written for Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who had announced plans to come to Jericho, a desert oasis of about 15,000, after it becomes the seat of the Palestinian Authority.


Bitter Closing Arguments in 'Recovered Memory' Abuse Case
Incompetent, greedy therapists persuaded Holly Ramona that she was the victim of childhood sexual abuse, leading her to falsely accuse her father of incest and costing him his marriage, livelihood and reputation, the lawyer for Gary Ramona said here this week in closing arguments of his lawsuit.
The therapists implanted false memories in the depressed, bulimic girl by misinforming her that eating disorders are usually caused by childhood sexual abuse and by inaccurately telling her that an interview administered under the influence of a hypnotic sedative, sodium amytal, would verify her vague recollections, said Mr.
Ramona's lawyer, Richard Harrington.
Mr.
Ramona is seeking $8 million.


Book Notes
'J.
F.
K.' Author Sued Two years after Nigel Hamilton published "J. F. K.: Reckless Youth," his best-selling account of John F. Kennedy's early years, a fellow author has sued, claiming that Mr.
Hamilton took information from him without paying for or properly acknowledging it.
The plaintiff, Gene Schoor, is asking for more than $20 million in damages from Mr.
Hamilton and from Random House, and has hired the heavyweight lawyer Barry Slotnick to take his case.
Mr.
Schoor's complaint, filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan late last month, presents him as a loyal Kennedy supporter hurt at being misled by Mr.
Hamilton.
Mr.
Schoor is the author of a number of sports books and in 1963 published "Young John Kennedy," a book about President Kennedy's early years based in part on interviews with the Kennedy family.
He claims that when he met with Mr.
Hamilton in 1990, Mr.
Hamilton pored through hundreds of pages of Mr.
Schoor's research material and then unexpectedly made photocopies on the spot.
When he tried to get compensation for the material, Mr.
Schoor says, Mr.
Hamilton never paid him anything, and then proceeded to pass off the information as the product of his own interviews.


A Killing Silence
Ten years ago, a woman named Rose Cipollone gave a deposition in her suit against three cigarette manufacturers for damage to her health.
"I thought it was cool to smoke, and grown-up." Then, she added, "I got hooked." A few months after her deposition Mrs.
Cipollone died of lung cancer, so she never knew she had become the first person to be awarded damages -- $400,000 to her widower -- in a smoking liability case.
The ruling was overturned on appeal, and a retrial canceled when the Cipollones' attorneys found it too expensive to continue.
They were not the first lawyers to be outgunned by the rich and powerful tobacco industry, but now the legal balance may be shifting.
Incriminating papers from industry files could give future plaintiffs a far greater chance to succeed.


G.M. Gives Mexico Its Own 'Chevy'
Passionate purple, nail-polish red and swimming pool aquamarine are colors that a growing number of Mexicans have begun to associate with the North American Free Trade Agreement.
As soon as the trade pact took effect on Jan. 1.
General Motors de Mexico started importing a cuddly new subcompact car from Spain called Chevy in several psychedelic colors.
Its arrival has brightened an otherwise dreary automotive sector.


METRO DIGEST
PATIENTS BEAR GREATER SHARE OF COSTS Patients covered by what they thought was comprehensive medical insurance are increasingly facing large out-of-pocket costs as insurers and employers turn to them to help pay the nation's ever-rising health care bill.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  FIREFIGHTER'S LIFE CELEBRATED IN DEATH The life of Capt.
John Joseph Drennan Jr., who fought for 40 days against the damage that flame inflicted on his body, was celebrated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
B3.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.(ABBY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Meredith Executive Gets President's Post
William T. Kerr, executive vice president of the Meredith Corporation and president of its magazine group, has been appointed president and chief operating officer.
The appointment is effective July 1.
Jack D. Rehm, 61, will continue as Meredith's chairman and chief executive, but will relinquish the title of president.


In Twist, Consumer Group And F.C.C. Back Cable TV
So much for convergence the idea that the telephone, television and computer industries will work together to build futuristic information networks that offer everything from movies on demand to video games.
Less than two months after most cable television and telephone companies abandoned their mating frenzy, the cable industry has declared war and begun a major legal campaign to delay phone-company plans to enter the television business anytime soon.


Revenue 2,631,000,000 2,683,000,000


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lester Bowie  Sweet Basil
The tension at Lester Bowie's second set at Sweet Basil on Tuesday night came not from the music but from the presence of Wynton Marsalis in the audience.
Mr.
Bowie, like Mr.
Marsalis a trumpeter, has been critical of Mr.
Marsalis in interviews recently, saying, in effect, that his music is too conservative, that it lacks soul.
So Mr.
Marsalis went to Sweet Basil with his trumpet in hand, ready to put words aside and challenge Mr.
Bowie on the bandstand.
The gauntlet was thrown down, but Mr.
Bowie didn't pick it up.
After addressing Mr.
Marsalis as "boy," Mr.
Bowie, who is at least 20 years older than Mr.
Marsalis, wouldn't invite him to play.


Foxmeyer Corp.(FOX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Associates Corp. of North America, Dallas, is selling $300 million of 7.25 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.722, to yield 7.331 percent, through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Developers Diversified Realty Corp., Moreland Hills, Ohio, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $275 million of debt securities, common stock and common stock warrants.


Siena College's Courage
To the Editor:
You report May 1 that 150 students at Siena College in Loudunville, N.Y., near Albany, protested dormitory drug sweeps.
As parents of two Siena freshmen, we were disappointed that you missed the good news that 95 percent of Siena's 3,000 students agreed with expulsion for drug abuse of eight students charged with possession as a result of the sweep.


Petroleum Geo-Services A/ S(PGSAY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Citizens Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Maradona Is Granted a U.S. Visa
DIEGO MARADONA, awaiting word from Japan on whether he will be allowed to play in exhibition games there, has been granted a visa to travel to the United States for the World Cup next month.
Maradona, captain of Argentina's national team, was given a three-month visa to play in the World Cup, a spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in Buenos Aires, speaking on condition of anonymity, said yesterday.
Maradona, 33, was suspended from international play for 15 months in 1991-92 after testing positive for cocaine use while playing for Naples in the Italian League.
He was also arrested in Buenos Aires in 1991 for cocaine possession. (AP)


Atmos Energy Corp.(ATO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Minnesota's Lenard Heading to the Draft
VOSHON LENARD is giving up his senior year at Minnesota to try his luck in the National Basketball Association draft, he said yesterday.
A new National Collegiate Athletic Association rule allows underclassmen to enter the draft, but retain their eligibility if they decide to return to college within 30 days of the draft.
But any team drafting an underclassman retains his rights for the next year's draft, meaning Lenard would have little bargaining power in 1995 should he opt for the draft but then decide to return to Minnesota.


Emanuel Goldberger, Cardiologist, Dies at 81
Dr.
Emanuel Goldberger, a cardiologist who practiced in Manhattan and Westchester County for more than 40 years until he retired last year, died on Saturday at Jupiter Hospital in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 81 and had homes in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Singer Island, Fla.
He suffered a lengthy illness, his family said.


Detective Held in U.S. Sting Faced Similar Charge in '86
One of the three Mount Vernon police detectives charged on Tuesday with stealing $10,000 during a police raid had been accused of a similar crime in 1986 -- and acquitted -- while a police officer in New York City.
The detective, Frank Lauria, was among at least a dozen officers in the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn who were indicted that year on charges including stealing and selling drugs, burglary and stealing garbage cans belonging to the police station.


Jurassic Jigsaw Puzzle; Before a Skeleton, Patience and Glue
In a quiet laboratory at the American Museum of Natural History, Amy Davidson, peering through a microscope, carefully aims a thin carbide-steel needle at an 80-million-year-old skull the size of a walnut.
She has spent nearly three weeks chipping and drilling at the rust-red sandstone that once encased the skull, which is from a rodentlike mammal known as a multituberculate.
Now, with a deft hand, she uses the needle to quickly flick away a piece of rock that resembles a pepper flake.
On the work tray in front of her is the barest sprinkling of rock dust from this and another skull, from a late Cretaceous Period turtle found in Bolivia -- a full morning's work.


Yeltsin Begins A State Visit To Germany
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia began a three-day state visit to Germany today, pushing hard on several fronts with his friend Helmut Kohl for more respectful and dignified treatment of his battered but still great-power country.
"Dear Boris" and "my friend Helmut" hugged each other warmly in bright spring sunshine, but there was tough diplomatic bargaining nonetheless.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.58
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.20
4.23
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.76
4.75
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.43
7.31
5.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.60
7.49
6.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.33
7.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.49
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Elron Electronics Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cleanth Brooks, Yale Professor And Prominent New Critic, 87
Cleanth Brooks, an educator, author and eminent Southern literary critic who helped spread the principles of the New Criticism movement throughout American universities, died on Tuesday at his home in New Haven.
He was 87.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, said the Beecher &amp; Bennett funeral home in Hamden, Conn.


Martin Bodian, 82, Retired Eye Surgeon
Dr.
Martin Bodian, a retired eye surgeon who practiced in Brooklyn for more than 40 years, died on Saturday at Mediplex of Southbury, a nursing and rehabilitation center in Southbury, Conn.
Dr.
Bodian, who lived in Southbury, was 82.
The cause was a head injury sustained in a fall, said his wife, Claire Bodian.


Babbitt Waits as Clinton Ponders Successor
The White House is preparing a dual confirmation process in hopes of winning support for Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, the President's likely nominee to the Supreme Court, and settling quickly on his successor, officials said today.
Aides said that Mr.
Clinton would delay announcing his selection of Mr.
Babbitt until he had made a private decision on the Interior post.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Tuesday about the stock of LDDS Communications Inc. misstated the status of the company's $2 billion bid for the Wiltel subsidiary of the Williams Companies.
An offer has been made for Wiltel, but Williams has not accepted it.


It's Location, Location and a Bit More
WHAT price glory and a good address?
In London, $:25 million, or about $37.5 million.
The Rectory is the most expensive house for sale in Britain, a 1725 Georgian-style mansion that was originally the home of rectors for St.
Luke's in London's Chelsea district.
The rectors owned it until the 1980's, when a businessman bought it for $:1.5 million.
Eventually, it was repossessed by two French banks.
The current owners, Toyoko Metropolitan, Japanese developers, have enhanced the property so that it is now 30,000 square feet and has four formal reception rooms (including a dining room with colonnades), eight bedroom suites, a gymnasium, a room for billiards, sun lounges and a professionally equipped kitchen.
And then there are the grounds: two and a quarter acres (quite grand for London) with a tennis court and a vegetable garden.


Executive Changes
ADVANCED PHOTONIX INC., Camarillo, Calif., a producer of electronic photo detection devices, named James Ward president and chief executive.
DELL COMPUTER CORP., Austin, Tex., named Morton L. Topfer vice chairman.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES CORP., Jackson, Miss., appointed Elizabeth D. Conklyn senior vice president for human resources and organization.
RIGGS NATIONAL CORP., Washington, said Paul Homan had resigned as president, chief executive and a director of Riggs National Bank after holding those positions for less than a year.
SEAGRAM CHATEAU AND ESTATE WINES CO., New York, a division of Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc., appointed John W. Laird president.
SMITH BARNEY SHEARSON, New York, named Terri Wein managing director in its mortgage trading group.


James Seeman, 79, Artist and Designer
James Seeman, a watercolorist, muralist and designer of wall coverings, died on Tuesday at his winter home in Miami.
He was 79 and lived in Water Mill, L.I., the rest of the year.
The cause was complications from heart disease, his family said.


Anticrime Bill Will Not End U.S. Violence, Bradley Says
Saying that violence in America had taken "inexplicable turns," Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey warned today that the pending Federal crime bill was a well-intended but desperate hodge-podge of proposals that might have only limited effect, and he called for a "national rebellion" against violence.
"It is a huge heap of ideas and proposals cobbled together by representatives of a nation which is increasingly desperate about violence," he said of the election-year bill that has passed both houses of Congress in different forms and is to be reconciled in conference starting next week.
"In a way, it reminds me of what a group of anxious citizens would do if they threw furniture and household goods onto a barricade to stop the invading hordes."


Rein In the Custodians
The egregious system that allows school custodians in New York City to collect high salaries while refusing to keep the schools clean and fit for education has long frustrated all attempts at good management.
This year Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines announced a new contract with the custodians that he described as "revolutionary." But Mayor Rudolph Giuliani sees the proposed contract as an empty shell that costs too much and requires very little of the custodians.
He has vetoed the contract and wants to have his Labor Commissioner take the lead in negotiations.
This is a complicated issue, raised to a high emotional pitch by the recent budget battle that pitted the Mayor and the Chancellor against each other in a bruising public confrontation.
In that battle, we stood squarely behind the Chancellor in his efforts to repel the Mayor's unwarranted intervention.
But the school custodians are a special case; they run a system that has long defied rational control.
The Mayor's instincts appear sound here: the city must not let pass an opportunity to rein in the custodians.


Nurseries For Every Gardener
INSIDE many gardeners lurk nursery addicts who want to wander through every garden shop they can find.
Some zero in quickly on the perfect plant.
Others prefer to flit from flower to flower like hard-working bees.
For both types, here is a sampling of nurseries within a 90-minute drive of the city.
Manhattan
For those who are city penned, Manhattan has three true garden centers -- places to find supplies like tools and big bags of fertilizers, as well as shrubs and trees.


MOUNT VERNON
One of the three Mount Vernon police detectives charged with stealing $10,000 during a police raid had been accused of a similar crime in 1986 -- and acquitted -- while a police officer in New York City.
Page B8.


Suns Stage A Record Comeback
Suns 124, Rockets 117
The Phoenix Suns refused to give up when they were down by 20 points, and they rallied for the biggest final-period comeback in National Basketball Association playoff history in a 124-117 overtime victory over the Rockets last night in Houston.
The victory gave the Suns a 2-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.
Only one team, the 1969 Los Angeles Lakers, has ever rallied to win a seven-game series after losing the first two games at home.


Senate, in 58-41 Vote, Bars Race-Based Death Row Pleas
Sending a warning to the House, the Senate expressed its opposition today to a provision in the House version of the crime bill that would allow inmates to challenge death sentences by using statistics on racial discrimination.
Today's action, in a 58-to-41 vote, came after impassioned pleas by two of the Senate's most liberal members, Carol Mosely-Braun of Illinios and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who argued that dropping the provision would be a setback in the fight for racial justice.


CHRONICLE
TIMOTHY LEARY, who served time in prison in the 1970's for possession of marijuana, was detained at the Austin, Tex., airport Tuesday for smoking -- a cigarette.
The 1960's LSD guru, whose credo was "Tune in, turn on, drop out," said he wanted to draw attention to people being "demonized" by the politically correct.
"We were told by an official that smoke in the airport would get us a citation," Mr.
Leary, who is 73, told The Associated Press.
"So we did look for a policeman to check this out."
He was held at the airport for about an hour.
A court hearing was scheduled for next Wednesday on the charge, which carries a maximum $500 fine.
NADINE BROZAN


ON THE SET WITH: Dennis Franz; A Man for All Precincts
It's lunch-time, and Dennis Franz is sitting lazily in his small trailer on the 20th Century Fox lot.
He sips at a bottle of Snapple.
Slowly, he picks at a dish of rice, chicken and vegetables.
At first glance, he seems only a distant relative of Detective Andy Sipowicz, the volcanic cop on ABC's acclaimed "N.Y.P.D. Blue." The jeans are perfectly cut, the knitted shirt is fashionably loose, the suede and leather loafers are expensive.
Even the haircut -- of what's left up there -- looks like the work of a high-priced Beverly Hills barber.


Whites in South Africa Find The World Has Not Ended
White South Africans looked up today to discover that the African sky had not fallen.
True, they had a black President, a slew of Communists in Parliament and a former guerrilla leader for Minister of Defense.


Brascan Ltd.(BRS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about an encounter between President Clinton and Senator Edward M. Kennedy described their conversation incorrectly.
Referring to a health care bill Mr.
Kennedy has proposed, Mr.
Clinton said, "You've got a great bill there." They did not engage in "horse-trading."


Overhaul of Toxic-Waste Cleanup Program Passes First Test
Congress took the first step today toward overhauling the Superfund program for cleaning up toxic wastes.
A House subcommittee voted unanimously to approve a package that has the grudging support of major business and environmental organizations.
The subcommittee vote, the first of several hurdles the bill faces in the House and Senate, culminated weeks of negotiations among business, environmental and political leaders.
Although the fragile compromise that emerged from the talks seems for now to have rescued the bill from the legislative mortuary, it is not considered certain to survive.


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Spurs Are Pondering Lucas's Future
The jobs of the San Antonio Spurs' coach, JOHN LUCAS, and their vice president, BOB BASS, may be in jeopardy because of the Spurs' first-round playoff loss, according to a published report.
Lucas, contacted in Miami, said the Spurs' management had not told him about a change.
The San Antonio Express-News reported yesterday that the subject was debated Monday during a meeting by the team's board.
Lucas was hired as coach in December 1992, after JERRY TARKANIAN was discharged.


Saying Strategy to Find Cure for AIDS Has Gone Awry, Researchers Seek Redirection
A new consensus has emerged among many leading scientists that the nation's $1.3 billion AIDS research program is on the wrong track.
The notion that the AIDS effort needs to be redirected has been discussed for some time, but little has changed.
Emphasis on quick testing of drugs and vaccines has continued, in spite of a widespread feeling of frustration and a sense that the research is far more complicated than many scientists had thought.


Students Take a Break from the Three R's for the Three Rings


Let the Old-Timers Retire With Dignity
To the Editor:
Last year, the Dinkins administration belatedly but wisely listened to those who urged New York City leaders to support pension reopener legislation, which did, eventually, enable many elderly qualified city employees in poverty-level "fractional" pension plans to retire with pension equity and dignity.


Copper Hits 15-Month High On Demand From 2 Sectors
Copper prices rose to a 15-month high yesterday as stockpiles declined, the result of soaring demand from resurgent construction and telecommunications sectors that are big users.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, July copper settled 2 cents higher at 98 cents a pound.
Prices are at their highest level since mid-February 1993.


Rent Board Proposes Small Rise In Increases
New York City's Rent Guidelines Board has proposed allowing rent increases that would be the smallest for rent-stabilized apartments since the guidelines were established 25 years ago.
The board recommended on Monday night that landlords of the nearly one million rent-stabilized apartments be allowed to increase rents 2 percent for one-year leases and 4 percent for two-year leases.
The board will make a final decision after public hearings in June.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The German central bank lowered both its key interest rates by half a percentage point to the lowest levels in five years, suggesting that Germany was again joining the United States and its allies to stop the recent slide in the dollar.  [ Page A1. ]
Having smashed Japan's control of the computer memory-chip business, South Korea's electronics giants are poised to break Japan's near-monopoly on production of advanced flat-panel computer screens.  [ D1. ]
Free trade comes to Mexicans in passionate purple, nail-polish red and aquamarine -- funky-colored G.M. cars from Spain called Chevys that have entered the country since the North American Free Trade Agreement was approved.  [ D1. ] Companies
G.M. will contribute $10 billion of stock and cash to finance the pensions of its retirees, in hopes of narrowing the nation's largest deficit in a private pension fund.  [ D1. ]
A Macy's shareholder is seeking talks with management about a plan to get the retailer out of bankruptcy.  [ D1. ]
Allstate and Nationwide were accused of improperly denying homeowners insurance to minority groups.  [ D4. ]
Old airlines never die, or at least it seems that way since some old names may be flying once again.  [ D4. ]
Investors dumped shares of disk-drive makers amid fears that a summer slump in computer sales would lead to price wars.  [ D4. ]
Four American companies won stakes in a new mobile telephone venture in South Korea.  [ D4. ]
Meredith named a president and chief operating officer.  [ D19. ] The Economy
The cable television industry has declared war on telephone companies less than two months after most cable and telephone companies abandoned their mating frenzy.  [ D1. ]
California air-quality regulators will decide whether it is still a good idea to to require electric cars to be sold by 1998.  [ D2. ]
Domestic violence groups are pushing to end what they say is discrimination against victims by many insurance carriers.  [ A23. ]
It's a deal even a New Yorker could love: a hotel, show, fancy meal and a tour for $199.40 in a tourism promotion.  [ B1. ] Markets
The stock market declined in computer-driven trading, following a sharp rise in long-term interest rates.
The Dow fell 27.37 points, to 3,629.04.  [ D8. ]
Bond yields surged and prices fell as the second leg of the Treasury's quarterly refunding drew less demand than expected and the auction of 10-year notes went poorly.  [ D17. ]
The dollar fell against most currencies after the Federal Reserve took no action to push up American interest rates.  [ D15. ]
Copper rose to a 15-month high as stockpiles declined.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Why has the bond market reacted so perversely to the Fed's pre-emptive strike against inflation if it is truly under control?
At least one Nobel economist thinks that the market is behaving as if the inflation of 1979 is just around the corner.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Many owners of utility stocks should pay more attention to an industry trend of trimming dividends as a way to prepare for tougher competition.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
As the American Association of Advertising Agencies begins its annual meeting, signs of change include the meeting's somewhat remote venue.
Advertising: Stuart Elliott.  [ D19. ]


Bridge
The 20th annual Cavendish Pairs at Loews New York Hotel in Manhattan ended on Sunday in a victory for Neil Silverman of Boca Raton, Fla., and Kit Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., who are both involved in options trading.
They both previously won the Cavendish event, with different partners.
The standings were: 1st Silverman and Woolsey, 2,171.97 imps; 2d Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Bob Levin of Orlando, Fla., 1,768.91; 3d Garey Hayden of Tucson, Ariz., and Gaylor Kasle of Palm Springs, Calif., 1,697.55; 4th Piotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki of Poland, 1,627.86; 5th David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., 1,570.8; 6th Steve Weinstein of Montclair, N.J., and Fred Stewart of Andes, N.Y., the defending champions, 1,053.56.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Mark Smith, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Sandy Alomar, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jesse Levis, catcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Promoted Bruce Egloff, pitching coach at Sioux City of the Northern League, to pitching coach at Bristol of the Appalachian League.
Northern League
SIOUX CITY EXPLORERS -- Re-signed Kevin Kobetitsch, pitcher, and Marty Neff, outfielder.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Announced the retirement of Isiah Thomas, guard.
United States Basketball League
ATLANTA TROJANS -- Signed Darrell Armstrong, Fred Vinson and Robert Shannon, guards, and Stan Rose, Mark Strickland and Terry Davis, forwards.
CONNECTICUT SKYHAWKS -- Signed Keith Bullock and Pervires Greene, forwards, and Doremus Bennerman and Malcolm Huckaby, guards.
LONG ISLAND SURF -- Signed Mitchell Foster, center, and Jean Prioleau, guard.
MISSISSIPPI COAST GAMBLERS -- Signed Dale Brown, guard, and Lenear Burns and Jessic Ratliff, forwards.
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Withdrew contract offers to Brad Goebel, quarterback, and Ed King, tackle.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed John Oglesby, running back, and Scott Kaplan, kicker.
Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Agreed to terms with Danny Barrett, quarterback.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Chris Anderson, running back. Arena Football League
CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Frank Owens, wide receiver-defensive back, and Don Mollick, fullback-linebacker.
MASSACHUSETTS MARAUDERS -- Signed Todd Gecewicz, lineman.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Signed Romallice Burke, wide receiver-defensive back.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Javier Zuluaga, fullback-linebacker.
Hockey  National Hockey League
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed Chris Herperger, left wing, and Aaron Israel, goaltender.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Recalled Pat Jablonski, goaltender; Matt Martin, defenseman; and Yanic Perreault, Chris Govedaris and Eric Lacroix, forwards, from St.
John's of the American Hockey League.
College
CITADEL -- Named Kenny Carter defensive ends coach and recruiting coordinator.
IOWA -- Named Mandi Kowal women's rowing coach.
MIDDLE TENNESSEE STATE -- Named Lee Fowler athletic director, effective June 13.
Announced that John Stanford, retiring athletic director, will assume the newly created position of director of athletic relations.
MIDWESTERN STATE -- Named Wayne Williams women's basketball coach.
MINNESOTA -- Announced Voshon Lenard, guard, will forego his senior year eligibility and make himself available for the NBA draft.
NORTHEAST LOUISIANA -- Announced the resignation of Janie Fincher Roland, women's assistant basketball coach.
NORTHWESTERN, IOWA -- Announced the resignation of Mike Meyer, women's basketball coach.
Named Earl Woudstra women's basketball coach.
SOUTHWEST TEXAS -- Announced that Keevan Mills has been dismissed from the track and field team for violating team rules relating to player conduct.


In Bosnia, An Island Of Tolerance Is Sinking
When the whim takes them, Serbian nationalist forces shell this northern Bosnian town from their positions in the mountains to the east and west.
On the last occasion, 10 days ago, the victim was a 22-year-old Serbian woman, Natasha Corak.
The episode seemed relatively trivial, just one more death in the 25-month Bosnian war.
But it underlined the worsening plight of the approximately 200,000 Serbs still living on the Bosnian Government side of the confrontation line.
Branded traitors by Bosnia's Serbian nationalists and increasingly marginalized by the growing Muslim nationalism within Bosnia, they feel isolated and threatened.


Overturning Conviction Is Upheld In Trenton
In a victory for a freed suspect, the New Jersey Supreme Court has refused to hear an appeal of an appellate court decision in March that overturned the 18-year-old murder conviction of V. James Landano on charges of killing a Newark police officer during an armed robbery in 1976.
The full court, in a 7-to-0 vote, denied the appeal by the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office, which must now decide whether to retry Mr.
Landano.
The decision was issued Tuesday and the lawyers were informed today.
The County Prosecutor, Carmen Messano, said today that a retrial would take about two months to schedule.


Guggenheim Deputy To Head Dia Center
Michael Govan, the deputy director of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, is to become the new director of the Dia Center for the Arts, a nonprofit contemporary art institution in SoHo, the organization announced yesterday.


Cancer Study Overseers Are Assailed At Hearing
Federal health officials and researchers at the University of Pittsburgh came under renewed attack today at a Congressional hearing for delays in disclosing falsified data and other irregularities in major studies that changed the way breast cancer is treated.
At the same time, officials of the National Cancer Institute backed the need to resume a large clinical trial it has financed to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the drug tamoxifen in preventing breast cancer.


Stocks Fall in Computer-Driven Trading; Dow Drops 27.37
The stock market declined yesterday in computer-driven trading, following a sharp rise in long-term interest rates when the Government experienced more difficulty than stock or bond traders had expected in selling the new 10-year Treasury note.
Higher interest rates cut the value of current bonds, raise borrowing costs for corporations and thus hurt their stocks, as well as slow the overall rate of economic expansion.


CHRONICLE
STACY KEACH bounded jubilantly up the aisle of the Warner Theater in Washington on Monday evening to collect his Helen Hayes Award.
In his view, it came not a moment too soon.
"Finally," he exclaimed, waving the award.
"I was beginning to think Helen didn't like me, but some one reminded me that Helen didn't even know me," said the actor, who was named outstanding actor for his performance in the Kennedy Center production of "The Kentucky Cycle."


INSIDE
Crime Bill Under Attack On 2 Fronts by Senators
Senator Bill Bradley said the Federal crime bill was a hodgepodge unlikely to stem violence, while the Senate opposed part of the House bill allowing death sentence challenges based on race data.
Articles, page A22.
Bratton Faults Training
Two weeks after a man died in custody, New York's Police Commissioner said training for handling violent prisoners is inadequate.
Page B1.
Abortion Foe Finally Freed
After spending 14 months in a New Jersey jail for refusing to identify herself, an anti-abortion protester was released.
Page B7.
It's Devils vs.
Rangers
The New Jersey Devils won their N.H.L. playoff series with the Boston Bruins, 4 games to 2, and will face the New York Rangers next.
Page B15.
Knicks Beat Bulls Again
Led by Patrick Ewing and Anthony Mason, the Knicks defeated Chicago, 96-91, to take a lead of 2 games to 0 in their N.B.A. playoff series.
Page B15.


Personalizing a Trip Down the Aisle
IF the 80's were the decade of the Big Wedding, the early 90's qualify as the era of the personalized wedding, ultra-personalized in some cases.
"It's not so much the grand party as it's something unique to the couple," said Nancy Davis, author of "Bridal Style" (Hugh Lauter Levin Associates; $60), a new large-format illustrated book of wedding ideas.
"If you met at the seaside, you might want shells on your cake."


Journal; Comeback Kid II
Now that Richard Nixon's rehabilitation is over -- having collapsed of its own inflated weight once a self-aggrandizing Henry Kissinger jumped on the bandwagon -- the time is right for Dan Quayle's comeback.
For Democrats no less than stand-up comics, this is heartening news.
The cue for Mr.
Quayle's re-emergence is his book, "Standing Firm," a surprisingly readable mixture of bitchiness, blame-deflecting and braggadocio in which it turns out that everyone except George Bush and Dan Quayle is responsible for everything that went wrong in their Administration and re-election campaign.
To promote this putative best-seller -- 375,000 copies in print -- Mr.
Quayle is touring 36 cities, sampling his '96 Presidential prospects along the way, and grabbing every free microphone he can in the media he spends much of his book excoriating.


Patients Share Bigger Burden Of Rising Health Care Costs
Patients covered by what they thought was comprehensive medical insurance are increasingly facing large out-of-pocket costs as insurers and employers turn to them to help pay the nation's ever-rising health care bill.
Personal outlays for medical care have risen steadily since the early 1980's, but the trend has accelerated in the last several years, with 1994 estimates showing yet another leap.


Mothers Step Into a New Role: Coach
ON a warm spring evening recently, Laurel Schliftman arrived at the Harvey School Rink in Katonah, N.Y., wearing several layers of sweaters.
It was 40 minutes before game time, and Mrs.
Schliftman was with her sons, Matt, 15, an experienced ice-hockey player who is helping her coach the Hickory Hill spring league hockey team, and Tim, 11, who is on the team.
Her daughter, Elizabeth, 14, also a hockey player and a competitive figure skater, was already at the rink, working at the snack bar as a volunteer.
A passionate hockey fan who fully supports her children's obsession with the ice, Mrs.
Schliftman, who is 43 and lives in nearby Bedford, N.Y., makes at least five trips a week to this hangarlike skating rink all year long.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  FIRST GAZA TOWN GAINS AUTONOMY  Signaling a transfer of authority that will spread, the ramshackle Gazan town of Deir el Balah became the first place to come under Palestinian rule.
As a contingent of armed police officers rode in, the town seemed to relish the fact that it was first.
A1


Design Secrets, Revealed
IS design finally becoming democratic?
Lemeau Arrott-Watt, a designer for 20 years in Manhattan, is spilling the secrets of the lips-are-sealed world of interior design in a newsletter called Decorator's Insider.
"We're going to talk about things your decorator doesn't tell you, like what fabrics work for drapes and what don't, what can go wrong when laying a carpet, the inside scoop on upholstering, and the perennial problem of working with contractors," she said.
In the first issue, an article assesses the styles and prices


Michael Scouting Bullpen Insurance
While Gene Michael and Kevin Malone have had two discussions in the last week, the general managers for the Yankees and the Expos both stressed yesterday that the conversations were preliminary and that a potential trade for reliever Mel Rojas is not imminent.
And Larry Walker?
Both dismissed the possibility of the outfielder being dealt to New York any time soon.
Michael has conceded that he monitors the availability of relievers throughout the major leagues, and that is why he has spoken to Malone and why Dick Williams is scouting the Expos.
That is also why the Yankees are keeping watch on Minnesota's Rick Aguilera and Chicago's Randy Myers.
Michael wants to be ready to act if the bullpen falters.


Take Me Out to a Ball Game, Not a Sideshow
As Fred Wilpon, the Mets' co-owner, announced with quite genuine excitement a new deal to install a kids' theme park at Shea Stadium, I thought: isn't the sport enough anymore?
The park was conceived by the Nickelodeon cable network, and based on Nickelodeon's popular kids' participatory game shows, the park will probably succeed.
Other teams will want something similar until all stadiums have one.
Figure the San Diego Padres on having one based on "Rescue 911."


Sparton Corp.(SPA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Here Come the Devils: Under the River, Out of the Woods
The Devils are getting a second chance at the Rangers, who swept them in six games during the regular season.
New Jersey joined its archrivals in the Eastern Conference final by defeating the Bruins, 5-3, at Boston Garden tonight.
"It's only fitting that we're playing the Rangers," the Devils' Bernie Nicholls said.
"I felt all year that they were the best team. For us, the way to the Stanley Cup is through New York."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Is Eliminated on Clay in Italy  Andre Agassi's clay-court season suffered another jolt yesterday when he was eliminated in the second round of the Italian Open in Rome.
Agassi, committing an unusual number of unforced errors, was beaten by unseeded Stefano Pescosolido of Italy, 6-3, 1-6, 6-3.
Agassi, who returned to action this year after a five-month layoff with a wrist injury, was hoping to round into form in time for the French Open, which begins later this month.
But after winning his comeback tournament on hard courts in Scottsdale, Ariz., in February and reaching the final of the Lipton championships in Key Biscayne, Fla., in March, Agassi has struggled on clay in Europe.
He lost in the first round of the Monte Carlo Open last month.
In an earlier match yesterday, No. 5 Michael Chang lost, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), to Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands.
Top-seeded Pete Sampras did not have such problems, however, reaching the round of 16.
Others advancing included No. 3 Jim Courier, the defending champion; No. 4 Goran Ivanisevic, No. 6 Andrei Medvedev, No. 7 Thomas Muster and No. 8 Boris Becker. (AP) Graf and Sabatini Roll On: Steffi Graf, a two-time defending champion, and fourth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina rolled to easy straight-set victories yesterday at the German Open in Berlin.
The top-seeded Graf beat No. 13 Ginger Helgeson of the United States, 6-2, 6-2, to become the first player to reach the quarterfinals.
Sabatini moved into the third round by knocking off another American, Kimberly Po, 6-4, 6-0. (AP)


Life of Fallen Firefighter Is Celebrated at Cathedral
In a place of tranquillity opened amid the canyons of Manhattan, the life of Capt.
John Joseph Drennan Jr. -- who had fought for 40 days against the damage that flame had inflicted on his body -- was celebrated yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
In a hush that gently enveloped what is usually one of New York City's most hectic thoroughfares, 10,000 firefighters in their dress blues and serge caps stood so silently along Fifth Avenue that songs of birds seemed etched against the distant hum of traffic held at bay blocks away.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Brand-New Heavies  The Academy
American musicians like Gang Starr and Digable Planets broke borders last year by combining hip-hop with jazz.
At the same time in England, the Brand-New Heavies, the Young Disciples and Soul II Soul were not only fusing hip-hop and jazz, but throwing funk, soul and gospel into the mix as well.
On Monday night, the Brand-New Heavies demonstrated that from an overseas vantage point, pop-music genres traditionally ghettoized in America can be gracefully combined.


California Regulators To Meet on Electric Cars
California's air-quality regulators will meet today and tomorrow in Los Angeles to decide whether their requirement that auto makers put tens of thousands of "zero emission vehicles" -- electric cars -- into dealer showrooms in three and a half years is still a good idea.
The meeting, a review by the California Air Resources Board to determine if the state's four-year-old program is technologically feasible, has national significance because the plan has been adopted by New York and Massachusetts, and 10 other Eastern states and the District of Columbia are trying to join it.
By Federal law, states that adopt the California plan, which is the national model, are automatically bound by later revision.


GERMANS REDUCE 2 INTEREST RATES
The German central bank lowered its key interest rates by half a percentage point today to the lowest levels in five years, suggesting that Germany was again joining the United States and its allies to stop the recent slide in the dollar that has troubled American financial markets.
The larger than expected interest rate cuts by the Bundesbank in Frankfurt, which spurred hope for economic recovery in Europe, were accompanied by similar or smaller rate reductions in Italy, France, Belgium and Denmark.


COMPANY NEWS: Pan Am et al.; Failed Airlines in Line For Another Takeoff
Old airlines never die. Nor do they fade away.
In recent months, companies that own the rights to three familiar names in aviation -- Eastern, Pan Am and Frontier -- have signaled interest in restarting scheduled service.
Another once-grounded carrier, Midway Airlines, is already back in the air.


What a Difference a Year Makes
It wasn't supposed to be this way, the Phillies had to figure.
Worst to first was fine.
But worst to first to worst, again?
Fate couldn't possibly be that cruel.
Could it?


Lawsuit Seeks Papers on Arkansas Thrift
The House Republican who has led inquiries into President Clinton's role in the Whitewater affair sued two Federal banking agencies today, demanding documents that he said have been illegally withheld.
The lawmaker, Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, asked a Federal court to order the Resolution Trust Corporation and the Office of Thrift Supervision to release files on Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, an Arkansas savings institution that Federal regulators closed in 1989.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mark Helias  Dance Theater Workshop
The bassist and composer Mark Helias is a structuralist who likes his compositions tidy.
The music he makes isn't small: it pushes and jostles like a river about to jump its banks. but it is identified by its attention to form, a precision and logic that make his pieces sound symmetrical and clean.


Musical in Concert To Benefit AIDS Group
Bernadette Peters, Mandy Patinkin and other members of the original Broadway cast of "Sunday in the Park With George" are to take part in a concert version of the 1984 musical, by Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine, on Sunday at 7 P.M. at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The performance is the first of three benefits for Friends in Deed, a nonprofit organization that offers emotional support to people with AIDS or other life-threatening illnesses and their families.
The other events are to be an evening of dance with Gregory Hines, Margie Gillis and others on June 1 at 7:30 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, and the world premiere of the film "Wolf," with Jack Nicholson, on June 14 at 7 P.M. at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street, Manhattan.


Insurability for Battered Women
After being beaten up by her husband and shoved across the room, a woman in her mid-20's from Pennsylvania sought life, health and mortgage disability insurance last year from State Farm Insurance.
She was denied all three.
State Farm says it denies insurance to battered women for their own protection.
"There is some fear that if the beneficiary is the batterer, we would be providing a financial incentive, if it's life insurance, for the proceeds to be paid for him to kill her," said K. C. Eynath, a spokeswoman for the company.
"We don't want to do that."


It's Just Another Happy Day For Yanks
Happiness has had innumerable definitions for the Yankees these days.
Last night, happiness for them was Jimmy Key adeptly handling the opposition when his pitches were suspect, Bob Wickman playing dominant closer, a missed sign igniting a pivotal rally, home sweet home in the Bronx and another day in first place.
Happiness was a 6-3 victory over the Indians.
So the team with the best record in baseball continued winning by corraling its sixth straight victory and also continued doing it in obscurity.
Yankee Stadium had more vacant seats than taken seats.
With the Knicks and the Devils both engaged in playoff games on the same evening, the Yankees provided a treat for the 17,611 spectators who ignored hockey and basketball and ventured into their private party by blitzing Dennis Martinez.
They made everyone happy.


U.S. Opposes Plan for U.N. Force in Rwanda
As rebel forces of the Rwanda Patriotic Front pressed their attack today against the capital, Kigali, the United States criticized a new United Nations plan to send some 5,500 soldiers into the heart of the Rwandan civil war to protect refugees and assist relief workers, saying it is more than the organization can handle.
Instead America's representative at the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, told the Security Council the United Nations should explore the possibility of sending an international force to establish a "protection zone" along parts of the Rwandan border where refugees could gather and be cared for.


Berlusconi and Cabinet With Neo-Fascists Take Office in Italy
Smiling in victory, Silvio Berlusconi was sworn in as Prime Minister today, heading a Government that prompted some Italians to question where it will lead the nation after more than two years of corruption scandals.
Mr.
Berlusconi, 57, took the oath of office flanked by a Cabinet that included five members of the neo-Fascist National Alliance, one of the two coalition partners of the new Prime Minister's Forza Italia party.
Mr.
Berlusconi pledged to "be faithful to the Republic, loyally to observe its Constitution and laws and to exercise my functions in the exclusive interest of the nation."


World War II Serb Holocaust No Fiction
To the Editor:
"Serbia's Suffering in Holocaust Is Exaggerated" (letter, April 29) by C. Michael McAdams is a slap in the face, not only to the memory of the Jews, Serbs and Gypsies who perished in the Nazi puppet state of Croatia in World War II, but also to those who think one should look at history objectively and truthfully.


Nabors Industries(NBR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Charles Lloyd  Blue Note 131 West Third Street Greenwich Village Through Sunday
The saxophonist Charles Lloyd, the headliner of a strong double bill at the Blue Note this week, is an odd jazz star.
He's a foremost exponent of the style made most popular by the saxophonist John Coltrane, and in the 1960's Mr.
Lloyd had enormous success and a few hit records.
His music has grown fairly difficult, but he still has his fans, and at the Blue Note Mr.
Lloyd used his charisma to keep them with him through his set.


MB Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Essay; Nixon On 1996
"'94 will be a great year for non-incumbents," Richard Nixon opined a few months before his death.
"People want change. Clinton asked for it; now the country is going to demand it."
But to a man who won four out of five national races, matching F.D.R.'s record, the focus had to be on the national ticket in 1996.


New York Buries a Heroic Firefighter


What Will They Think of Next? It's Under One Roof
IT'S no surprise that modern furniture, with its off-kilter, esoteric shapes, has not made its mark in the heart of American culture.
But cutting-edge design does have its enthusiastic followers.
These days, contemporary can mean down-home simple or downright ornery.
Artisans, artists and entrepreneurs gallivant their way through the gamut of materials and shapes; some reflect environmental concerns, while others take a witty approach.


COMPANY BRIEFS ARKLA INC., Shreveport, La., a natural gas pipeline company, changed its name to Noram Energy Corp.


The Making of a Fiasco
WASHINGTON
Scrambling to revive its moribund Haiti policy, the Clinton Administration has decided to rule out a compromise with the country's military leaders and to broaden economic sanctions.
The one certain effect of this new policy will be to greatly increase the possibility of U.S. military intervention.
Faced with the tightened embargo, which will go into effect next week, Haiti's rulers will not just throw up their hands and go.
They will engage in political maneuvering, like yesterday's installation of the 80-year-old Supreme Court Justice Emile Jonassaint as "provisional president." And they will continue their sickening game of chicken with the United States -- clinging to power as the suffering in Haiti goes from terrible to truly horrifying, betting that the U.S. will lose its stomach for the embargo before it forces them out.


In a Gaza Town, the Palestinian Police Take Over
A contingent of armed police officers rode in today and the multicolored Palestinian flag flew high, proclaiming this ramshackle town the first place to come under Palestinian rule as the awaited transition from Israeli rule became real.
The transfer of authority is to spread in the next few days across the Gaza Strip and in Jericho, on the West Bank, under an agreement reached last week by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Smile, and Take Your Seat
A CHAIR is not always just something to sit on.
It can be a fanciful object, upholstered in feathers, live moss and sunflowers.
For "Fantasy Chair," an exhibition at the Decoration and Design Building in Manhattan, 20 architects and interior designers were invited to make chairs.
Their efforts are often beautiful, sometimes comfortable and certainly whimsical.


Trustees Urge Power Authority to Study Public Takeover of Lilco
Two trustees of the Long Island Power Authority called today for a study of a public takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company as a way to cut electric rates that are among the highest in the nation.
The request came as the power authority, the state agency that took title to the Shoreham nuclear power plant in 1992, met to hear a consultant's report on three proposals to convert Shoreham to a gas-powered plant.


Reviews/Dance; From Madrid, a Troupe Based in Earthy Passion
The Compania Nacional de Danza, a Madrid-based troupe directed by Nacho Duato, is one of the most talked about dance companies in Europe.
After its United States debut on Tuesday night at City Center, it is easy to see why.
The dancers, mainly Spanish but also drawn from the United States and other parts of the world, make an immediate connection with the audience.
Their power is earthy, even elemental, drawing strength from the sand, fire and water that are never too remote from the imagery in Mr.
Duato's choreography.


In French Factory Town, Culprit Is Automation
Bibendum, that chubby, famous French mascot also known as the Michelin Man, has long brought good cheer to the people living at the foot of the volcanoes of central France.
The more maps and guidebooks he appeared on and the more tires his owners made, the more jobs for the people at the Michelin headquarters at Clermont-Ferrand.
Three years ago, Michelin became the world's largest maker of tires.
But at the factory yards and around the bars here, no one remembers morale being so low.
This medieval market town that Michelin transformed into a prosperous industrial center during the last 100 years has been squeezed by the belt-tightening of its biggest business.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Lord Sharp of Grimsdyke, former chairman and chief executive of Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British-based telecommunications company, misstated the increase in the company's revenues under his leadership.
The increase was about tenfold from the 1980-81 fiscal year to the 1990-91 fiscal year, not "more than fifteenfold a year."


William E. Barlow; Publisher, 76
William E. Barlow, a founder and publisher of Spanish and Portuguese-language news magazines distributed in Latin America, died on Tuesday in New York Hospital.
Mr.
Barlow, who lived in Manhattan, was 76.
The cause was cancer, said a son, Christopher.


To Be the Great Defenders, It's All About Flexing
The Knicks were this large, unsightly boulder that weighed at least a thousand pounds.
Madison Square Garden was the steepest hill in the Eastern Conference.
All night long, all week long, the Chicago Bulls seemed to be pushing the boulder, huffing and puffing, trying to roll it over the top.
The Bulls gave it another mighty good roll last night, but the boulder finally turned on them, the way it did Sunday night.
Close just doesn't count against the Knicks' pile of Ewing-Oakley-Mason muscle.
The Bulls were left on their backs, trailing the Eastern Conference semifinals two games to none, feeling flattened, despite Phil Jackson's vow that the Bulls would go home where the playing field is even, and return next week for Game 5.


Gathering Donations for a Gardening


Klan Made Potent Use of 'Birth of a Nation'
To the Editor:
You report on a panel discussion of "The Birth of a Nation," the D. W. Griffith film, given by the Library of Congress (arts pages, April 27).
During the proceedings, the film scholar Thomas Cripps and the historian John Hope Franklin disagreed on the Ku Klux Klan's use of the movie to propagate the Klan in the early 1920's.
Mr.
Franklin is right; the Klan used the racist film intensively.


Runway Expansion Urged at Airport Where Plane Crashed
Two weeks after the crash of a charter plane killed eight people at Sikorsky Memorial Airport, a consultant told a committee studying airport expansion that the airport's runways should be extended.
The consultant, Paul Puckli of the L.P.A.
Group of Valley Forge, Pa., told the Master Plan Study Advisory Committee of Sikorsky Memorial Airport today that his recommendation, based on a survey of 500 airport users, was not prompted by safety factors.
Rather, he said, the expansion would allow the airport to accommodate larger planes that cannot use the existing runways.


Giuliani Asks G.O.P. to New York in 1996
Armed with pastrami sandwiches from the Carnegie Deli and pen and pad sets from Tiffany, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani traveled here today to try to convince Republican Party officials that New York City should be the site of the 1996 convention.
In a presentation before 25 party officials, Mr.
Giuliani argued that the choice of New York City would "be a very strong statement for the Republican Party" and would demonstrate its concern for urban America.


After Scripps Slaying, Families Clash Over Custody of Child, 3
A bitter battle began shaping up today over the custody of a 3-year-old child who was orphaned in January when her father, Scott S. Douglas, killed her mother, the newspaper heiress Anne Scripps Douglas, in their Bronxville home, then jumped to his death off the Tappan Zee Bridge.
The battle in Surrogate's Court here pits two families -- the Douglases and the Scrippses -- that turned on each other as the Douglas marriage began dissolving last year.
The Scrippses have already asked the court to grant custody of the child, Victoria, to Mary Gibbs Scripps, Mrs.
Douglas's 42-year-old sister.


Making His Mark Above the Crowd


Package Deal Is Offered to Lure Tourists to Big Apple
Every New Yorker knows: avoid lines, never pay retail.
But visitors stand in line at a lot of places, paying a lot more money.
Acknowledging Big Apple sticker shock and the city's innate ability to intimidate, government officials and business and arts leaders have joined for the first time to offer a unified front on tourism.
Here's the deal: a package including two nights at a New York hotel with parking and breakfast, lunch at a high-priced restaurant like Lutece (sorry, no dinner), a ticket to a Broadway show, free admission to the Metropolitan Museum of Art and other major arts institutions, and a tour of New York by boat or double-decker bus.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


An 'Embarrassed' Bowden Speaks Out
Florida State Coach BOBBY BOWDEN said he disagreed with the assertions that he and his staff should have been aware that some players on his national championship team were associating with recruiters for sports agents last season.
"They say we should have known," Bowden said Tuesday night at a gathering of boosters in Sarasota, Fla.
"Tell me and I would have known."


Career Horizons Inc.(CARH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reds Say Browning Won't Need Surgery
The Cincinnati Reds' orthopedist decided yesterday that pitcher TOM BROWNING will not need surgery on his broken left arm.
Browning's arm broke as he threw a pitch Monday night in a 3-2 victory in San Diego.
He was examined in Cincinnati by Dr.
SCOTT JOLSON, who decided that the break would heal without surgery.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rollins Band and Therapy
Irving Plaza
If Henry Rollins didn't lead a band, he might have been a motivational speaker, a pop preacher or a demagogue.
On Tuesday night, his songs were pep talks and angry rants directed at girlfriends, weaklings, gun lovers and sometimes himself.
Over the band's sturdy midtempo riffs, Mr.
Rollins chanted lyrics, usually in a controlled shout.
He worked hard, tensing every muscle, including ones around his eyes.
By the end of the second song, his bare muscular torso was covered in sweat.


Intergroup Healthcare Corp.(IGHC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Vallone's Hands
With Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's $31.6 billion budget before the City Council, its fate now depends largely on the leadership skills of Speaker Peter F. Vallone and on how he positions himself in negotiations between a Republican Mayor, whose core values he shares, and the Democratic City Council.
Like Mr.
Giuliani, Mr.
Vallone, a Democrat from Astoria, Queens, has long appealed to middle-class constituents and championed quality-of-life services like police, schools and sanitation.
The next two months of wrangling over the plan will test whether Mr.
Vallone can deliver a budget similar to Mr.
Giuliani's in the face of concerns among many minority lawmakers that the cuts Mr.
Giuliani is proposing would fall particularly hard on their constituents.


Low Testosterone Affects Women Too
To the Editor:
I have researched the medical literature and communicated with leading researchers in "female androgen deficiency syndrome" (testosterone deficiency), and conducted workshops to educate women suffering from a decrease in the normal, essential levels of this hormone.
"Male Hormone Molds Women, Too, in Mind and Body" (Science Times, May 3) recognizes resistance to acknowledging the role of the "so-called male hormone" in women, and then extensively discusses excess testosterone.


National Intergroup Inc.(NII,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tewksbury Improves to 7-0
Cardinals 3, Cubs 2
Bob Tewksbury became the National League's first seven-game winner, scattering seven hits in eight innings as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Chicago Cubs, 3-2, last night at Busch Stadium.
Tewksbury (7-0) joined Ben McDonald of Baltimore as the only seven-game winners.
Braves 4, Phillies 2
Deion Sanders hit a two-run homer and Fred McGriff added a solo shot as host Atlanta finished a three-game sweep of Philadelphia.


Outsider to Face Insider in Governor Race
Tom Ridge, a six-term member of Congress who ran as a political outsider, defeated State Attorney General Ernest D. Preate Jr. on Tuesday in the Republican primary for governor.
In November, Mr.
Ridge will face Lieut.
Gov.
Mark S. Singel, who won the Democratic race by campaigning as an experienced incumbent.
"I have not been part of the Harrisburg problem," Mr.
Ridge, 48, told supporters in a victory speech, "but beginning tonight, you and I become part of the Harrisburg solution." Mr.
Ridge, who lives in Erie and represents Pennsylvania's 21st Congressional District, called himself "the man nobody ever heard of from a town nobody ever visited." He also campaigned with the slogan, "He'll change Pennsylvania, honestly," in a discrediting reference to Mr.
Preate.


Tables and sconces and chairs, oh my!


An Unknown Model For Calvin Klein
In the past, Calvin Klein has used sensual models whose faces were instantly recognizable.
Now, the designer is using a model who is not as well known, but whose body has made him an instant celebrity.
Michael Bergin, 25, is the model for Calvin Klein underwear and jeans who recently began appearing in the designer's latest provocative ads.
He replaces Marky Mark, the rap singer and actor, whose contract expired in January.


U.S. Rejects French Proposal To Impose a Peace in Bosnia
United States officials today rejected France's call to impose a peace settlement in Bosnia.
The move came just days before foreign ministers are to meet in Geneva to try to breathe new life into efforts to end the war.
In Washington for talks today with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the French Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, called on the United States to pressure the warring parties to accept a peace plan, preferably one of their own but if not, then one developed by the major powers.


Washington at Work; Ex-Aide Is Now Lobbyist With White House Ties
Despite the pledge by President Clinton that his friends would not cash in on their ties, one of the most successful new lobbyists here is a longtime Clinton adviser and confidante who has pitched a client's case while watching college basketball at the White House.
Most lobbyists struggle to arrange meetings with mid-level Government bureaucrats, and can only dream of the kind of access enjoyed by Betsey Wright, one of the President's oldest friends and an architect of his rise to power in Arkansas.


Couple Are Found Dead
A man stabbed his girlfriend to death and then hanged himself in their Harlem apartment, the police said.
Their bodies were found yesterday by the woman's mother, officials said.
Investigators did not know what prompted the incident, at 216 Bradhurst Avenue, near 152d Street, said a police spokeswoman, Detective Kim Royster.


Mets Play Expos Close But Not Close Enough
Todd Hundley knows you're not supposed to watch the standings in May.
That's for August, and September, when the numbers really count.
It was too tempting, though, for Hundley to avoid it this morning.
It has been so long since the Mets had reason to read the statitics page.
That glance -- the one that told him the Mets were two and a half games behind Atlanta heading into today's action -- is what made the Mets' one-run loss to the Expos tonight at Olympic Stadium so hard to take.
With the opportunity to come into a three-game series with the division-leading Braves in sole possession of second place in the National League East, the Mets instead watched the Expos grab a 4-3 victory and a share of second place with New York.


Bratton Faults Police Rules For Arrests
Two weeks after a suspect was killed in custody, a police official said yesterday that Commissioner William J. Bratton has determined that policy and training for dealing with violent prisoners is inadequate.
Part of the problem, officials said, is that after banning choke holds last year, the department failed to instruct officers in other methods of subduing prisoners that were as effective but less dangerous.


Welfare Plan Seeks Limit On Benefits
Unwilling to wait for President Clinton to act, his Democratic allies in the House of Representatives today proposed a welfare bill similar to the one he has long promised but has yet to deliver.
The measure would place a two-year limit on welfare benefits and then require indigent mothers to join a community service program.
To finance its provisions, the bill seeks deeper cuts in benefits to immigrants than legislation that White House aides say they are likely to propose.
Indeed, those cuts alienated some potential co-sponsors in Congress.


Sports of The Times; On the Bulls, Michael = Motivation
THE first name is enough for only a few.
Babe.
Muhammad.
Wayne.
Wilt.
And, of course, Michael.
As a minor league outfielder, he's no longer relevant to the Knicks-Bulls playoff series.
And yet, in his absence, he is more relevant than ever.
Michael Jordan remains the yardstick by which the Bulls are measured.


Military to Start Intensive Testing of Ailing Gulf War Veterans
The Pentagon will soon conduct the most intensive, standardized medical exams yet on hundreds of veterans of the Persian Gulf war who are suffering from unexplained illnesses, the military's senior health official said today.
The official, Dr.
Stephen C. Joseph, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, said in an interview that doctors at American military medical centers around the world would give afflicted veterans 20 to 30 medical tests to try to diagnose their ailments.
He said the tests could start in the next few weeks.


A Klimt Outshines A Monet At Auction
The state of the market for Impressionist and modern art looked better at Sotheby's last night -- but not that much better.
One painting in particular, Klimt's "Lady With a Fan" (circa 1917-18), sold for a whopping $11.6 million, far exceeding its estimate of $7 to $9 million.
But the sale was not without big disappointments for the sellers.
Two of the evening's presumed stars, a Monet and a Brancusi, each expected to bring over more than $7 million, failed to sell at all.


SNC-Lavalin reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Here Come the Devils: Under the River, Out of the Woods
The Devils are getting a second chance at the Rangers, who swept them in six games during the regular season.
New Jersey joined its archrivals in the Eastern Conference final by defeating the Bruins, 5-3, at Boston Garden tonight.
"It's only fitting that we're playing the Rangers," the Devils' Bernie Nicholls said.
"I felt all year that they were the best team. For us, the way to the Stanley Cup is through New York."


Miscellany
*
Foot Locker and Members Only have been signed as worldwide sponsors of the 1994 Goodwill Games, which will be held this summer in St.
Petersburg, Russia. *
R.
Kent Atherton, former director of corporate sales and marketing at Group W Sports Marketing, New York, has formed Atherton Communications L.P., a sports marketing and production company in Fairfield, Conn.


Right-Wing Lawmakers in Haiti Swear In a Provisional President
In a defiant step supported by Haiti's military leaders, a rump group of right-wing legislators in Port-au-Prince swore in an 80-year-old Supreme Court justice as Haiti's provisional President today, intensifying the country's confrontation with the United States.
The move came just as President Clinton has adopted a stern new posture toward Haiti's military rulers over their refusal to permit the return to power of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's democratically elected President ousted in 1991.


Calendar: Antiques And Tours
Antiques on Fifth Avenue  Sinclair-Fletcher Mansion, Fifth Avenue at 70th Street; (212) 249-4865.
An art and antiques show will be held today through Saturday, from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., and on Sunday, from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $8.


Review/Theater: Grease; Memories With a New-Wave Touch
Hey, remember nostalgia?
Remember that funny, innocent way people used to look at the past?
The extraordinary accomplishment of the Tommy Tune production of "Grease!," a revival of the long-running 1972 musical about the 1950's, is to make you perversely sentimental about lost sentimentality, to pine not for a simpler time but for simpler ways of evoking it.


For First Time, Bosnia Feels Time Is on Its Side
For the first time in the 25-month-old war, the Muslim-led Bosnian Government feels that time is on its side in its military struggle against the Serbs.
Throughout Bosnia, officers in the Bosnian Army appear buoyed by the end of fighting between Muslims and Croats two months ago.
Although the full effects of this cease-fire have not yet been felt, the Bosnian Army is now more mobile, less stretched and somewhat better armed.


Patriots' Tippett Calls It a Career
ANDRE TIPPETT, who took his fearsome pass rushing skills to five Pro Bowls, retired yesterday after spending all 12 of his pro seasons with the New England Patriots.
He will do marketing and public appearances on behalf of the team.
Constrained by the salary cap, the Patriots were not willing to pay him close to the $750,000 he earned last season. (AP)


Elizabeth Birdsall Burdick; Library Founder, 74
Elizabeth Birdsall Burdick, the founding director of the International Theater Institute Library in New York, died last Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
She was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
She had a heart attack in her home, her family said.


Pattern of Dismissed Cases Is Seen in Legal Aid Study
A senior lawyer at the Legal Aid Society said yesterday that a review of its criminal cases has found that an unusually large number of dismissed cases stemmed from arrests made by police officers in two precincts in upper Manhattan.
Robert M. Baum, chief of the criminal division at Legal Aid, which provides lawyers for defendants who cannot afford private ones, said the high rate of dismissals suggested widespread police misconduct in the 32d Precinct in Harlem and the 34th Precinct in Washington Heights.


U.S. Officers Were Divided on Somali Raid
In their first public account of the failed Army raid in Somalia, the top commanders painted a picture today of a mission in which the American military was divided about the wisdom of trying to capture a Somali warlord and the amount of firepower needed to carry it out.
For seven months, Maj.
Gen.
William Garrison, who commanded the American commando force in Somalia, has maintained a stony silence.


On My Mind; Clinton's Honor Saved!
Somebody once asked Art Buchwald whether it was hard to keep coming up with great ideas for his humor columns.
Why, not at all, he said, not in a country that sends a cake to Ayatollah Khomeini.
That's all there is to it.
These humor fellows just loll around.
Now and then they reach out for a piece of real-life wackiness nobody could possibly make up.
No research, no interviews, no nothing.
For this they get paid huge amounts of money.


Herman Walker, 83, Professor And U.S. Foreign Officer, Dies
Herman Walker Jr., a former Foreign Service officer and emeritus professor of history, economics and political science at SUNY College at New Paltz, N.Y., died on Sunday at the New Paltz Nursing Home.
A resident of New Paltz, he was 83.
He had been ill for a long time, said his wife, Evelyn Acomb Walker, an emiritus professor of history at New Paltz.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New Government reports suggested an economic lull, which could ease some concerns about inflation.
Retail sales fell in April, while first-time claims for unemployment benefits climbed unexpectedly in early May.
And inflation at the producer level was nonexistent for both April and for the latest 12 months.  [ Page A1. ]


Art in Review
Mariana Cook
Sander Gallery  19 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through June 25
More than a few celebrities are shown in Mariana Cook's elegant black-and-white portraits, but in this series, devoted to pictures of fathers and daughters, they appear in private rather than public roles.
Ms.
Cook's images achieve a surprising diversity, both emotional and formal, despite a simple style whose main unifying characteristic is the black backdrop deployed in nearly every shot.


Why I Am Leaving the Senate
There was no one moment when I decided to leave the Senate.
Those days usually ended at 10 P.M. with dinner at my desk.
There was no time for reflection, no time to exchange ideas with fellow senators.
Too often, attempts to talk with another senator about teaming up on a bill or amendment were met with "I can't talk now, but have your staff person call my staff to talk about it."


In Alaska, a Yearning For a New Ice Curtain
The Russian Far East and Alaska share the midnight sun, an affinity for fish and a common disdain for central governments that are more than 5,000 miles and many time zones away.
But with post-cold war business ventures floundering and some cultural exchanges turning into a horror movie ("The Guest Who Wouldn't Leave"), people on both sides of the Bering Sea are now wondering if it was easier to like each other when their governments hated each other.


Reviews/Film; Siblings on a Search For the Ideal Parent
There's a lot to be said for a fantasy in which children can trade in their mothers for better models.
In "Trading Mom," Sissy Spacek plays the harried single mother of three perfectly typical children.
Twelve-year-old Elizabeth (Anna Chlumsky of the "My Girl" movies) and her two younger brothers would like a parent who is more like a fairy godmother and less of a working mom who makes them clean their rooms.
They get their wish when a magical neighbor, played by Maureen Stapleton, tells them how to erase their own mother from memory and pick a new one at the Mommy Market, a kind of mall where new mothers are on display.
There are singing moms, dancing moms, cooking moms, and a few who look suspiciously like Sissy Spacek taking on multiple roles in outlandish makeup and costumes.
This is where "Trading Mom" loses its appeal.
The children choose three different mothers in turn, taking them home with disastrous results.
But none seems remotely like the kind of mother kids would choose.
Instead, they smack of adult attempts to give Ms.
Spacek something exotic to do.


Review/Art; Pictures and Sculpture From Some 600 Years In Armory Fine Art Fair
"By appointment only" is the customary visiting arrangement for galleries specializing in art made before the 20th century.
And this formality lends Old Master work a rarefied, patrician chill, as if it were beyond the reach of ordinary mortals.
The "International Fine Art Fair: Renaissance to Impressionism," which opens today at the Seventh Avenue Armory, wants to change all that, and it succeeds.
Anyone with a few dollars (15, to be exact), the time to do some serious browsing and an appetite for astonishment can walk off Park Avenue straight into the midst of the handsomely installed wares of some 60 stellar European and American fine-arts dealers, many of them the top in their fields.


Cisco Systems Inc.(CSCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Houston: A City in Need Of a Heimlich Maneuver?
When Hakeem Olajuwon banked a 6-footer with 10 minutes to go Wednesday night, giving the Rockets a commanding 20-point lead in a playoff game against the Phoenix Suns, Houston fans were ecstatic.
Just as they were in January 1993, when their football Oilers built a seemingly insurmountable 32-point lead in the second half of a playoff game at Buffalo.
But once again, just as in Buffalo, Houston proceeded to stage a stunning collapse -- and got surmounted.


E-Z Serve Corp.(EZS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


At the Bar; 'Come and get me': A Government lawyer takes up a sword -- er, pen -- against his employer.
In the annals of American civil disobedience, simply receiving payment for writing an op-ed article sounds a bit tame.
And Peter G. Crane, a soft-spoken lawyer for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission who holds a high security clearance and spends his spare time researching the final decades of czarist Russia, appears a most unlikely candidate even to think about defying the law.
But when Mr.
Crane accepted a $150 payment from The Washington Post for an article entitled "Arrest Me, Officer, I'm Writing," he put himself in deliberate violation of a Federal law that prohibits Government employees from receiving pay for any "speech, article or appearance," whether or not connected in any way to their Government work.


Corrections
An article and a chart yesterday about a new tourism promotion for New York City misstated the availability dates for a two-night package deal.
It will be available Memorial Day to Labor Day (May 30 to Sept. 5), not May 15 to Oct. 15.


Accounts
*
Silhouette Optical, Northvale, N.J., to Calman &amp; Stefenson, New York, as the first agency to handle its account in the United States.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


A Classic Crooner Sings In Wordperfect's Pitch
The Wordperfect Corporation rolled out its big gun in the marketing battle for consumer software sales yesterday -- a tanned, gray-haired 67-year-old baritone who cheerfully confessed his ignorance of personal computers, saying, "I still use a pencil."
But the software maker is convinced that Tony Bennett (yes, that Tony Bennett) is just the man for the job.
Mr.
Bennett has become a popular artist with Generation X, the 20-something crowd, in the last few years.
The classic crooner's videos appear regularly on MTV, and magazines like Spin and Rolling Stone have written admiring articles about him.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about plans by the city to sell the operating license of WNYC-FM referred incorrectly to the signal strength of another FM station, WNYE, owned by the Board of Education.
WBAI and WNYC -- not WNYE -- have the strongest FM signals and the widest listening areas in the city among noncommercial stations.
Both have transmitters atop some of the city's tallest buildings.
WNYE's 430-foot antenna is in downtown Brooklyn, and the reach of its signal is limited by Manhattan's towers.


Familiar Face Behind New 'Windows'
Windows on the World, one of the country's most prominent restaurants for both its dizzying altitude and staggering revenues, will be redeveloped by the man who created it in the first place: Joseph Baum, often referred to as the dean of restaurant consultants.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced yesterday that the Joseph Baum &amp; Michael Whiteman Company had won the fierce competition to renovate and run the two-level restaurant complex atop the World Trade Center, which closed in February 1993 after a terrorist bombing.


Reviews/Film; The War of the Sexes
There was a time when Marco Bellocchio was mentioned in the same breath as Bernardo Bertolucci.
But that was a couple of decades ago when they were among the wild young things of the Italian film industry.
Today Mr.
Bellocchio is best known in the United States for his X-rated 1985 film, "Devil in the Flesh," and his latest work is not likely to raise his profile.
"The Conviction," a 1990 film opening today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, takes topical, explosive issues -- rape, sexual harassment, power plays between the sexes -- and reduces them into a forgettable puff of hot air.
The film begins in a promising, if calculated, way.
An ordinary-looking young woman named Sandra (Claire Nebout) finds herself locked in a museum overnight.
A handsome architect named Lorenzo (Vittorio Mezzogiorno, who died in January) has intentionally stayed behind as well.
When he begins to rape her, at first she fights back.
Then she freezes.


Mexico Invites U.N. to Attend Election to Observe the Observers
Trampling an ancient political taboo in pursuit of new legitimacy for Mexico's coming presidential vote, the Government has invited the United Nations to evaluate its electoral system and help organize independent groups of election observers.
In a letter made public on Wednesday night, the Mexican Interior Minister, Jorge Carpizo McGregor, asked the United Nations to play only a limited role in judging the fairness of the balloting scheduled for Aug. 21.
Rather than monitor the vote directly, Mexican and United Nations officials said, the organization would probably observe the observers.


CHRONICLE
EMPRESS MICHIKO of Japan has almost fully recovered the power of speech, nearly seven months after being struck with a mysterious ailment that rendered her silent, Reuters reported yesterday.
"The power of speech has returned fairly close to normal," said Dr.
ICHIRO KANAZAWA, her physician, in a statement released by the Imperial Household Agency, which is responsible for royal family matters.


In Numbers Game, There's One Devils Want to Ignore
The way the Devils view their coming encounter with the Rangers, it has little to do with geography and everything to do with arithmetic.
The two teams played 84 games in the regular season to compile the two best records in the National Hockey League, the Rangers finishing with 112 points to 106 for the New Jersey.
There is a certain justice, the Devils say, in having the top two teams clash in one of the semifinals for the Stanley Cup.
"Oh, boy, us and the Rangers meeting in the final four," said Ken Daneyko, the rugged defenseman.
"This is the way it should be. The two best teams playing each other."


Montana Bank's Annuity C.D. Is Approved
The top regulator of national banks permitted a tiny bank on a Blackfoot Indian reservation in Montana yesterday to offer the first certificate of deposit that has the tax advantages of an annuity.
The decision is a blow to the insurance industry, which has been successful in offering annuities, investment accounts that pay interest that is generally not taxed until money is withdrawn.


'The Surprising Mets' Has a Nice Ring to It
In every city, people use the same adjective to describe the 1994 New York Mets.
That word is "surprising," and it seems to have become permanently placed in front of the team's name.
John Franco doesn't care.
If there is anything Franco and his teammates wanted to be called this season, "surprising" is it.
Nothing was expected -- "nothing at all," according to Bobby Bonilla -- but the Mets are starting to open some eyes.


Schultz Sav-O Stores Inc.(SAVO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 23


Some Teams Have All the Luck
When a team is going well, runners score when they should be thrown out at the plate; players batting nearly .500 don't start but pinch-hit late in the game and drive in key runs; batters get hits after they fail to sacrifice runners to second, and flying barrels of broken bats distract fielders and turn outs into base runners who score winning runs.
The Yankees are going well.


Gift Limits Sought for Attorney General Race
Challenging her opponents to do the same, Karen S. Burstein opened her campaign for State Attorney General today by announcing she would impose limits on campaign contributions, including a cap of $2,500 from any person.
State law allows individuals to contribute up to $12,000 for the primary race.
Her opponents for the Democratic nomination, while praising the ideal of campaign finance reform, characterized Ms.
Burstein's announcement as a bit of political theater to dramatize her late-starting candidacy.
None of the three challengers agreed immediately to the limits.


Nova Scotia Power reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; Scary Idea: Mason More Assertive
WE are constantly being reminded that there are many paths to enlightenment.
Phil Jackson's Zen way is to take his players for a ride on the Staten Island Ferry, and occasionally to buy them hard-covered books that they can store in their duffel bags to bring wisdom to their sneakers.
Pat Riley takes the activist approach to basketball salvation.
He is an advocate of firm rules, hard discipline, and ultimately redemption through good works.
And who is to say his way is not also effective?


Record Low: Hawks Hold Pacers to 69
Hawks 92, Pacers 69
Atlanta held Indiana to the fewest points in National Basketball Association playoff history last night and the Hawks, behind 20 points each from Danny Manning and Kevin Willis, tied the Eastern Conference semifinal series at one victory apiece with a 92-69 triumph in the Omni.


Timely Repairs for a Historic Clock


Sampras Chips Away at Clay Roadblock
Tennis on clay still doesn't feel right, like a too-stiff pair of jeans, like a song played too slowly.
He has a tough time knowing when he should come to the net, and he tends to lose his footing on his volleys.
Even his first serve loses its sting.
Yet with the opportunity to become the first man in 25 years to win four consecutive Grand Slam titles, Pete Sampras is doing his best to make a friend out of red clay.
"I really played a mediocre match," Sampras said today after eliminating Andrei Chesnokov of Russia, 7-6 (10-8), 6-3, in third-round play at the Italian Open.
"The best thing I can say is that I was hanging in there. I wish I had a nice, firm hard court where you know where the ball is going to bounce every time. Instead, I'm here on clay, trying to find a way to win. I know it isn't pretty."


No Headline
"Some day this is going to haunt you. There's going to be another political issue that you're on the other side of, and you're going to regret this vote." SENATOR ROBERT C. SMITH, opposing a bill to restrict abortion protesters.  [ A1:6. ]


COMPANY NEWS
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, acquired an equity stake in Azupharma G.m.b.H., Germany, a generic drug company, which is a subsidiary of Gehe A.G., a pharmaceutical wholesaler.
Terms were not disclosed.
FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC., New York, said it would pay $123 million in cash and new mortgage debt to buy the Joseph Horne Company, a chain of 10 department stores in Pittsburgh and Erie, Pa.


Art in Review
'Greatest Hits'
Mary Heilmann  Pat Hearn Gallery  39 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through May 21
The title of this little survey of Mary Heilmann's work is nicely attuned to her wry balance of modernist geometric abstraction and pop content.
She has handled the combination so deftly for so long that her paintings seem to float above fashion.
They look as good right now as they did in the early 1970's, the starting point for this show.


Norman Brad Blumenthal; F.C.C. Official, 51
Norman Brad Blumenthal, a member of the review board of the Federal Communications Commission, died on Wednesday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 51 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


First Conviction Under Ozone-Protection Law
The owner of a car-repair shop in St.
Louis who admitted letting the refrigerant from a car's air-conditioner leak into the air has become the first person prosecuted under a Federal law intended to protect the atmosphere's ozone layer by tightly regulating such chemicals.
The United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Missouri, Edward L. Dowd Jr., described it as a landmark air-pollution case.


We Must Find and Train Better Police Officers; Perjurers Pursued
To the Editor:
Jane B. Freidson, a criminal defense lawyer, asserts that she has "neither seen nor heard" of a police officer being prosecuted for perjury in her "16 years in the business" (letter, May 6).


Losers in Saudi Phone Deal Say They Underbid AT&amp;T
The AT&amp;T Corporation's winning bid for a $4 billion contract to modernize Saudi Arabia's phone system, which had been supported by heavy Clinton Administration lobbying, was hundreds of millions of dollars higher than other bids, some of the losing companies said today.
While those companies have not detailed any specific unfairness, the deal underlines the political context in which big international transactions sometimes occur.
The Saudis selected AT&amp;T after Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown made personal appeals for the company while on trips including Riyadh.
In addition, President Clinton sent a letter on AT&amp;T's behalf to King Fahd.


House Subcommittee Backs Cigarette Ban
A subcommittee in the House of Representatives approved legislation today that would ban smoking in most parts of most buildings open to the public.
This is the most extensive anti smoking legislation ever to clear a Congressional panel, but it is unlikely to go further in Congress this year.
It was adopted by the Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment.


Erik Erikson Dies


Now It's Knee Surgery for Kruk
Philadelphia Phillies first baseman John Kruk is scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery on his right knee today and will miss the next three weeks.
Kruk, who missed the first six games of the season after having a cancerous testicle removed on March 8, will have loose cartilage removed.
Kruk, hitting .313 with one homer and 10 runs batted in, was placed on the 15-day disabled list. (AP)


Insider Charges Settled
A financial adviser to Time Warner Inc. agreed yesterday to pay the Government $931,077 to settle charges of insider trading in Time Warner stock in 1991.
The adviser, Oded (Ed) Aboodi, a close associate of Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, did not admit or deny any of the charges against him, which were made public in a lawsuit and settlement filed simultaneously by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Review/Film; A Rebel in an Enclave Ruled by Women
In the 1920's, in the Irish town of Kilshannon, is an enclave known as Widows' Peak.
It is a world of women, defined by law.
Joan Plowright, as the dowager always called by her full, unwieldy name, Mrs.
Doyle Counihan, is the unofficial ruler of this well-off community, which the terms of her mother's will decreed off limits to all but widows.
One exception to the law is Mrs.
Doyle Counihan's bachelor son, Godfrey (Adrian Dunbar), clingingly devoted to his "Mammy." Another is the penniless, mysterious Miss O'Hare.
She is craftily played by Mia Farrow as a woman approaching middle age with her prettiness still intact but possibly a few stray marbles rattling around in her skull.
When a widow named Edwina Broome arrives, she is the flamboyantly beautiful and shockingly modern Natasha Richardson, who drives her own car, smokes cigarettes, wears bright red lipstick and flirts shamelessly with Godfrey like any common hussy.
You can see the conflicts coming, but they are quite delicious to watch.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a custody battle over the 3-year-old daughter of the slain Anne Scripps Douglas referred incorrectly in some copies to Margaret H. Tyre.
She is a lawyer appointed to represent the interests of the child in court, not her legal guardian.


A Realignment At Westwood One
Westwood One Radio Networks said yesterday that it was realigning five radio networks in response to advertisers' needs.
As part of the reorganization, Westwood's networks -- CNN+, Super, Power, Mutual and NBC Radio Networks -- which previously had various formats and a total of 2,500 stations nationwide, were being regrouped based on formats and audience demographics.
The networks were renamed Westwood CNN+, Westwood AC, Westwood Country, Westwood Young Adult and Westwood Variety.


50-Year Retrospective Of an All-Girl Class
The goals listed beside the yearbook portraits of Battin High School's all-girl class of 1944 repeat themselves like memorized verse: secretary, nurse, librarian, clerk.
Whatever they may have said in those pages, most of the graduates ultimately did what was expected of them in their day -- they became wives and mothers.


A Brand-New Hall for Some Very Old Mammals
DESIGNERS of the new exhibition on mammal evolution at the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan approached the job with one admonition ringing in their ears.
It had nothing to do with scientific interpretation or instructions about where exactly to place the giant wombat, say, or the Protohippus.
Above all, they were admonished to keep in mind the esthetics of the place.
"We were told to make sure we never hear again the criticism that this is a dusty, musty museum," Ralph Appelbaum, the chief designer, said the other day while showing off the newest exhibition hall, the Lila Acheson Wallace Wing of Mammals and Their Extinct Relatives.


Gap Inc.(GPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Stocks Rise as Data Ease Inflation Fears
As if they had never heard the news before, stock traders bid up prices yesterday after the Government offered still more evidence that the economy was expanding moderately without worrisome inflation.
But the stock market gave up much of its gain as the session wore on.
The Dow Jones industrial average, up as much as 35 points by 2 P.M., closed with a gain of 23.80 points at 3,652.84.


Review/Art; 2 Schools Of Painting At the Met
THE idea behind "American Impressionism and Realism," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, will seem recondite to most visitors.
The aim is to show that the American Impressionists and the American Realists have more in common than the history books say.
They painted around the same time, similar things, with a similar attitude (a more rose-tinted and nationalistic one than their French counterparts had).
So the exhibition argues, and to prove its point it brings together works by Impressionists like William Merritt Chase and Childe Hassam and by Realists like Robert Henri and George Bellows, 83 works in all.
The result?
The two schools of painting look even less alike than you would have thought if you had thought about it at all.
Or to put it another way, the differences between the Impressionists and the Realists turn out to be much more interesting visually than their similarities.
Here's yet another analysis: The show's an intellectual muddle.


Butler International Inc.(BUTL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Wants Clinton to Lift Bosnia Embargo
The Senate approved two conflicting measures today on lifting the Bosnian arms embargo, saying in one breath that the President should seek NATO support for lifting the embargo and in the next ordering the President to go it alone and lift the embargo despite allied objections.
Both measures passed by one vote, 50 to 49, with eight Senators voting in favor of both and six voting against both.


On Stage, and Off
'Passion' and the Beast
Broadway's season didn't exactly roar to a close this week.
Three musicals opened, but two, "Grease!" and "The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public," were more or less clobbered by the critics and disdained by many of the opening-night invited guests.
"Passion," Stephen Sondheim's much-revised operettalike show, fared better, but the reviews were, for the most part, measured and respectful rather than ebullient, and the Blanche-esque talk afterward among many on Broadway was of the kindness of critics.
Indeed, several people said this week that the reviews legitimized the show as a best-musical candidate, which was needed, they said, because the only other real choice is Disney's "Beauty and the Beast," whose presence is still resented among Broadway veterans.
One producer, promised anonymity, even admitted this week that although he liked "Beauty" very much, he wouldn't vote for it.
At yesterday's Tony administration committee meeting, the "Beauty" score was deemed eligible for a nomination, on the ground that half of it was written specifically for the theater.
Wouldn't it be amazing if Mr.
Sondheim won for best musical and Disney for best score?
It's possible.


INSIDE
British Laborite Dies
The leader of Britain's Labor Party died of a heart attack, dimming its prospects in challenging the governing Conservative Party when the Tories are trailing in surveys.
Page A11.
Insurers v.
Florio, Again
Lawyers for New Jersey insurers charged that the Florio administration knew a state-run auto insurance pool was running a deficit but hid the fact for political reasons.
Page B1.
Bosnian Leaders Are Buoyed
With its army better positioned, the Bosnian Government is more confident in fighting the Serbs.
Page A10.
Behind an Executive's Death
The death of the head of one of the top minority-owned investment firms is puzzling Wall Street.
Page D1.


Books of The Times; The Top-Level Player Who Never Made the Team
Learned Hand
The Man and the Judge
By Gerald Gunther
Illustrated. 818 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
In legal circles and law schools all over the nation in the first half of the 20th century, Learned Hand came to be regarded as "the Tenth Justice" on the Supreme Court of the United States.
In his 52 years on the Federal bench -- beginning in 1909, when he was a Federal judge for the Southern District of New York, and then, from 1924 until he retired from active service in 1951, as first among equals in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit -- his opinions and law-review articles were regularly cited as precedent in Washington.
They still are, but Learned Hand himself never made it to the Supreme Court.
That is what makes a book about his life a political mystery as well as essential legal history.


We Must Find and Train Better Police Officers
To the Editor:
A news article April 27 notes that in the aftermath of arrests on corruption charges of police officers in New York City's 30th Precinct, the Police Department is analyzing the background and life experiences of the officers with the hope of finding some common traits that make up a "corrupt cop profile."


Victim and Workers Stop Diamond Theft
A robber made off with about $1 million worth of diamonds at Kennedy International Airport yesterday, but was caught moments later by his victims and some airline workers, a spokesman for the Port Authority police said.
The gems belonged to a diamond dealer who was waiting with a friend to board a United Airlines flight to Los Angeles, said the spokesman, Tom Middlemiss.
He said the dealer went to buy a soda at about 6:20 P.M., leaving his friend with two suitcases containing the diamonds.


Stay Calm on Haiti
Emil Jonassaint, a former supreme court justice, was sworn in on Wednesday as President of Haiti by a minority of legislators with the backing of the military junta.
It was a clear act of defiance toward the international community, which last week voted in the U.N. to intensify sanctions against Haiti to force its illegitimate rulers to step down and allow the return of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In response, some members of Congress and other observers have begun talking more seriously about the use of military force to oust the coup leaders and allow Father Aristide to return.
That would be a mistake.
Mr.
Jonassaint's appointment does not materially change the situation in Haiti.
The new sanctions, set to begin May 21, should be given a chance to work.
The pressure they will exert on the country's rulers will be just as uncomfortable, whether or not they are living under the charade of a legitimate government.


Executive Changes
ARROW ELECTRONICS INC., Melville, L.I., named Stephen P. Kaufman, its chief executive and president, to the additional position of chairman.
CONDUCTUS INC., Sunnyvale, Calif., appointed Charles E. Shalvoy president and chief executive.


Newborn's Body Found
A forklift operator found the body of a newborn boy yesterday in a pile of newspapers at a recycling plant in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, the police said.
The body, wrapped in a towel, was found in a recycling machine at about 2:30 P.M., said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck-Mladinich, a police spokeswoman.
The plant, owned by BQE Services, is at 75 Thomas Street.


Hornets' Curry Wins Sixth Man Award
DELL CURRY of the Charlotte Hornets, who hit 3-pointers in bunches to lead all reserves by averaging 16.3 points, won the N.B.A.'s Sixth Man Award yesterday.
Curry, with the Hornets for their six years in the league, edged NATE McMILLAN of the Seattle in voting by a panel of sports writers and broadcasters. (AP)


Shift in Account Of Thom McAn
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York said yesterday that it would move its Thom McAn account, along with executives who work with it, to Mad Dogs &amp; Englishmen in New York, an independent agency partly owned by the Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond principals, Jonathan Bond and Richard Kirshenbaum.
Billings were estimated at $4 million.


Erik Erikson, 91, Psychoanalyst Who Reshaped Views of Human Growth, Dies
Erik H. Erikson, the psychoanalyst who profoundly reshaped views of human development, died yesterday at the Rosewood Manor Nursing Home in Harwich, Mass.
He was 91.
He had a brief illness, said his daughter, Sue Erikson Bloland of Manhattan.


Prescriptions Belong In Computer Form
To the Editor:
When you or I go to the drugstore, Federal and state prescription laws require the drugstore to keep the "original" prescription copy on file.


U.S. Data Suggest A Lull in Growth, With No Inflation
In reports suggesting a lull in economic expansion, which could ease some concerns about future inflation, Government figures showed today that retail sales fell in April while first-time claims for unemployment benefits climbed unexpectedly and substantially during the first week of May.
At the same time, the Labor Department said inflation at the producer level was nonexistent for both April and for the latest 12 months.


11 Blue Cross Plans Rated As Financially Troubled
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said today that 11 Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans insuring 16 million people were in weak financial condition, in many cases because of poor management.
The report said that the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, the national trade association for the 69 Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans, had shown a "historic reluctance to enforce its membership standards" against financially troubled plans.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  LATINS REJECT FORCE IN HAITI  Several Latin American nations rejected the use of force in Haiti, dimming prospects for approving of any United State-led intervention to settle the standoff there.
A1  U.S.
BOMBS STILL KILL IN VIETNAM  In the battle for Khe Sanh in 1968, United States forces dropped 100,000 tons of bombs, some of which are still killing Vietnamese.
A1


Art in Review
'Lustmord'
Jenny Holzer  Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through June 30
Jenny Holzer returns to New York gallery exhibitions after a five-year hiatus with an impressive if problematic show.
There can be few more manipulative pieces of stage design outside of a Broadway theater than Ms.
Holzer's "Lustmord" at Gladstone.
One walks into a darkened room, which hums with a low electrical buzz, then into a leather-lined cylinder to read L.E.D. texts spinning in a glass-dome module.
It is all vintage Holzer, but keyed up a notch.
The epigrammatic texts are a bit more aggressive, their L.E.D. display hardware is spiffier, and the atmospheric lighting has dropped from dim to a scary pitch-black.


Ralph H. O'Brien; Computer Executive, 64
Ralph H. O'Brien, an executive of business equipment and computer companies for 30 years, died on Wednesday at the Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
Mr.
O'Brien, who lived in Naples, was 64.
He died of colon cancer, said his wife, Barbara.


Clinton Keeps Watchers Waiting on Selection for Supreme Court
After predicting two days ago that he would announce his nominee to the Supreme Court within 48 hours, President Clinton extended the process for another day today and defended the delay as evidence that he was approaching the task seriously.
Administration officials said that Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt was Mr.
Clinton's first choice at the beginning of the day, but that he had still not formally ruled out choosing Judge Richard S. Arnold, who sits on the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Little Rock, Ark.


Choreography as a Sort Of Roller-Coaster Ride
The second program of the Compania Nacional de Danza, which will perform through Sunday afternoon at City Center, features three United States premieres: "Coming Together," "Cautiva" and "Arenal." All are choreographed by the Spanish troupe's artistic director, Nacho Duato, and all show off the bombardment of the senses that defines his work.
The fast and furious pace at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) is admirable, with the dancers' powerful energy and precision shaping the phrases that Mr.
Duato constructs out of disparate idioms.
At the same time, this relentless surge of movement, with tension palpable even when the dancers are briefly still, can leave the viewer yearning for relief.
When Martha Graham codified her dance technique, she based it on a contraction of the lower torso but also, significantly, on release.


U.S. HINT OF FORCE TO END HAITI CRISIS DRAWS OPPOSITION
The Clinton Administration's recent warnings that force may be needed to settle Haiti's long-running political crisis have quickly stirred strong opposition in the Southern Hemisphere, clouding the prospects for international approval of any American-led intervention.
During a discussion of the Haitian crisis at the Organization of American States in Washington on Wednesday, Brazil, Peru, Ecuador and Uruguay rejected the use of force under any circumstances.


Art in Review
Mari Mahr
Bonnie Benrubi Gallery  52 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through June 24
Mari Mahr's black-and-white photographs hint at narratives without ever resolving themselves into coherent stories.
For her first one-woman show in the United States, Ms.
Mahr, who worked as a photojournalist in Hungary before moving to England in 1972, shows excerpts from three series, including her best-known work, "A Few Days in Geneva."


Gartner's Goal in Overtime Gets Leafs Even With Sharks
Mike Gartner was waiting, and hoping, by the right side of the net of the San Jose Sharks.
Not long before, his Toronto Maple Leafs had come within inches of a historic and improbable end to their season.
He was along the goal line, looking toward teammate Doug Gilmour behind the net.
Gartner's temporary post did not seem the most opportune spot for the fifth-leading scorer in National Hockey League history, but with a season at risk and the pass headed his way, he took what he could get.
"Throw it at the net, and hope for the best," Gartner remembered.
Then he laughed.
"That's what I do all the time. What's different about that?"


New Jersey Senate Approves Bill To Jail 3-Time Criminals for Life
The State Senate today unanimously approved legislation that would require mandatory life imprisonment for a person convicted of violent crimes on three or more occasions.
The vote of 35 to 0 put New Jersey on the path toward enacting one of the nation's toughest versions of the "three strikes" concept.
If this bill or one similar to it becomes law, as expected, a person convicted on three occasions of certain violent crimes in any jurisdiction would be sentenced to a mandatory term of life imprisonment with no eligibility for parole.
The crimes the bill covers are murder, manslaughter, aggravated assault, kidnapping, sexual assault, robbery and possession of a firearm, explosive or destructive device for an unlawful purpose.


Overseas Shipholding Group Inc.(OSG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Film; A Tender Domestic Drama From, No Joke, Spike Lee
Foremost among the stereotypes undone by Spike Lee's "Crooklyn" is the usual idea of a Spike Lee film.
None of the edgy, confrontational drama or stark handsomeness of Mr.
Lee's other work distinguishes this noisy, crowded family story.
Nor will "Crooklyn" spark debate on racial or sexual issues, as some of Mr.
Lee's films have.
Instead, "Crooklyn" is so mild that it's the first Spike Lee film with the potential to be turned into a television show.
More important, it's the first one to display real warmth of heart.
From some film makers, tender feelings are de rigueur; from others, they're cloying or easy.
From Mr.
Lee, they're nothing if not a surprise.
Messy as the semiautobiographical "Crooklyn" often is, it succeeds in becoming a touching and generous family portrait, a film that exposes welcome new aspects of this director's talent.
The phrase "kinder, gentler Spike Lee" may not sit well with those who admire the film maker's harder edges, but it does come to mind.


Pagurian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TV Weekend; Grieving Over, It's On With the Show
She began as a comic in clubs and she is now, with an occasional pause for a performance gig, a jewelry saleswoman on television.
Joan Rivers has a habit, often unfortunate, of doing the unexpected.
On Sunday night on NBC, she does what could easily be construed as the unthinkable.
She stars in a movie about the aftermath of the 1987 suicide of her husband, Edgar Rosenberg.
The co-star of "Tears and Laughter: The Joan and Melissa Rivers Story" is, yes, Joan's daughter, Melissa.
Self-indulgence and promotion evidently know no bounds in the Rivers universe.
In the months before his death in a hotel room, Edgar Rosenberg had triple bypass heart surgery and was dismissed from Fox Broadcasting after the cancellation of his wife's talk show.


CHRONICLE
A New York State appeals court upheld yesterday a lower court ruling that gave the three children of WOODY ALLEN and MIA FARROW to their mother and severely limited his rights to visit them.
The judges said "the best interests of these children would be served by remaining together in the custody of Ms. Farrow" and abiding by the visitation schedule set last July by the trial judge, Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court in Manhattan. .


Nuclear Agency to Send a New Inspection Team to North Korea
The International Atomic Energy Agency said today that it will send a team of inspectors to North Korea this weekend in what appears to be a last-minute attempt to avoid imposing United Nations sanctions, Asian and American officials said.
The loose arrangement will permit the inspectors to finish most of the testing and sampling in North Korea's nuclear reprocessing center that they were prevented from carrying out in March.
North Korea has also been warned that its hopes of diplomatic talks will disappear unless it freezes any action to remove spent fuel from its nuclear reactor.
That fuel, once converted to weapons-grade plutonium, would give the North enough material for four or five nuclear weapons.


As an Analyst, Brown Scores on 3-Pointers
He extols basketball as the best game of all.
But baseball was the first love of the TNT analyst Hubie Brown.
"When I grew up, my life was dedicated to baseball," Brown said minutes after the Knicks' 96-91 victory Wednesday night over the Bulls.
"My dad's dream was for me to sign to play baseball. But I became better suited for basketball."


Labor Party's Leader Dies of a Heart Attack, Stunning Britain
John Smith, whose political acumen and personable style made him the favorite to lead the opposition Labor Party back into control of the British Government for the first time in two decades, died today after suffering a heart attack at home.
He was 55.
Coming only a week after after his party had rolled to huge gains across Britain in town and county elections, the sudden death of Mr.
Smith raises the specter of old divisions in Labor's ranks at a time when the party appears to have the governing Conservative Party on the ropes.


Way to Stanley Cup: Through New Jersey
Who am I rooting for?
I was born in the city and live here now, but I spent 20 years in New Jersey.
Who ever thought that the Rangers would have to take the Turnpike to the top?


Fencing of the Fields Disappoints Cup Chief
Although the chief organizer of the World Cup calls it "massive overreaction" by the police, fences to contain overzealous fans will be erected around at least two and probably three of the nine fields to be used for this summer's international soccer tournament.
Both Alan Rothenberg, chairman of World Cup USA '94, and FIFA, soccer's world governing body, strenuously object for safety reasons to the placement of fences around Stanford Stadium in Palo Alto, Calif., RFK Stadium in Washington and the Cotton Bowl in Dallas.
But law enforcement officials in each city have the final word on security arrangements.


Critic's Notebook; Cannes, Where Good Taste Is Only a Concept
FOR the art collector who has everything, why not a $22,000 knockoff of the Sistine Chapel ceiling, modified in the distinctive Cannes fashion?
Adam's loins are draped with a strip of celluloid, and he clutches an Oscar.
The figure reaching out to him is Marilyn Monroe's, and the ghosts of John Wayne, James Dean, Elvis Presley and Humphrey Bogart look on in approval.
The hilltop Hollywood sign glitters in the background.
A couple of cherubs are thrown in for good measure.
The same art gallery, just across the street from the Palais du Festival, also features Marilyn as Venus on the half shell, Marilyn on Mount Rushmore and Marilyn holding court at the Last Supper.
For this last bit of sacrilege, there are hamburgers, Heinz ketchup and a Jim Beam bottle on the table.
Laurel and Hardy are two of the Twelve Apostles.
Really, there ought to be a law.


David DuVivier, 83, Former Law Partner
David DuVivier, who practiced law in New York and Paris for 30 years, died on May 7 at the Medical Center of Princeton, N.J.
Mr.
DuVivier, who lived in Princeton, was 83.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Georgine DuVivier.


Jury Duty Is a Right Americans Have Won
To the Editor:
Norman F. Cantor (letter, April 28) writes of his frustration with jury duty in New York.
My frustration is focused on people who look at jury duty as a five-day annoyance.


Auto Insurers Say Florio Aides Hid State Deficit
Lawyers for the insurance industry charged today that the Florio administration knew that the state-run auto insurance pool it had created was running at a deficit from its inception, but hid that reality from the public for political reasons.
That accusation, documented in a lawsuit by insurance companies against the state, emerged as the insurance industry and the Whitman administration appeared close to an agreement to pay off the $1.3 billion debt of the insurance pool, known as the Market Transition Facility.


Officer and Relatives Indicted in Purchase Of House With Cash
A New York City police officer, his brother and his father were indicted yesterday on charges that they illegally conspired to hide their cash purchase of a $275,000 house in Queens.
The indictment by a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn does not say why the defendants tried to avoid Government scrutiny of the transaction, but law-enforcement officials said the investigation was continuing.


Let Bosnian Muslims Arm Themselves
To the Editor:
My colleagues Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations, offer a seductive set of reasons against United States termination of the arms embargo against the Bosnian Muslims in "Don't Arm Bosnia" (Op-Ed, May 5).


A Top Executive's Puzzling Death
The death of Wardell R. Lazard, chairman of W. R. Lazard &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's top minority-owned firms, contrasted starkly with what his many friends and admirers knew of his life.
To them, Mr.
Lazard was accomplished, highly regarded, well liked and, seemingly, thriving.
But on Wednesday, less than two weeks before his 45th birthday, Mr.
Lazard died, apparently of a drug overdose, naked and alone in a hotel room in Pittsburgh.
Next to his bed, the police said they found a vodka bottle and a tray with white powder on it.


Allied Signal to Buy Textron's Lycoming Unit
In a significant consolidation of the small airplane engine business, Allied Signal Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy the Lycoming Turbine Engine division of Textron Inc. for $375 million in cash.
Allied Signal, a diversified manufacturing company based in Morristown, N.J., has been seeking to expand its aerospace business, which is based in Torrance, Calif.
Its plant in Phoenix makes motors for regional transport planes containing 19 to 30 seats.


Gang Leaders Paid to Help Fight Crime
In the state that produced Bonnie and Clyde, officials here have come up with a different but controversial way to tame gang leaders: putting six of them on the city payroll and paying them $10,608 a year to dissuade fellow gang members from crime.
There was little dissension when the City Council passed the measure on an 8-to-1 vote on Tuesday, but there has been an uproar since then.
Local radio talk shows have been inundated with irate callers, as have the Mayor and the Police Chief.


Philip Morris
The share price of Philip Morris, which had been battered by anti-smoking publicity and by price cuts for Marlboro and other cigarettes, rose yesterday.
Some traders have speculated that the company may be close to spinning off either its food or tobacco division.
Philip Morris said earlier this year that it was studying such a move.


Battlefields of Khe Sanh: Still One Casualty a Day
A quarter century has passed since one of the most costly battles of the Vietnam War raged across the desolate Khe Sanh plateau, but this old battlefield near the former border between North and South Vietnam is still filling hospital beds with fresh victims.
The bare brown earth for miles around remains seeded with unexploded shells and bombs -- a legacy of the 77-day siege in 1968, when some 40,000 North Vietnamese troops tried in vain to overrun the 5,000 United States marines holding the Khe Sanh bastion.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Ritzman Shares Lead  Alice Ritzman, a 42-year-old player who has never won a tournament in her 17 years on the tour, shot a three-under-par 68 yesterday for a share of the L.P.G.A.
Championship lead with Dottie Mochrie.
Juli Inkster and Noelle Daghe were one shot back, and Laura Davies was one of five golfers to shoot 70 on the wet, wind-blown course at the DuPont Country Club in Wilmington, Del.
Play was suspended by darkness at 8:25 P.M. with just three players on the course.
Nancy Lopez, a three-time winner of the event, struggled with lower-back pain and withdrew after 14 holes.
She shot six over par. (AP) TENNIS  Sabatini Loses Again  Ann Grossman, an American ranked 40th in the world, defeated fourth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday at the upset-riddled German Open in Berlin.
Third-seeded Jana Novotna had to rally past Tatyana Ignatyeva, 4-6, 6-1, 6-2, and No. 7 Anke Huber defeated No. 14 Katerina Maleeva, 5-7, 6-4, 6-4.
Along with top-ranked Steffi Graf, they are the only players among the 10 seeded players still alive in the tournament.
Sabatini has not won a tournament in two years, and lost her opening match at the Italian Open last week. (AP) Lendl Outlasts Wilander: Ivan Lendl, the No. 2 seed, held off Mats Wilander, 6-3, 4-6, 7-5, to advance to the quarterfinals of the America's Red Clay Championships in Coral Springs, Fla.
Jared Palmer beat the qualifier Marcelo Ingaramo, 6-1, 6-2, to also advance.
Palmer will face Jamie Morgan, who advanced with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over Juan Garat.
Next for Lendl is Mark Woodforde, a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Jimmy Arias. (AP) Coetzer in Quarterfinals: Top-seeded Amanda Coetzer defeated Janette Husarova, 6-2, 6-4, and advanced to the quarterfinals of the Prague Open.
Silke Frankl upset second-seeded Natalya Medvedeva, the defending champion, by 6-2, 6-3. (AP) CYCLING  Italian Wins 18th Stage  Giuseppe Calcaterra of Italy won the 18th stage of the Tour of Spain yesterday, covering the 117 miles in 5 hours 12 minutes 53 seconds.
Tony Rominger of Switzerland retained his overall lead, finishing back in the pack.
Rominger, ahead by 5 hours 15 minutes, is virtually assured of a third straight victory in the event, which ends Sunday in Madrid. (AP)


SENATE APPROVES BILL TO PROTECT ABORTION CLINICS
The Senate today approved legislation that makes it a Federal crime to attack or blockade abortion clinics, their operators or their patrons and sent it to President Clinton, who has said he will sign it.
The 69-to-30 vote was a triumph for abortion-rights advocates, who had labored for months to bring what they say is an increasingly lawless anti-abortion movement under the jurisdiction of Federal judges and marshals.
The legislation was propelled by a spate of unusually violent attacks last year, including several firebombings of abortion clinics and the slaying of a doctor in an anti-abortion protest in Florida.


Southwest Gas Corp.(SWX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BROTHERS OF THE BRUSH," Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton.
A drama about Irish house painters, by Jimmy Murphy; directed by Nye Heron.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 757-3318.


Corrections
An article on the Law page last Friday about a lawyer's contingency fee for lobbying Congress misstated the history of his involvement, on behalf of 31 states seeking many millions of dollars from New York.
The lawyer, Bernard Nash, argued the case before the Supreme Court, which ruled against him.
As a result of that decision he took the states' argument to Congress.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd. (AIP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mitel Corp.(MLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Ninth Avenue Festival
Lovers of ethnic food and flea markets will find both at the 21st Ninth Avenue International Food Festival, tomorrow and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Merchants from 37th to 57th Street will sell samples of international food, from Cajun crawfish to baklava.
Visitors may also browse through a variety of merchandise and watch the assembling of a 26-foot wooden rowboat, to be christened "Floating the Apple." The annual fair is sponsored by the Ninth Avenue Association of New York.
Information: (212) 581-7217.


John Smith, 55, Led Labor In Comeback
John Smith, who died today at the age of 55 after suffering a heart attack, led the opposition Labor Party for the last two years, building a commanding lead in public opinion polls that he hoped would carry him into 10 Downing Street at the next election.
A lawyer with a reputation as a shrewd political strategist, Mr.
Smith took over the Labor leadership from Neil Kinnock after the party's loss to the Conservative Party of Prime Minister John Major in the last general election, in April 1992.
He continued the process begun by Mr.
Kinnock of moving the traditionally left-wing party toward the center.


CHRONICLE
MARY FISHER, the Republican crusader for people with AIDS who is H.I.V.-positive herself, is having a busy week.
On Tuesday, she shared the stage in San Francisco with Tony Kushner, the author of the play "Angels in America," at a benefit dinner for the San Francisco AIDS Foundation.
On Wednesday, she attended the opening of "Grease!" at the Eugene O'Neill Theater in New York, sitting next to MAUREEN CRIMMINS, the sister of ROSIE O'DONNELL, a star of the show.
"Rosie's a friend and a terrific lady," Ms.
Fisher said.


Airgas Inc.(ARG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tower Air Inc.(TOWR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Harvard, Citing Relative Lack of Resources, Starts $2 Billion Drive
Harvard University, which already has the largest endowment of any private university in the nation, opened a campaign today to raise $2.1 billion over the next five years.
"Harvard is in a time of relatively scarce resources," the university's president, Neil L. Rudenstine, said this morning as he announced what officials said was the biggest fund-raising drive in the history of higher education.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Suspended Eric Anthony of the Seattle Mariners for four games for charging the mound during a game against the Boston Red Sox on May 3.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Mike Morgan, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 9.
Activated Frank Castillo, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on April 20 with an article about the competition between video-game makers and the personal computer industry misstated the price of Cray Research Inc.'s Cray-1 supercomputer.
The average selling price of the machine was $8 million, not $20 million.


Sussex Buys Spy Magazine
Sussex Publishers Inc., the publishers of Psychology Today and Mother Earth News, announced late Wednesday that the company had acquired Spy magazine.
Spy, a satirical magazine founded in 1986 and based in Manhattan, suspended publication in February after it was unable to find a buyer.


Miscellany
*
Leisure Concepts Inc., New York, formed a joint venture with EM-Entertainment G.m.b.H., Munich, Germany, to form Entertainment Concepts, a full-service European licensing and entertainment company with offices in Britain, Italy, France and Germany.


Bargaining Session Is Scheduled
Negotiators for players and owners have scheduled a meeting for Wednesday, their first bargaining session since the owners turned over financial information about the clubs for the players association to study.
The two sides have met only twice this year, on March 7 in Tampa, Fla., and March 30 in Phoenix.
RICHARD RAVITCH, management's negotiator, is seeking a salary cap in exchange for agreeing to give players a fixed percentage of defined revenue, and the financial information they provided the union was used in developing the salary cap formula.
The players are expected to resist the idea, and DONALD FEHR, head of the union, has termed a strike in the second half of the season a "real possibility."


Las Vegas Theme Casino by ITT Sheraton
The ITT Sheraton Corporation plans to build a 34-acre casino resort and entertainment complex on one of the last remaining open parcels of the Las Vegas Strip, the company announced yesterday.
Like other recently built gambling centers, the Sheraton Desert Kingdom, a $750 million project that is expected to provide 5,000 jobs, would continue the industry trend toward casinos in an elaborate theme-park style -- lures that have been successful in attracting not only gamblers, but also entire families, to the Strip.


Japan Won't Give Visa to Maradona
Japan yesterday refused to grant DIEGO MARADONA a visa to play in a tournament there this month, citing his drug record.
But the Japanese Embassy in Buenos Aires said the Government in Tokyo had granted a visa to forward CLAUDIO CANIGGIA.
Caniggia, like Maradona, had been suspended after testing positive for cocaine use.
"The difference is that Maradona had a judicial case against him and Caniggia didn't," said MOKOTO KATO, a spokesman for the Japanese Embassy. (AP)


Diner's Journal
Believing the Evidence
When you walk into a restaurant, look at the menu and find nothing you want to eat, the smart thing to do is leave.
Immediately.
But this is easier said than done.
Most of us have a very hard time walking out once bread has been brought and water poured.


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Hees International reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Company Wins $113 Million in Bank Case
A Dallas real estate company won a $113 million judgment against banking regulators and the nation's third-largest bank today in a decision that raises questions about the conduct of the Federal bank bailouts.
William A. Brewer 3d, a lawyer for Prentiss Properties Ltd., said he believed the judgment was the largest ever against the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, but this could not be immediately verified.


Review/Dance; Margaret Illman Stars
The New York City Ballet has a star on its hands.
Or so it would appear after a performance on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater by Margaret Illmann, who starred on Broadway this season in the short-lived musical "The Red Shoes."
Ms.
Illmann, who will perform again with the company tomorrow afternoon and Sunday night, is a fascinating performer.
She dived bravely into George Balanchine's choreography in "Who Cares?," a celebration of George Gershwin's music, looking a little stiff at times in "The Man I Love" segment but very much a Balanchine ballerina with her carefree flyaway limbs in "Fascinatin' Rhythm." And her buoyant run onto the stage in "I Got Rhythm" was pure City Ballet.


Athens Journal; New Subway Lays Bare Greece in All Its Glory
While drivers all around them in this traffic-choked capital perform their customary impatient concert of blowing horns and squealing tires, archeologists are meticulously sifting through a yawning excavation, longer and wider than a football field.
Athens is building a badly needed subway, and the $2.8 billion project has provided a boon to archeology.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.42
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.20
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.68
4.76
3.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.34
7.43
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.60
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
n.a.
8.45
7.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.53
5.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


First 20 Palestinian Policemen Arrive in Jericho
Waving Kalashnikov rifles out of their white and dun-colored vans, an advance team of 20 Palestinian policemen arrived in Jericho today to prepare to take control of this town from the Israeli Army on Friday.
The expected handover and an accelerating Israeli pullout in the Gaza Strip came as the Palestine Liberation Organization announced the names of 15 members of the authority that is to govern Gaza and Jericho under a self-rule agreement with Israel.


More Downs Than Ups at Spring Art Auctions
Nothing has underscored the art market's fragility better than the auctions of contemporary, Impressionist and modern art over the last two weeks in New York.
Six months ago, auction-house experts said they felt confident that the market was making a slow but steady climb up the track.
Then came an unexpected derailment.
Several forces worked against both Sotheby's and Christie's.
The world economic outlook has worsened in the last few months, meaning that buyers from Latin America and Asia, on whom the auction houses were counting, disappeared; American collectors led the buying.
Other buyers, even if their piggy banks were full, apparently didn't feel psychologically confident enough to spend money this spring, always a factor in the auction room.


Council Votes for a Role On Privatization Efforts
In the first test of the relationship between New York City's new Republican Mayor and the largely Democratic City Council, lawmakers yesterday overwhelmingly passed legislation that would allow the Council to hold hearings on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's attempts to turn municipal services over to private companies.
The bill would also require the administration to conduct extensive cost-benefit analyses before displacing city workers, but it would not give the Council the ability to stop any privatization efforts.
The measure has been strongly condemned by the Mayor, who complained that it would deprive him of flexibility in labor negotiations and add crippling delays to attempts at privatizing services.


From the company that invented the soap opera, a call to embrace new media technology.
THE head of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the world's largest advertiser, issued a provocative call to action to marketers and advertising agencies yesterday, urging them to embrace new media technologies as opportunities rather than to fear them as threats or ignore them as irrelevant.
Edwin L. Artzt, the chairman and chief executive of P.&amp; G., challenged a session of the 76th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies here to "start getting control of the new environment."


Racial Injustice in the Senate
Congress seems bent on adding dozens of death sentences to the Federal criminal code.
At least the House, trying to retain some balance in the pending crime bill, has included a measure to reduce racial bias in administering capital punishment.
Not so the Senate, which ignobly has voted to keep the House's proposed Racial Justice Act out of the final crime bill when a Senate-House conference committee meets to reconcile their different versions.
The Senate has instructed its conferees to resist the House measure.
Conferees often ignore such instructions and should do so again, especially when they have a chance to curb the death penalty's notorious racial disparities.


Mason's Activation A Last-Minute Move
After a brief practice and some candid statements by Pat Riley regarding Anthony Mason, the Knicks departed for Chicago today, confident they would succeed where they failed last year.
New York will take a 2-0 lead over the Bulls into Game 3 of their four-of-seven game playoff series Friday night at noisy Chicago Stadium.
The Bulls know they have little chance to extend their three-year reign as National Basketball Association champions unless they win the next two games at home.


France Says It Won't Support Military Intervention in Haiti
The French Foreign Minister said today that France would be willing to take part in a United Nations force to keep watch in Haiti after democracy is restored, but would "certainly not" join an intervention intended to overthrow the military government.
Alain Juppe, who met with President Clinton at the White House, said, "We aren't going to play the conquerors all over the world." His Government has already contributed more troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations in Bosnia than any other country.


For Rebbe's Followers, Hospital Becomes Yeshiva
The buzz of prayer and the rapid cadences of Talmudic debate swirled about the dozen young men packed into the two cramped rooms, sitting amid books and coffee cups with the bleary-eyed look of students cramming for finals.
Their teacher peers down at them, but only from a photograph -- Rebbe Menachem Mendel Schneerson himself, the Grand Rabbi of the Lubavitch Hasidim, lies upstairs at Beth Israel Medical Center, critically ill, as he has been since suffering a stroke on March 10.
The young men spend their days partly in vigil and partly in study, having converted the medical center's meditation room as well as the hospital cafeteria into a makeshift yeshiva, yet another outpost for a group that survived world wars by uprooting itself and going into exile.


Abroad at Home; Wreckers at Work
Conducting the regular business of the Federal Government has become a far more draining task for the President and his people than it used to be.
If you want to know why, here is a small example.
Last November President Clinton nominated Sam W. Brown Jr. to be an ambassador as head of the U.S. delegation to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The C.S.C.E., which has played a leading role in promoting human rights, now mediates conflicts in the former Soviet republics and is to supervise some arms control efforts.


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Undaunted by Spring Showers, Graduates Celebrate


Easy Goer, Who Raced to Public Fancy, Dies at 8
Easy Goer, the son of Alydar who caught the public's fancy as one of New York's most exciting racing champions, died yesterday at Claiborne Farm in Kentucky at the age of 8, apparently of a heart attack.
His trainer, Shug McGaughey, who got the news at Belmont Park, said: "He captured the public. He was a brilliantly fast horse, exciting to watch, and he had a great following. And for me, he was the big turning point in my career. He generated all kinds of publicity, and it careened off onto the people around him."


Convicted Pennsylvania Justice Is Facing Impeachment
The Pennsylvania Legislature is starting impeachment proceedings against a State Supreme Court Justice, Rolf Larsen, who was convicted last month by a state court of illegally conspiring to obtain prescription drugs.
"Justice Larsen refuses to resign from office, and he leaves us with the distasteful task of impeaching him," said state Representative Thomas R. Caltagirone, a Democrat who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.
Justice Larsen was re-elected in 1987 to a second 10-year term on the State Supreme Court, Pennsylvania's highest court.


CHRONICLE
Proof for anyone who ever doubted that fashion models are the new idols of teen-agers: hundreds of them showed up at Macy's Herald Square yesterday for autographs from KATE MOSS and MICHAEL BERGIN, the stars of the Calvin Klein underwear ads.
JAYME THALER, a high-school student from Cliffside Park, N.J., had cut class so that he could get Ms.
Moss to sign a pair of white briefs.
"She's beautiful," he said.
"I'm obsessed with her."


ADT Ltd. (ADT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wardell R. Lazard; Investment Banker, 44
Wardell R. Larzard, the chairman of W.R.
Lazard &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's top minority-owned investment banking firms, died Wednesday, apparently of a drug overdose.
Article, Business Day, page D1.


Alliant Techsystems Inc.(ATK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Monk-Austin Inc.(MK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For Children
'First Annual Urban Park Ranger Bass Blast'
Carl Schurz Park  East End Avenue, between 84th and 89th Streets  (800) 201-7275  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
If the American alligator can make a comeback, so can the striped bass.Striped bass, at least, are definitely returning to the New York City area, and the Urban Park Rangers are so thrilled, they're having a party.
Although still not safe to eat, the striped bass that populate the Hudson River have flowed into the East River now that it is cleaner, said John Feeley, a borough ranger.


Scitex Corp.(SCIXF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Swept 'Em: Yeah, So What?
It has become a hockey post-season where all the cliches have come true.
Within a bridge span of each other, the Rangers and the Devils -- two rivals who did their regular-season homework, obeyed strict coaches and wound up in the top two spots in their conference -- have reached a critical impasse.
"It's going to be a great spectacle," Ranger Coach Mike Keenan said today of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference final series that commences Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
"Both clubs have had a very disciplined year, and both came through the first few playoff rounds relatively unscathed."


Home Video
The Price of 'Mrs. Doubtfire'
In video outlets, no guideline flies out the window faster than that ball-park figure referred to as the suggested retail price.
Whatever the movie for which a studio suggests whatever amount, the price immediately heads south in a highly competitive marketplace.


Giuliani Presses Bid to Privatize Custodial Work in Some Schools
The Giuliani administration set the stage yesterday for a showdown with the school custodians' union over contracting out some or all of its work to private cleaning companies.
Randy L. Levine, the city's Labor Commissioner, said in an interview that he would seek a new contract with the union that would allow the city to use private custodial services in half or more of the schools in order to compare the performance with that of the 853 union members now in charge of most school cleaning.


Treasuries Up Modestly On Bond-Friendly Data
Prices of Government securities moved modestly higher yesterday after an unexpected drop in April wholesale prices and consumer spending.
The weaker-than-expected data eased investor fears of rising inflation pressures.
So far this week the anxious market has not been able to put together two consecutive days of a similar trading pattern, its concerns shifting over interest rate increases, a weaker dollar, a quarterly refunding by the Treasury, inflation data and the the coming Federal Open Market Committee meeting.


A Theft Scandal Ravages a Career At a Leading American Law Firm
In the increasingly competitive world of corporate law practice, Gary L. Fairchild was both expert and evangelist.
As the man atop Winston &amp; Strawn, one of Chicago's largest law firms, he became a regular on the booming management seminar circuit, tirelessly championing notions like "total quality management" and what he called the "A.C.E. Program" -- short for "above client expectations."
As Winston &amp; Strawn prospered, so did Mr.
Fairchild, the firm's managing partner since 1987.
He earned an estimated $500,000 a year, amassed what was touted as the local bar's largest collection of suspenders and lived on East Lake Shore Drive, one of Chicago's ritziest venues.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $56 million of notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 7.59 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The issue is callable in two years.


Franchise Stores Lure Corporate Refugees
As a store planner for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, Louis Minella knew the mysteries of how a store should look and the subtle skills of leading the eye and the buyer to a desired end.
But he had never faxed a letter all by himself.
He did not even know how to run a copy machine.
Here, at a tiny Mail Boxes Etc. franchise that is Mr.
Minella's new life, all that has changed.


Where There's No Car, There's a Bus; Navigating and Surviving the Suburbs: Taking the No. 60 in Westchester
On weekday mornings, buses like the No. 60 weave through the fraying urban neighborhoods of Mount Vernon, New Rochelle and Yonkers and fill up early with women who are heading out to clean the homes and care for the babies and tend the frail in the more prosperous villages farther north in Westchester County.
The passengers sit in cocoons of silence, gazing dreamily at the scene reeling film-like out the tinted windows, their bodies swaying gently as the bus rounds a curve or halts a little too suddenly.
Some leaf through The Daily News or listen to radios or chat with other regulars.
A few take naps, knowing their journey will be a long one.


Vive la France!
To the Editor:
As a Franglais by birth, I must correct "All Aboard for the Chunnel of Love-Hate" (The Week in Review, May 1) for changing the title of one of my national anthems.
There have been efforts to remove the more blood-thirsty lyrics from the French anthem.
But the title is still "La Marseillaise," not "Les Marseilles." As for my English anthem, I concede the year I was born, one sang "God Save the King." MICHAEL R. LITTLE  Newark, May 1, 1994


Witnesses Say Suspect on S.I. Did Not Resist
Several witnesses provided to the police by the family of a man killed in police custody on Staten Island two weeks ago have told detectives that the man, Ernest Sayon, did not resist officers after he was handcuffed.
Police officials have said more than 40 people claiming to be witnesses have been interviewed, and their accounts contradict one another.
But the 12 witnesses provided by Mr.
Sayon's lawyer, whose accounts are contained on nine 90-minute cassette tapes recorded in the office of the District Attorney on Staten Island, paint a picture of a suspect in restraint who mostly lay still as officers beat him, put him in a choke hold and kneed him in the back.


Clemens Wins Duel With Brewers' Bones
Red Sox 3, Brewers 1
Roger Clemens stopped Milwaukee on two hits in seven innings and the Brewers wasted a strong performance by Ricky Bones, losing to the Boston Red Sox, 3-1, last night at Fenway Park.


School Board Will Recognize Other Cultures, but as Inferior
They said the pledge of Allegiance, heard grade-school children sing "It's a Grand Old Flag," then the school board here voted to teach all students in Lake County that American culture is superior to all others.
The conservative Christian members of the Lake County School Board, who have held a majority here for nearly two years, said that as part of a state-mandated program on teaching about other cultures, the schools should also teach that American values are the best.


Alternative High Schools Do a Heroic Job
To the Editor:
As the superintendent responsible for six of the New York City "low performing schools" cited in an April 30 news article, I object to their linkage with "principals who have presided lazily over failing schools" (editorial, May 3).
In each of the schools with which I am associated, the faculty and principals, along with students, are making Herculean efforts to move youngsters toward diplomas, college and gainful employment.


Honda Suspected Wrongdoing for 3 Years
The American Honda Motor Company first became aware of allegations of wrongdoing in its sales force three years ago, long before the Government started an investigation of company executives who took bribes for granting dealerships and providing popular cars to existing dealers, a lawyer for Honda acknowledged in an interview this week.
But even though Honda began its own investigation in 1991, the Japanese auto maker began to share the results of its internal inquiry with law enforcement officials only last October, well after a Federal criminal investigation was under way.
During that time, the company also apparently did not disclose the existence of its inquiry to securities regulators or shareholders.


1993 It's Not, Bulls Are Learning
When Phil Jackson left his suburban north Chicago home this morning, a neighbor shouted to him: "Fight fire with fire. Go get the Knicks."
"That's exactly what we're not going to do, fight fire with fire," Jackson said several hours later, after a short Bulls' workout in the Berto Center, the team's training facility here.


Interest Rates Don't Faze Companies
Who's afraid of the Federal Reserve?
Not the chief executives of the nation's biggest companies -- at least not yet.
The nation's central bank has increased short-term interest rates three times this year and is expected to raise them again.
But business leaders gathered here today for a semiannual conference with top Administration officials expressed no concerns.


Market Place; Buyout of UAL by its unions looks like winning alternative.
BARRING some unforeseen event, the proposal by the pilots' and machinists' unions at United Airlines to trade concessions for majority control appears headed for shareholder approval some time next month.
And if one mark of a fair deal is that no one group thinks it is making out like a bandit, then this latest in a long line of attempts to buy the company fits the bill.


Mr. Bratton's Wise Policing
Police Commissioner William Bratton continues to react intelligently, instead of defensively, to allegations of police brutality.
For that he deserves the gratitude of all New Yorkers, especially in view of the disturbing accounts from witnesses to the arrest of Ernest Sayon, the Staten Island man who died recently in a struggle with police.
Without in any way judging the behavior of the police officers, Mr.
Bratton has ordered a review of his department's policies and training programs for handling violent suspects.
That is a sound move on the merits and in community relations.
New Yorkers must be confident that their police officers -- particularly their police chief -- reject violent, abusive behavior.
The tendency for officers to protect each other is a strong one.
Mr.
Bratton sends the message that his strong defense of the police force does not extend to the unnecessary use of violence.
Yet he also shows understanding for his police officers, who need better training to avoid injury themselves while subduing violent suspects.


Method to Produce Safer Cigarette Was Found in 60's, but Company Shelved Idea
Tobacco companies not only knew of the hazards of smoking by the early 1960's but had already discovered and patented a critical step for making a safer cigarette.
The idea was to heat the tobacco rather than burn it, thus avoiding the process that creates most of the hazardous substances in tobacco smoke.
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, a subsidiary of the London-based British-American Tobacco PLC, put the idea to the test in a cigarette, code-named Ariel, according internal company documents obtained by The New York Times.
The prototype was granted a patent in 1966 but was never marketed.


Dorothy Bernstein; Volunteer, 80
Dorothy Bernstein, a trustee and president of the auxiliary of the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn from 1972 to 1990, died yesterday at her home in Bellport, L.I.
She was 80.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said her son, Herbert Bernstein.


Save Health Care for New York Children
Eleven thousand 12-year-olds are on the verge of losing their health insurance as Albany dithers over New York State's budget.
At stake in the stalled negotiations is Child Health Plus, a program that provides primary and preventive health care for about 70,000 young children of parents who work but are too poor to afford coverage on their own.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo supports raising the cutoff age of the program to 13 -- so that today's 12-year-olds do not become tomorrow's uninsured 13-year-olds.
So does the Assembly.
But Republicans in the Senate have held up approval because the Governor refused to go along with their plan to boost hospital reimbursement rates.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST A STEP TOWARD THE '3 STRIKES' CONCEPT
The New Jersey Senate unanimously approved legislation that would require mandatory life imprisonment for a person convicted of violent crimes on three or more occasions.
A1.


James F. Hoch; Partner in Law Firm, 40
James F. Hoch, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, said Michael E. Zega, his companion.


Tow Firms Are Accused In Violations
As part of a crackdown on private tow trucks that run red lights and break speed limits to reach accidents first, New York City filed complaints yesterday against 14 tow truck companies.
Commissioner Fred Cerullo of the Department of Consumer Affairs said he would seek administrative hearings at which fines could be issued and licenses suspended or revoked if the companies were found guilty.


Detective Movies From the Days Before the Mood Turned Noir
Did the mustachioed Colonel Mustard, with his beady eyes and stiff military bearing, commit the dastardly deed in the billiard room with a lead pipe?
Or did Miss Scarlet, a slithery femme fatale in a red dress, hide behind the door to the conservatory with a revolver?
Isn't there something odd about Mrs.
White, that stout gray-haired woman who never smiles and says she's a professional nurse?
If she's a nurse, then she must know a lot about poisons.
And what do you suppose she and that seedy traveling salesman, Mr.
Green, were whispering about so intensely over dinner?


Critic's Choice/Film; AIDS Patients on Life and Death
Among the growing number of films that focus on people living with AIDS, no documentary has done so with the stunning intimacy of Juan Botas and Lucas Platt's "One Foot on a Banana Peel, the Other Foot in the Grave." It is a high point of the 1994 New York Lesbian and Gay Film Festival, which runs through May 22 at the Quad Cinema in Greenwich Village.
"One Foot," which is subtitled "Secrets From the Dolley Madison Room," records the conversations of a group of men with AIDS in their doctor's office (nicknamed the Dolley Madison Room), where they gather to receive regular intravenous medication.
Unlike other AIDS documentaries, "One Foot," which was produced by Jonathan Demme and Peter Saraf, is not relentlessly upbeat in the face of tragedy.
As the emaciated patients reminisce, joke and talk about life, love, sex and death, their collective reflections become a microcosm of changeable human emotion, devastatingly heightened by their situation.
Sadness and grief coincide with an antic humor and an irrepressible passion for life.


Review/Photography; A Celebration of Cartier-Bresson's Birthday
Henri Cartier-Bresson is to turn 86 this summer, and the International Center of Photography is giving him a splendid early birthday gift, in fact, a series of gifts.
At a gala dinner on Monday, the center is to honor this photographer for his life's work, and today a three-part exhibition, "Henri Cartier-Bresson: Hommage," tracing the course of his career opens in the center's landmark Fifth Avenue mansion.
The celebration of the long career of this master of the photographic moment includes the American premiere of a film about Mr.
Cartier-Bresson's work by Sarah Moon, the fashion photographer. (Mr. Cartier-Bresson, who underwent heart surgery last year, will not travel to New York for these events.) Also on view at the center is to be a new portfolio of recent lithographs, made to illustrate Louis Aragon's Surrealist book published in 1926, "Le Paysan de Paris."


Yankees Give a Little Bit Extra to Extend Streak
The situation had grown dangerous and precarious for the Yankees on a gloomy day at Yankee Stadium.
The Yankees had frittered away a three-run lead to the Indians after there were two outs and none on base in the ninth inning and were threatening to spoil a perfect streak and a perfect homestand.
It was time for an unexpected test; another chance to see what the Yankees might produce as the summer approaches.
They could either fold like a paper napkin, reasoning that Cleveland was due to win one and still be elated about winning six of seven games.
Or they could regroup.
The Yankees were redeemers as they rolled a perfect seven in the Bronx.


Lands' End (LR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Bulls File Tampering Charge
The Chicago Bulls have filed tampering charges with the National Basketball Association against the Orlando Magic President BOB VANDER WEIDE for his comments about forward HORACE GRANT during a TNT telecast last week.
The Bulls charged yesterday the comments constitute tampering under the N.B.A. constitution.
The Magic said it believed the Bulls' charge is without merit. (AP)


Restaurants
The front of the restaurant has been thrown open, and when the rain begins the air is filled with the electric smell of spring.
As the downpour becomes violent, everyone in the slick, noisy room falls suddenly silent, listening to the power of the falling water.
The room is illuminated by a flash of lightning.
There is a crack of thunder.
Strangers murmur to one another.
And then the storm abates and the conversation begins to build again, swirling into a maelstrom of sound.
Cascabel is quiet only in a rainstorm.


ASR Investments Corp.(ASR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Formula One Driver Badly Injured
Another serious driver injury has marred the opening qualifying session for the Monaco Grand Prix, just two weeks after the deaths of a Brazilian, Ayrton Senna, and an Austrian, Roland Ratzenberger, during the San Marino Grand Prix weekend.
KARL WENDLINGER, 25, of Austria was in a coma with severe head injuries after crashing yesterday morning during practice.


1988 Hiring Of Detective Held in Sting is Defended
The Mayor of this Westchester County city today defended the Police Department's decision in 1988 to hire a former New York City police officer who had been acquitted of corruption charges there.
The officer, Frank Lauria, was one of three Mount Vernon detectives arrested on Tuesday on charges of stealing $10,000 during a raid on an apartment where they thought a fugitive from Florida was hiding.
In fact, the cash had been placed in the apartment as part of an F.B.I. sting operation.


Lowe's Cos. (LOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the Treasury Department's new regulations on lobbying misstated the estimate of the tax revenue to be raised by a ban on deductions for lobbying expenses.
The Treasury estimates that it will be $653 million over five years -- not an annual total between $800 million and $1.2 billion.


New I.B.M. Laser Method Stacks Data on Disks
I.B.M. scientists demonstrated a new optical disk technology today that would expand more than tenfold the storage capacity of digital disks used in playing back music, video or computer data.
I.B.M. has not yet created a product from the technology.
But the technique could lead to such consumer-product improvements as putting several feature-length movies on a single disk the size of today's music CD's or computer disks known as CD-ROM's.
Currently, it typically takes two such disks to hold the average movie.


People
*
Peter Mackey was named to the new position of senior vice president and group director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Technology Group, San Francisco.
He was previously senior vice president and management director at Anderson &amp; Lembke, San Francisco.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about people in Manhattan who watched the eclipse misidentified the method they used.
It was pinhole projection -- in which light from the sun passes through a pinhole and creates an image on a surface below -- not pinhole reflection.


Polish-German Border An Economic Frontier
By 10 A.M.
Ewin Freund, a German retiree, finished his weekend shopping at the array of stalls here and walked back over the border into Germany.
His best bargains were summer bed comforters and a wicker laundry basket.
His wife, Adelheid, stocked up on butter and his brother-in-law, Gunther, found a 12-piece coffee set at half the price it was selling for in Germany.
"It's amazingly cheap," Mr.
Freund said as he approached passport control, where he flashed his documents and then headed to his car for the two-hour drive home.
"If it was cheaper in Germany we would buy there. But we can buy everything for less here, and we are leaving money behind for the Poles."


Private Custodial Services Are Getting Mixed Grades
To Rosemarie B. Ferrera, the privatization of the custodial work at Lafayette High School in Brooklyn, where she is the principal, has brought cleaner classrooms, more courteous service and easier after-hours access to the school for community groups.
"Its been positive," she said.
But Stephanie Ferrandino, the principal at Martin Luther King High School in Manhattan, has had the opposite experience.
Since the city hired a private cleaning contractor last fall, floors and stairways have gotten dirtier.
She even threw the company's foreman out of her office after a dispute.


Quiet Partners in Big Art-World Business
"John? Paul? Which one is this?"
Giggles emanate from the other end of the telephone.
A voice with a New York City accent launches into the latest art-world scuttlebutt.
From time to time, whoever is talking invariably mentions the other's name, which is the only way to tell whether the voice belongs to John Herring or his identical twin, Paul.


Philadelphia Journal; Inner City Market Blossoms
Thanks to a novel farmers' market, some residents of a housing project in southwest Philadelphia say they recently tasted fresh asparagus and cauliflower for the first time.
Some of their children ate their first carrots and celery.
The markets here at Tasker Homes and at another housing project have been so successful that eight more farmer's markets are to be opened in other neighborhoods this year.


Prices Rise For Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities ended moderately higher yesterday after a roller-coaster session that epitomized the trading activity throughout the week.
The market initially rallied after the Labor Department reported that consumer prices rose a tenth of a percent in April.
The increase was less than had been expected in many forecasts and was another sign that inflation was still in check.


Puckett Homer Sinks McDonald and O's
Twins 4, Orioles 1
Kirby Puckett hit a two-run homer in the sixth inning to hand Ben McDonald his first loss of the season last night as the Minnesota Twins defeated the Baltimore Orioles, 4-1, at the Metrodome.
McDonald (7-1), trying to become the majors' first eight-game winner, took the loss despite carrying a one-hitter into the sixth.
Indians 2, Tigers 0
Mark Clark pitched his first American League shutout and kept Tim Belcher without a victory in eight starts as Cleveland beat Detroit at Jacobs Field, stopping a five-game losing skid.
Belcher (0-7) gave up two runs and six hits but became the first Detroit pitcher to lose his first seven decisions in a season since Ted Gray lost nine in a row at the start of the 1953 season.


Stephen C. Smith, Gay Rights Lobbyist, 37
Stephen C. Smith, a lobbyist for gay rights, died on Tuesday at the Hospice of Washington.
Mr.
Smith, who lived in Washington, was 37.
He died of AIDS, said Gregory King, a friend.


Moore Corp.(MCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kidder Says Auditor Backs Bond Valuation
Moving to dispel questions about its financial condition, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company says its outside auditor has nearly completed a special study of the firm's $12 billion in mortgage-backed bonds and concluded that the prices at which the firm has valued the bonds accurately reflect market conditions.
"They have largely completed the process, and based on the work they have done, they have concluded that prices that we have used are reasonable," John M. Liftin, Kidder's general counsel, said yesterday.
"They are not proposing any adjustments to our inventory reserves."  Attempt at Reassurance
The study, which has been under way for several weeks and involved a team of specialists, is being conducted by KPMG Peat Marwick, one of the world's biggest accounting firms.
It is clearly an attempt on the part of Kidder's top executives to reassure clients, investors and especially the firm's corporate parent, the General Electric Company, which has previously tried to sell the firm.


New Offerings, One With Islamic Principles
The new Blanchard Emerging Markets Growth and Income Fund invests in stocks and bonds in Latin America, Asia and other emerging markets, with equities normally making up two-thirds of the portfolio.
Investments in developing countries can be volatile, as shown by this year's double-digit losses among funds that invest in Southeast Asia.
The income component and the global approach of the Blanchard fund might mitigate some risk.
The $75 opening fee is halved through July 31.
The Amana Growth Fund buys growth stocks that conform to Islamic principles.
Investors share in any profit or loss and avoid businesses with alcohol, gambling or pornography concerns, as well as banks.
Because Islam forbids receiving interest, the new fund cannot own bonds or keep money in cash equivalents.


Hollinger Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Low-Cost Ways to Tend Portfolios Over Time
NO one much likes the middle of things.
Gardeners like to plant and harvest, but who wants to weed midseason?
Investors are no different, and now they have a few low-cost aids, offered by mutual funds, to help tend assets as they grow.
The help is needed; neglect can be very risky in investing.
Steven Janachowski, a financial adviser in San Francisco, tells of a retired couple, both doctors, with an $800,000 portfolio they need for income.
Unmonitored for years, the assets are "about 70 percent in mostly speculative equities," he said.
"Hardly an income portfolio." And because equities usually return more than other investments, unwatched portfolios tend to get stock-heavy -- the reverse of what experts advise as retirement or other goal nears.


OCCUPATION ENDS AS ISRAELI TROOPS EVACUATE JERICHO
The last Israeli soldier left this ancient town today, ending Israel's 27-year occupation and giving Palestinians control over the first West Bank foothold for their hoped-for independent state.
A force of about 460 Palestinian soldiers-turned-policemen rode into Jericho, automatic rifles thrust skyward in triumph, and took over a freshly evacuated army base and fenced-in police station that had been Israel's headquarters.


Storm Clouds for Knicks: Bulls Win After Brawl
It was a bizarre and unforgettable Friday the 13th for the Knicks.
Toni Kukoc's 22-foot thunderbolt at the buzzer gave the Bulls a remarkable 104-102 victory over the Knicks at Chicago Stadium, leaving the Knicks with a precarious 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 JERICHO GETS ITS OWN FORCE  The last Israeli soldier left the ancient town of Jericho, ending Israel's 27-year occupation and giving Palestinians control over the first West Bank foothold for their hoped-for independent state.  1  Settlers mourned at the sight of Palestinians guarding a synagogue.  7  U.N.
PLANS RWANDA DEPLOYMENT  The United Nations Security Council finally agreed on a plan to send an all-African force to war-torn Rwanda to protect threatened civilians and aid workers.  1  CHINESE DISSIDENT RELEASED
In an important gesture to the Clinton administration, China released Chen Ziming, the second of two major figures still serving long prison terms for leading the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989. 7  In a village, decaying corpses with frozen expressions of terror.  3  RUSSIA JOINS BALKAN EFFORT  Russia formally joined the United States and the European Union in a reinvigorated effort to end the two-year-old war in Bosnia.
The nations supported a plan that calls on the Bosnian Serbs to cede nearly a third of the land they control.  6  MEXICAN CANDIDATES DEBATE  Mexico's leading presidential candidates held the first nationally broadcast debate in the country's history.
Lil Picard, an artist and critic.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Another new Justice.
A victory for abortion rights.
Sad blow for British democracy.
Build the neighborhood clinics.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The human touch.
Russell Baker: Secrets of the trade.
Victoria de Grazia: Will Il Duce's successors make facts run on time?
Judith Chernaik: O Brooklyn local.
Vicente Echerri: Help Cuba.
Tighten the embargo.
Chronicle 22 Bridge 12 Crossword 14


Classical Music in Review
'Interrupted Chime'  Carnegie Hall
A group of Russian, Armenian and American musicians joined forces on Wednesday evening for "Interrupted Chime," a memorial to the victims of tragedies that have befallen Armenia, from the Ottoman massacres of 1915 to the earthquakes of 1926 and 1988.
The program was suitably elegiac: included were several Requiem and "Ave Maria" settings, along with "Dido's Lament," the closing death scene in Purcell's "Dido and Aeneas"; a vocalise version of Gluck's "Dance of the Blessed Spirits," and a thoroughly lugubrious reading of the so-called Albinoni Adagio. (There was no hint in the program notes that Albinoni did not compose it.)


College Seniors Can Get the Jobs They Want
To the Editor:
If the intent of "College Seniors Find More Jobs but Modest Pay" (front page, May 1) was to kill a dream, it succeeded for many!
Local employers and services involved in day-to-day hiring for college graduates perceive a different marketplace from the one you describe.


Transalta Corp.(TA) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yankees Survive 9th-Inning Collapse
The Yankees continued playing dangerously tonight and continued to emerge unscathed.
For the second straight game, the Yankees mishandled a three-run lead in the ninth inning and relied on Bernie Williams to produce a hit with the bases loaded in extra innings to rescue them.
With wacky victories like this, will they ever lose?
Of course, the Yankees will lose again.
But they did not tonight because they overcame Terry Mulholland's disintegration in the ninth and Manager Buck Showalter's reluctance to remove him, the loss of catcher Mike Stanley for at least 15 days with a strained left hamstring and the ejection of Don Mattingly, the team captain, for arguing when the Yanks had a four-run lead and a thin bench.


Observer; Secrets Of the Trade
Do you ever wonder what Plato wrote for his Saturday column?
Not "The Republic," I'll bet.
Column-wise, "The Republic" is strictly Sunday stuff: big, serious, double-dome.
Heavyweight thinking went into "The Republic." Sunday-column thinking.
Maybe an editor would have let Plato get by with "The Republic" as a Wednesday or Friday column.
Both days can accommodate earnest, no-nonsense columns.


Turner Broadcasting System Inc.(TBS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Q &amp; A
Savings Bond Guarantee
I purchased Series EE Savings Bonds before Nov. 1, 1986, when the minimum guaranteed interest rate was 7.5 percent.
If these bonds are kept beyond the 10-year maturity, do they retain the 7.5 percent guarantee?
LOUIS MYERSON, Bronx, N.Y.
Since the original maturity of your United States Savings Bonds was 10 years, they are scheduled to enter a 10-year extended maturity period in 1996.
During that period, the guaranteed minimum rate on the bonds will be the same as for new issues during that time.
The guaranteed rate is now 4 percent.
The actual rate on your bonds, however, may be higher than the guaranteed rate.


American Oil &amp; Gas (AOG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.78
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
4.11
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.66
4.68
3.05
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.27
7.34
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.56
6.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.41
8.45
7.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.51
5.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Excerpts From Clinton's Remarks Announcing His Selection for Top Court
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's remarks announcing his selection of Judge Stephen G. Breyer for the Supreme Court, as recorded by The New York Times:
Today I am proud to nominate Judge Stephen Breyer to serve on the United States Supreme Court.


Plea Deal in Kidnapped Girl's Case Is in Doubt
Efforts to reach a plea bargain that would have spared Katie Beers, the 11-year-old Long Island girl who was kidnapped for 16 days, from having to testify in a sex-abuse case have collapsed, a lawyer involved in the case said today.
The lawyer, Thomas J. Klei Jr., said his client, Salvatore Inghilleri, has apparently scuttled the efforts of the Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson, to keep the case from going to trial.
Mr.
Inghilleri, who was not involved in the girl's kidnapping, was arrested in October 1992 on charges of sexually abusing the girl twice.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Purchased the contract of Rene Gonzales, infielder, from Charlotte of the International League.
Optioned Chad Ogea, pitcher, to Charlotte.
Designated Tom Kramer, pitcher, for assignment.


Signs of Lost Times; Age Gives a Faded Glory to Old Advertisements Painted on the Sides of Buildings
There has to be some payback for putting up with bulldozers as the site at 67th Street and Broadway is cleared for a new apartment tower, and it is visible now, but not for long.
It is a pair of signs, softly faded, painted on the side of an old brick tenement, long hidden and destined to disappear once again as soon as the tower rises out of the ground.
It looks, at first, like something put there for a movie shoot, an attempt to dress up the raucous cityscape of New York and make it look like the genteel city it never really was.
But these signs are an authentic remnant of an age before infomercials became the way to sell new products, and there is a sweetness to their message: "Omega Oil. For Rheumatism. Stops Pain. Trial Bottle 10."


Ivy Clarke, Dance Executive, 78
Ivy Clarke, a former general manager of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, died on Wednesday night at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 78.
The cause was heart failure, said Meg Gordean, a friend.


Wolf Packs Don't Have Much in Common With Human Gangs
To the Editor:
Jamal and his teen-age gang members in Barbara Nevins Taylor's "Nothing Will Happen. I'm Lucky" (Op-Ed, April 30) are, like wolves, predators, but the similarity stops there.
A wolf pack is a close-knit extended family dedicated to caring for the offspring of the one pair that breeds.
Wolves do not prey on their own.
Nor do they kill for greed or pleasure -- human characteristics.


A Nominee Deemed Politic, Not Political
In this search for a Supreme Court justice, President Clinton began by choosing Senator George J. Mitchell, a politician's politician, and finally ended an excruciating week of indecision today by selecting Stephen G. Breyer, a judge's judge.
Along the way, the President considered and discarded other possibilities, just as last year he had considered and discarded Judge Breyer himself when the two met for a highly publicized and evidently unfulfilling lunch just days before Mr.
Clinton settled on Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg.


Corrections
A letter Wednesday from John Guenther about Glenn Miller's wartime orchestra at Yale University in 1943 misidentified the G.I. who was its lead singer.
He was Tony Martin, not Tony Bennett, who also sang in the Army in World War II.


Russia Joins the West in a Push to End the Bosnian War
Russia formally joined the United States and the European Union today in a reinvigorated international effort to end the two-year-old war in Bosnia, supporting a plan that calls on the Bosnian Serbs to cede nearly a third of the land they control to the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.
Under the plan backed today, that Government, now federated with the Bosnian Croats, would be given control of 51 percent of the country, while the Bosnian Serbs, who now control more than 70 percent, would receive 49 percent.


Corrections
A schedule in Weekend yesterday for the film series "Hawkshaws, Shamuses, Gumshoes and Dicks: Private Eyes in the Movies," at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center, misstated the time of a free panel discussion, "Private Eyes in Fact and Film." It is tomorrow at 2 P.M., not 5 P.M.


Suicide of a Veteran, Amid Pain and Fame
Tens of thousands of obituaries have been written for the men who fought and died in Vietnam.
More will follow as veterans age and die.
But some deaths seem larger than others, as if they could serve as obituaries for the war itself.
Lewis B. Puller Jr.'s was one such death.
It happened on Wednesday night, when Mr.
Puller, who was 48, shot himself in the head at his home in suburban Virginia.
A veterans' advocate and Pulitzer Prize winner whose hands were disfigured and whose legs were torn from his body by a booby trap in Vietnam, he had finally surrendered in his 26-year battle against depression, drug and alcohol addiction, despair and perhaps, at the end, sheer fatigue.


Classical Music in Review
'Schubert for Men's Voices'  Greenwich House Music School
Schubert wrote great music for now-vanished media: private entertainments like the F-minor Fantasy for two pianists at one instrument; also the male vocal ensembles like "Sensucht" and "Nacht-helle" or the breathtaking "Standchen" for alto solo and men's (or women's) voices.


3 in Senate Race Bank on Primary Upset
The June 7 primary election in New Jersey is just a blip on the screen for the two major candidates for United States Senator, but for three lesser-known and less affluent candidates it's the big show.
Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic incumbent who made it official Monday that he is seeking a third term, and Chuck Haytaian, the Republican who is Speaker of the State Assembly, are each expected to raise and spend $5 million to $10 million on their campaigns.
Meanwhile, the candidates hoping to trip them up next month talk about raising enough to print some handbills and, if things break their way, to produce a radio commercial.


To Obey Law, Homeless Are Removed by 8 A.M.
The courts say New York City may not keep homeless families in emergency assistance offices overnight, sleeping on chairs and tables.
But "overnight" has been defined as whether anyone is left in the office at 8 A.M.
So it was that at a city office in the Bronx on Thursday night, families began arriving at 5 P.M.
Some stayed the night, sleeping on plastic chairs in a room where the musty smell of human traffic competed with the stench of disinfectant wafting from the bathrooms.
Then, just before 7 A.M. yesterday, a voice on the public address system broke the sleepy silence: "Attention ladies and gentlemen. Everybody has been placed. The building will be empty at 8 o'clock."


Classical Music in Review
American String Quartet  Alice Tully Hall
The American String Quartet can usually be relied upon to deliver a mellow, warmly expressive sound, even if its interpretations are not the last word in intensity.
In a program on Monday night, the quartet capably covered broad ground: Haydn's Quartet in F (Op. 77), Bruckner's String Quintet (with Michael Tree, the violist) and Kenneth Fuchs's String Quartet No. 2, receiving its world premiere.


Police Investigating Morris Park Resident With Cache of Arms
A 39-year-old paramedic, described as a loner by the police and an unremarkable employee by the Emergency Medical Service, had quietly stockpiled guns and crude explosives in his Bronx apartment until an informer led the authorities to arrest him on Thursday evening, the police said yesterday.
The police had yet to determine yesterday why the man, Robert Frano, had accumulated an arsenal that included eight homemade grenades, two semiautomatic rifles and two shotguns in his basement apartment at 1660 Hering Avenue in Morris Park.


Leucadia National Corp.(LUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Touch of the Old West Comes to the City


Beliefs
A week ago Austin, Tex., a liberal stronghold mobilized by conservative Christians, voted almost 2 to 1 to repeal a measure that had extended insurance benefits to unmarried partners of city employees.
The next day, in a Mother's Day commencement address, Hillary Rodham Clinton told the graduates of George Washington University that "no matter what a family unit looks like today, the family remains the essential ingredient of shaping our later lives."


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING New Rules Established for Formula One  The organization that runs Formula One auto racing decided yesterday to impose new safety regulations after recent accidents that left two drivers dead.
The International Automobile Federation imposed measures intended to reduce speeds in a sport in which cars are often clocked at 200 miles an hour. (AP)


Watershed Police Protect What New York City Drinks
The facade of the Mount Pleasant Corporate Center, all silver walls and mirrored windows, was sleek and futuristic, and the lush lawn in front led down to a pretty little pond with heather draped over the stone walls around the water.
But floating on the surface, right under a drainage pipe, was a white sudsy substance that Ronald A. Gatto didn't like the looks of, especially when he considered where it was going: from the pond into Malcolm Brook, then to the Kensico Reservoir, and from there to the taps of nearly nine million people in New York City and Westchester County.


Sports of The Times; So Much For Veteran Leadership
THE mass stupidity continued last night, and this time, right in front of David Stern.
The commissioner of the National Basketball Association had a ringside seat for the latest brawl that is making his league increasingly bogus, a league whose players would apparently rather fight than win.


Ex-'Ward Heeler,' 95, Is a Healer
ELSYE ROTHSCHILD, who is a year older than the 20th century, likes to sit on the stoop of the apartment house on Fort Washington Avenue in upper Manhattan, the one she moved into when she married in 1926, and tell her neighbors what they should do.
"Well, these days I only talk to people who still ask me for my advice," said Mrs.
Rothschild, a widow with eyes both twinkly and sharp.
For several decades she was the Democratic Party's captain on the block, getting out the vote on Election Day and serving as a fixer and expediter much of the rest of the time.


Wall St. Executive's Hidden Drug Problem
The mystery surrounding the death of Wardell R. Lazard deepened yesterday as some of his closest confidants and co-workers said they were unaware of his drug abuse and financial problems.
The three senior principals of the firm, W. R. Lazard &amp; Company, and the firm's outside lawyer said yesterday that they were unaware before this week that Mr.
Lazard had been arrested for drug use or been in treatment.


Man Is Killed in Accident Involving a Bus Carrying New York Students


Cries of Heresy After Feminists Meet
Six months ago, about 2,000 women from major Protestant denominations gathered in Minneapolis, where they gave praise to a female personification of God, laughed at the patriarchal tradition of the church and shared honeyed milk in a ritual that affirmed the sensuality of women.
The aftershocks have not stopped.


Insurance Game Pits Men Against Women
To the Editor:
"Disability Policy Costs to Increase for Women" (Your Money pages, April 16) perpetuates the tradeoff myth that excuses charging women up to 50 percent more than men for disability insurance sold at unisex prices because sex discrimination in insurance is said to deliver some benefits to women.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TO OBEY LAW, HOMELESS MOVED AT 8
The courts say New York City may not keep homeless families in emergency assistance offices overnight, sleeping on chairs and tables.
But "overnight" has been defined as whether anyone is left in the office at 8 A.M.
So just before 7 A.M., those who had spent the night at a city office in the Bronx were roused and moved, mostly to shelters.
Page 1.


Drunk Driver Penalties
To the Editor:
The horror on Cross Bay Boulevard in Queens, in which an unlicensed, drunk driver caused the deaths of three members of one family (news article, May 3), strikes terror in all who fear they could become victims of a similar, senseless tragedy.


Bias Is Found In the Hiring Of Custodians
The Justice Department has found that New York City and the city's Board of Education discriminated against members of minority groups in recruiting and promoting the custodians who maintain the city's schools.
In letters sent to city officials and the lawyer for the custodians' union this week, Deval L. Patrick, Assistant Attorney General in the Civil Rights Division, called on the city, the board and the custodians' union to reach an out-of-court agreement to remedy the discrimination or face court action.


Review/Music; Masur, Ax and Beethoven Warhorses
What is there left to say about the neat row of Beethoven masterpieces laid out for New York Philharmonic listeners on Thursday night?
For anyone who has read a program, examined record-liner notes or simply lived near the concert culture of the 20th century, the stories being told this week at Avery Fisher Hall are old and comforting.
The "Leonore" Overture No. 3, we will remember, is one of several ways Beethoven attempted to introduce his opera "Fidelio." Operagoers will also know that most of these prefaces are somehow configured into modern performances on stage.
It is also no musicological secret that Beethoven's First Piano Concerto is really his second and vice versa.
The Fifth Symphony will come as no surprise to people never before in a concert hall.
With its famous themes, fate has knocked and V for victory been signaled.


Public &amp; Private; The Human Touch
The formal title of the course at New York University School of Medicine meant to teach first-year students how to deal with the human needs of patients is Behavioral Science.
According to Mack Lipkin Jr., it's known familiarly as B.S.
This is unsurprising to Dr.
Lipkin, an internist and a professor at the school.
He remembers in sharp detail one day when he was a third-year medical student at Harvard, on rotation in the wards, and he and his compatriots stood around the sickbed of one of their own professors and discussed his case without even acknowledging the man beneath the sheets.


Cisco Shares Plunge; Nasdaq Volume Record
Shares of Cisco Systems Inc., a maker of computer networking equipment, plunged almost 20 percent yesterday on record Nasdaq volume, as Wall Street showed its disappointment with third-quarter earnings that met, but did not exceed, expectations and projections of slower growth in future.
The selloff of Cisco shares, which analysts considered a bellwether for the networking business, spread to the shares of other networking companies, which also fell sharply yesterday.
Networking companies, which have seen high growth in recent years, sell hardware and software that link everything from office computers to bank teller machines.
Cisco, which traces its origins to Stanford University, where its founders had networked the university computers, was one of the first in the field.


Slaughter of a Swan Leaves a Village Shaken
Angelo Albanese has been mayor of this Syracuse suburb for 16 years, and in that time, he says, nothing has shaken the community like the slaying of a mute swan who made his home in a village park.
Two teen-agers have been charged with killing the swan on April 30 and leaving its head on the steps of the police station.
In a statement to the police, one of the youths, a 15-year-old from Fayetteville who has not been identified because of his age, describes stabbing the swan up to 40 times.
He also says he "grabbed the swan's legs and broke them like twigs."


Calais Puts On a Show And London Snarls As the Tunnel Opens
The Eurotunnel connecting France and England, which was inaugurated on May 6 by Queen Elizabeth II and President Francois Mitterrand, is being called the grandest construction project since the Suez Canal.
An American might timidly adduce some efforts from the Western Hemisphere, like the Panama Canal and, if it counts as engineering, putting a person on the moon.
What is undeniable is that the Europeans came up short, far short, when they got around to celebrating this latest technological marvel artistically.
Suez (or more precisely, Cairo) had Verdi's "Aida." The tunnel (or more precisely, Folkestone, where the tunnel emerges on the English side) had, in the waspish words of The Financial Times of London, "well, some really nice Kentish choristers singing their hearts out in a tent."


Amoco Canada Petroleum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Credit Rehabilitation After a Bankruptcy Filing
Seven years after filing for personal bankruptcy, Richard J. Diamond, 49, is well on his way toward reestablishing a respectable credit rating.
He got back on his feet by starting a small real estate brokerage business out of his apartment in Cambridge, Mass.
Along with overcoming financial troubles, he spent about two years recovering from the trauma and the embarrassment of the bankruptcy.
"That was the most difficult part," he recalled.
"You work hard all your life, pay your bills and then overnight, you lose everything."


Disgusted Pippen Sits Down For Game-Winning Play
Where was Scottie Pippen when the team needed him on the court in the waning seconds of Game 3?
Why wasn't he on the court?
Why was he having words with his coach?
The score was tied, 102-102, after the Knicks' Patrick Ewing hit a three-foot hook shot.
There was 1.8 seconds to go in the game in which the Knicks had staged another remarkable fourth-quarter comeback at Chicago Stadium.
The Bulls, with possession of the ball and reeling because the Knicks had wiped out a 22-point deficit at the end of the third quarter, had called a timeout.


Officers' Taunting Cited
Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, criticized the Chicago Stadium security force tonight for taunting several Knick players during the fight between Derek Harper and Jo Jo English.
Checketts said he planned to raise the matter with the National Basketball Association office.
"They actually escalated the fighting and got involved with John Starks, taunting him even after the whole mess was finished," Checketts said of the stadium security force.
"That is not the role of security. It is inexcusable and unconscionable. It was spoken about on the air. The TNT broadcasters saw security and felt that they acted completely unprofessionally. They talked about it on the air."


How Bligh Climbed Admiralty Ladder
To the Editor:
While I agree with your implied criticism of the confirmation of Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d's four stars upon retirement in "An Admiral's Bounty" (Topics of The Times, April 28), the facts concerning William Bligh are somewhat different.


Wise Stores reports earnings for Year to Jan 29


Aspirin Study News Embargo Harmed No One
To the Editor:
Dr.
I.
Herbert Scheinberg's assertion that The New England Journal of Medicine impeded the flow of information to the public on the role of aspirin in preventing heart attacks (letter, April 30) contains multiple errors.
Contrary to his statement that we held the authors to our timetable, we waited an additional week (of the five weeks between receipt of the manuscript and publication) at the authors' request, to let them honor their commitment to inform trial participants before the results were made generally available.


TNT Freightways Corp.(TNTF,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 2


California Loses Top Spot In Japanese Tourist Trade
As California struggles to climb out of its long recession, more bad news has emerged: the state has lost its dominant share of the lucrative Japanese tourist market and may be hard-pressed to recover it.
As other destinations compete with new attractions and more aggressive marketing, the state's share of the $14 billion Japanese tourist market has shrunk from 44 percent in 1987 to a projected 18 percent this year, California Division of Tourism figures show.
The decline has meant a loss of $658 million a year.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Lois G. Forer, author and retired Philadelphia judge, referred incorrectly to the publication of her book "What Every Woman Needs to Know Before (and After) She Gets Involved With Men and Money." The publication, by Macmillan, is not due later this year; it occurred in February.


Legislative Battle to Continue Over Ban on Assault Weapons
Though both houses of Congress have passed bills for a national ban on assault weapons, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Democratic-led Assembly say they will still press this year for state legislation that would outlaw the weapons.
But the Republicans who control the Senate, apparently relieved that Congress may act on an issue they had taken up only reluctantly at the state level, say the proposed Federal legislation would be sufficient.
They do not intend to pursue a ban now but still want to stiffen penalties for people convicted of crimes committed with assault weapons, said a spokesman for the majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, Republican of Oyster Bay.
Cuomo Feels Strongly
So the issue will continue to be contentious this election year.
Mr.
Cuomo, who feels strongly about the ban personally, has also found it helpful politically to combat Republican charges that he is soft on crime.
For months, he has hammered away at the State Senate for not voting on a ban, after the Assembly passed its version in January for the second year in a row.


Corrections
An article yesterday about impeachment proceedings against a Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice misspelled the name of the chairman of the state House Judiciary Committee in some copies.
He is Representative Thomas R. Caltagirone.


Suit Calls an 'Unforgettable' Omission Unforgivable
Natalie Cole's studio-engineered duet with her father, Nat (King) Cole, may truly be "Unforgettable." But her record company has amnesia when it comes to giving credit, according to a lawsuit filed this week in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
In the suit, Naomi Riddle, widow of the big-band musician Nelson Riddle, charges that the record company, Elektra Entertainment, failed to credit Mr.
Riddle as arranger on the 1991 release of "Unforgettable."


Gooden May Be Back Soon
Dwight Gooden could be back on the mound in 10 days even if it is only in an exhibition game.
Yesterday at Shea Stadium, Gooden threw off the mound for the first time since he had a workout cut short in San Francisco on April 24 because of pain in his right big toe.
It appears Gooden could return to the rotation at the end of the month.
Before last night's Mets-Braves game, Manager Dallas Green said he hoped to be able to get Gooden an inning or two of work on May 23, when the Mets play their Class AAA team in Norfolk.
Gooden's availability for that game depends on how he responds to the work he does next week.
Gooden is scheduled to take today off and throw again tomorrowand Monday.


Aging Dept. Privatizes 4 Contracts For Services
The Giuliani administration has given a national for-profit company four contracts to provide city services to elderly people, saying the company can do the work cheaper than the four nonprofit groups that have been offering those services.
The decision has prompted protests from some elderly residents and City Council members, who say the four neighborhood-based organizations will now be forced to lay off dozens of employees and scale back the other services they provide.


Angles Flatten Courier
On paper, Jim Courier's match against Slava Dosedel promised to be the easiest of the Italian Open quarterfinals today, but it turned out to be the longest and most surprising.
Courier, the two-time defending champion, lost an unnerving three-setter to the unseeded Czech, 1-6, 6-3, 6-4.
"He's a very clever player, and he plays differently than the others do," said Courier of the 51st-ranked Dosedel.
"He hits sharp angles, he takes the ball on the rise, and he takes pace off of the ball. He mixes up his shots very well."


F.D.A. Says 4 Scientists Broke Rules In Drug Tests
The Food and Drug Administration sent letters today to four scientists and two drug company officials, saying they had violated scientific procedures and Federal regulations numerous times in drug experiments that led to at least five deaths.
The trials of a drug intended to treat hepatitis were carried out last year at the National Institutes of Health, the University of Washington Hospital in Seattle and the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in San Diego.
The drug, fialuridine, or F.I.A.U., was developed by Eli Lilly and Company of Indianapolis and Oclassen Pharmaceuticals of San Rafael, Calif.


Ralph Ellison Memorial
A memorial tribute to Ralph Ellison, the author of "The Invisible Man," is scheduled for May 26 at noon at the American Academy of Arts and Letters at 156th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive.
Mr.
Ellison died on April 16.


A Smarter I.R.S. Learns Your Business
Computer sleuths at the Internal Revenue Service could scarcely have been more surprised.
Working on the prototype of an ambitious new plan to uncover tax cheats last spring, they found swarms of returns from new-car dealers.
Many of these dealers' corporate filings showed minimal receipts and no outlay for goods.
Researchers soon identified a serious scam: employees of dealerships masquerading as dealers.


Father Who Fought 'Memory Therapy' Wins Damage Suit
In a groundbreaking legal verdict, a Napa County jury awarded $500,000 today to a father who had accused psychotherapists of conning his adult daughter into remembering childhood incidents of incest that he said had never occurred.
The case, tried over two months, was the first in which a nonpatient challenged therapists who treat patients with a much-debated technique that involves the use of leading questions and other aggressive memory-enhancing procedures to prod patients into recalling events that were so traumatic that their minds repressed them.


Chronicle
JAY LENO is coming to New York today to do a week of "Tonight" shows from the city that has not been home to the program for 22 years.
But that is not all the late-night talk show host will do while he's on the East Coast.
Tonight, he is due to make a "surprise" visit to "Saturday Night Live," and tomorrow he will appear in Washington on "Meet the Press." To talk about what?
"Something lighthearted," one of his assistants said.
Sunday afternoon, he returns to visit Shea Stadium and the New York Mets, who have surpassed all expectations this season.
Mr.
Leno, who has tossed more than one barb at the Mets, said: "I am going to try out some Mets jokes on them and see if they think they're funny. They've been good sports, and Anthony Young, who had the biggest losing streak, has been great."
Turning to the team of his hometown, he said, "I'm from Boston, and it's sad to say we're not in good shape." NADINE BROZAN


Bank Austria reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bridge
One of the most remarkable stretch drives in serious competition occurred eight days ago in the Cavendish Teams, played at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street.
With six of nine matches completed, the foursome of Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif., Bob Goldman of Highland Village, Tex., David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., were lying seventh in a field of 10 teams.
They then scored 87 out of a possible 90 victory points, enough to carry them to victory.
The diagramed deal from the event pinpoints a weakness in the Multi Two Diamonds, a device popular in Europe and gaining ground here.
Over East's two diamonds, showing a weak two-bid in one of the major suits, Shugart as South was able to overcall two hearts.
She arrived in game, and received the lead of the spade queen.


Tiananmen Leader Is Set Free by China
China today released on medical parole one of the dissidents accused of leading the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989.
Chen Ziming, 42, a social scientist and publisher, was sentenced to a 13-year prison term in February 1991.
He was the second major figure from the democracy movement to be released in recent weeks.


Tejas Power Corp.(TEJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Will Il Duce's Successors Make the Facts Run On Time?
The coalition government about to take power in Italy will be the first in Western Europe since 1945 to include neo-Fascist ministers.
If this were Germany, there would be fear, but Italy enjoys the reputation of being humane.
The neo-Fascists perpetuate this myth by exploiting two durable myths -- that Fascism was not anti-Semitic and that Mussolini was a modernizer who permanently made the trains run on time.
This manipulation of history should add to worries about the ambitions of the three parties that make up the coalition: the neo-Fascist National Alliance, the separatist Northern League, and Forza Italia headed by Silvio Berlusconi, the political neophyte who will be Prime Minister.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about people in Manhattan who watched the eclipse misidentified the method they used.
It was pinhole projection -- in which light from the sun passes through a pinhole and creates an image on a surface below -- not pinhole reflection.


Twillingate Journal; Cod Are Almost Gone and a Culture Could Follow
To Cyril Dalley, whose modest wood-frame house is close enough to the sea to catch salt spray on its front windows, fishing is a "passion that's born within a person."
Over his mother's protests, he used to sneak out at 3 A.M. with his dad in the old wooden boat, and he "entered a man's world quite quickly."


Devils Must Try to Make Recent Past the Prologue
The stigma of losing all six meetings to the Rangers during the regular season still hangs over the Devils.
"The first game is very important for us because we want to prove that we're better than the regular season," Scott Stevens, the captain of the Devils, said yesterday about Game 1 tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden.


T2 Medical Inc.(TSQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
I admire the Supreme Court enormously, because in this country people believe in law, they believe in individual rights, they believe in the  Constitution, and they believe that all that matters to their lives.
And they're right. -- STEPHEN G. BREYER  [ 1:6. ]


Don't Give Up on Neighborhood Clinics
Under Mayor David Dinkins, an innovative plan known as Communicare I was launched to build 20 primary health-care clinics in underserved New York City neighborhoods.
His hope was that government could bring quality preventive health services to the city's poorest families.
A new City Council report shows that the program -- plagued by construction delays, understaffed clinics and long waits for even routine appointments -- has fallen short of the mark.
The blame game is already roaring along.
Democrats say Mayor Rudolph Giuliani provides weak leadership; Republicans argue that the program's failures started under Mr.
Dinkins.
Whatever the truth, the problems can be corrected.
And the second phase of the program -- Communicare II, which will build 30 more clinics beginning next year -- should be largely immune from the problems that afflict the present effort.


Reliance Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Another New Justice
For his second Supreme Court appointment, President Clinton has again chosen an able lower court judge.
Chief Judge Stephen Breyer of the U.S.
Court of Appeals based in Boston is, like Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, respected for integrity, good judgment and concern for justice.
Indeed, Judge Breyer was a finalist in last year's selection process.
This year Mr.
Clinton narrowed the field to three candidates, including Bruce Babbitt, Secretary of the Interior, and Richard Arnold of Arkansas, Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.
Another white male on the Court increases Mr.
Clinton's obligation to bring more women and racial minorities into the selection process in the future.
We find it hard to believe there were no qualified candidates in these categories good enough to make the finals this time.


Insuring New C.D. Account
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said yesterday that it would insure, with some limitations, deposits in an unusual bank account that has characteristics of an annuity.
The account, the Retirement C.D., was developed by the American Deposit Corporation in Pine, Colo, and will be offered first by the Blackfeet National Bank, a tiny bank in Browning, Mont., owned by American Indians.


From Ricoh, a Copier That Turns Pages
As technical announcements go, this one is a real page turner.
A Japanese copier company has developed a system that it says will automatically turn pages, making it far easier to make photocopies from books and magazines.
The Ricoh Company said it believed its system was the first such system.
Given the time people spend standing over copiers lifting up a book, turning the page and placing the book back down on the glass, it is perhaps surprising that it has taken several decades since the advent of xerography to open this chapter in technology.


Fairchild Corp.(FA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Fire in Harlem Kills 1
A four-alarm fire roared through a five-story apartment building in Harlem last night, killing one person and seriously injuring another, a Fire Department spokesman said.
The fire broke out inside the building at 28 West 125th Street about 7:40 P.M. and escalated to three alarms within 20 minutes, said the spokesman, Firefighter Richard Kuzniewski.


Review/Dance; Oppression Gently Builds
A high metal wall, a few chairs and a small coin are all it takes for the six members of Betontanc, a Slovenian dance and theater company that performed in its American debut on Thursday night at La Mama E.T.C., to create and plunge the audience into another world.
"Every Word a Gold Coin's Worth" lasts just under an hour and unfolds in circumscribed stage space that grows much smaller, but the piece covers an astonishing amount of psychic territory.
Betontanc, the resident dance company at the Glej Theater of Ljubljana, was founded in 1990 by Matjaz Pograjc.
A student at the city's theater academy, Mr.
Pograjc gathered a group of young artists from many fields to respond to the intellectualism and conceptualism they perceived in the arts of the 80's.
The company describes itself as "a basketball team."


Police Sergeants, the Front Line, Under Fire
Sgt.
Robert Diehl, considered by his superiors as well as the officers he supervises to be among the best at his job, heard it all and smiled thinly.
The radio calls had reached a roar inside his squad car in the 83d Precinct in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
In swift succession: a call reporting an emotionally disturbed person that might require a police barricade; a call to respond to a man with a knife, and, from a second radio, a call that a heroin sale had just taken place, and that officers were moving in on the suspected buyer.
For Sergeant Diehl, the moment, with its sense of frenzy and futility, captured perfectly the predicament facing the Police Department's first line of supervision.
Last month, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton identified the "critical shortage of sergeants" and the failure of many sergeants to do their jobs properly as being at the heart of the department's corruption troubles.


First-Place Braves Give Mets a Pitching Lesson
John Franco knew the game had changed when the Braves came to town this weekend.
The victories over the Cardinals had been nice, the victories over the Expos heartening.
The second-place record, the improved pitching, the excellent road trip -- all these were things that gave the Mets reason to feel confident.
There's something different, though, about facing Atlanta, the team with the best rotation in baseball and the team that sits ahead of New York in the National League East.


Positive Inflation Report Fails to Inspire Stocks
The Government further underscored its good economic news of Thursday with another favorable inflation report yesterday, this time involving consumer prices.
But traders reacted as if it was old news, and the leading stock indexes barely budged in trading volume that was below average.
The exception was the over-the-counter market, where high-technology stocks were hurt by a troubled industry outlook for computers.
Cisco Systems, a big producer of equipment that allows computers to talk to each other, said its backlog of orders had fallen sharply.
Shares of Cisco fell 5 3/4, to 23 1/4, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.


Palestinian Police Now Guard an Ancient Jericho Synagogue
When Yoel Elitzur arrived with two other Jewish settlers at Jericho's ancient synagogue today, he found the site guarded by uniformed Palestinians holding Kalashnikov rifles.
The settlers tore their shirts as a sign of mourning.
Capt.
Lutfi Hassan, a veteran Palestinian fighter newly arrived from Iraq, was the commander of the guard detail.
His task: to protect Israelis who want to pray here.
It remains to be seen how he will respond if those worshipers resume the recent protests at the 1,400-year-old synagogue against the transfer of Jericho to Palestinian rule.


Arden Fingerhut, Stage Designer, 48
Arden Fingerhut, a prolific designer for the theater whose lighting and stage effects highlighted dozens of Broadway productions in the last 20 years, died yesterday at the North Adams Regional Hospital in North Adams, Mass.
She was 48 and lived in Pownal, Vt.
The cause was breast cancer, said her husband, Dennis McHugh.


Reinstatement For 7 Officers Suspended In Graft Case
Seven of 14 New York City police officers suspended after being arrested on corruption charges last month have returned to work while awaiting trial, earning full pay for what the Police Department calls "modified assignment," police officials said yesterday.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani immediately called for changes in state civil service law, which gives the Police Department 30 days either to file departmental charges or to reinstate an officer who has been arrested.
The Mayor said he was considering asking the State Legislature to give the police commissioner more flexibility to withhold pay or to block reassignment in such cases.


In a Surprise Gesture, China Releases a Major Dissident
In an important gesture to the Clinton administration, China today released on medical parole the second of two major figures still serving long prison terms for leading the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989.
A brief dispatch this morning on the New China News Agency said that Chen Ziming, 42, "has been released on bail for medical treatment" under an order from "Chinese judicial authorities."


Sad Blow for British Democracy
Only a week ago, John Smith, leader of Britain's Labor Party, was savoring his party's successes in local elections at the expense of the tottering Conservatives.
After four straight defeats in national elections, Mr.
Smith's Laborites seemed finally headed for victory.
But cruelly, Mr.
Smith, at the age of only 55, suffered a fatal heart attack Thursday.
He has no obvious successor as opposition leader.
British democracy is the loser.
On form, it would seem that even a mediocre rival could beat Prime Minister John Major, whose dismal approval ratings are the lowest since such polls began.
Not only is the long-ruling Conservative Party badly divided, but a succession of sex scandals has made Mr.
Major and his slogan, "Back to Basics," the focus of ridicule.
Hardly a day passes without hostile outbursts and rumors of plots against the Prime Minister, all gleefully reported in an otherwise pro-Conservative press.


Scholarly Consensus Builder: Stephen Gerald Breyer
By nature and personality, Judge Stephen G. Breyer, whom President Clinton named yesterday to the United States Supreme Court, is professorial.
But rather than become enmeshed solely in ideas, Judge Breyer has chosen to harness his considerable intelligence to solve problems, to clean up messes.
Rather than stake out fixed positions, he has built coalitions and achieved consensus.
As generously endowed with political savvy, pragmatism, personal charm and energy as intelligence -- and unencumbered by any overarching ideology -- he has won a reputation for doing as well as thinking.


Chronicle
After spending 20 hours traveling from Johannesburg, where he witnessed the national election and the end of apartheid, DANNY GLOVER landed in Boston on Thursday night just in time for a party to celebrate two neighborhoods' revival efforts.
Sure, he had a crick in his neck from the airplane seat and his eyes were bleary from jet lag, but Mr.
Glover was ebullient in his praise for the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative, which has been cleaning up and rebuilding areas of Roxbury and Dorchester for 10 years.
The organization is the first neighborhood group in the country to win the right of eminent domain and to use it to transform vacant blighted land into homes, community centers and businesses.


Tadiran Ltd.(TAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dibrell Brothers Inc.(DBRL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arms for Taiwan Act Remains in Effect
To the Editor:
President Clinton has signed a State Department financing bill containing a statement that the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act, which authorizes arms sales to Taiwan, takes precedence over later directives, such as the 1982 United States-China joint communique, limiting arms sales to Taiwan (news article, May 1).


Berkshire Hathaway Inc.(BRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rustum Bastuni, 71, Builder and Teacher
Rustum Bastuni, a retired New York architect and campaigner for Palestinian-Israeli conciliation, died on April 25 at his home on the Upper West Side.
He was 71.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Self-Employed? Loan Hurdles Are Higher
People with erratic incomes, like consultants and small-business owners, often face unexpected obstacles when seeking a loan.
"You're treated like an outcast even though you're making good money," said Jason Calfo, president of Calfo Associates, a small graphic design business in Manhattan.


Security Council Agrees on Plan To Send Peace Force to Rwanda
The Security Council agreed tonight on a plan to send an all-African force to Rwanda to protect civilians and aid workers threatened by the ethnic slaughter that began there four weeks ago.
The Council is expected to approve the plan on Monday after the Clinton Administration receives details from the United Nations on how the plan will be carried out.


Clinton Talk Led to Firing, Woman Says
A New Rochelle woman said today she was dismissed from her bookkeeper's job on Tuesday, one day after she met with President Clinton and told him how her experience as a medically uninsured worker demonstrates the need for health care reform.
Catherine Rosen, 45 years old, attributed the dismissal to either the company's discovery that she had a medical condition or its embarrassment at the publicity that followed her meeting with the President.


9 New Shows For NBC-TV In the Fall
NBC, which is expected to end this broadcast season in third place among the networks, yesterday announced nine new shows for the fall, including a mystery series with Bill Cosby and a sitcom starring Gene Wilder.
Apparently in an effort to challenge the ratings dominance of "Roseanne," NBC also announced that it would move "Frasier," one of its most popular shows, to Tuesday at 9 P.M. opposite Roseanne Arnold's hit show on ABC.


For Babbitt, a Horizon of Hills and Valleys
Just before President Clinton announced that he had chosen Judge Stephen G. Breyer of Boston for the vacancy on the Supreme Court, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt assembled his senior staff and told them that fate intended him to stay in his Cabinet post.
For several days, the capital had swirled with reports that Mr.
Babbitt was the top contender for the job on the court.
But nobody in the room knew what their boss had just been told -- that the President had chosen someone else.


Preakness Thins as Holy Bull Withdraws
One day after it lost Brocco, the Preakness lost a star of even greater magnitude yesterday when Holy Bull was withdrawn with a mild infection and was aimed instead for the Metropolitan Mile at Belmont Park 10 days later.
"It's not serious," said Jimmy Croll, the owner and trainer of Holy Bull.
"We took a routine blood test this morning, and the white-cell count was a little high. It's a question of what's right and wrong for the horse. He'll take antibiotics for a few days, and he should be fine. But he'll miss three or four days of training, and the Preakness comes up two weeks after the Kentucky Derby, and that's too soon."


U.S. Hopes To Revive Japan Talks
Senior American and Japanese officials agreed today to try to revive their stalled negotiations on opening Japanese markets to more American imports, but privately American officials remained wary about the prospects for a deal.
Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa of Japan telephoned Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, this morning and they spoke for 30 minutes about the need to have preliminary contacts about resuming their trade talks before the economic summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations in July.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Thursday about American Telecasting Inc.'s agreement to acquire five wireless cable systems misstated the total value of the transactions.
It is about $85 million in cash and stock, not $105 million.


Dismissal of Charges Sought In Armored Car Fraud Case
Lawyers for the owners of an armored car company who have been accused of stealing as much as $38 million from customers said today that they want the charges dismissed because the Government had allowed the disposal of documents vital to their case.
Francis X. Casale Jr., the lawyer for Robert J. Scaretta, a co-owner of Revere Armored Inc., said in Federal District Court here that hundreds of cartons of records, which he said would show that the Long Island company did not skim money from its customers, were taken from a warehouse it rented in Beacon Falls, Conn.
Mr.
Casale said that the building's landlord destroyed them, and that the Government was responsible for these documents since it had seized the company's assets last year.


Walton Is Better Than Par for the Course
Robin Walton said she shoots par often. But usually it isn't good enough.
"A lot of days you take pars and people go right past you," she said.


Anti-Foreigner Riot Hits German Town
At least four people were stabbed and 49 were arrested Thursday night in an outbreak of violence against foreigners in this eastern German town.
All but one of those arrested were released before dawn today, and the one who remained in custody was held only because a warrant was outstanding for his arrest on an unrelated charge.
Officials said they were not sure they had enough evidence to bring charges against any of those involved in the assaults.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Florida school board's decision to teach children that American culture is superior misidentified the president of the Christian Coalition, which has influenced some board members.
He is Pat Robertson. (Pat Buchanan, the conservative newspaper columnist, was not involved in the situation.)


3 Candidates Hold Mexico's 1st Televised Debate
Mexico's leading presidential candidates held the first nationally broadcast debate in the country's history on Thursday night in what was hailed today as a glimpse of the democracy that the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party has been promising for much of the last year.
In all its 65 years in power, the governing party has never before agreed to a debate involving one of its presidential candidates.
For the 40 million Mexicans who listened and watched, the 90-minute debate was thus their first opportunity to see the differences among the candidates displayed in the same forum.
In past elections, opposition candidates have been virtually ignored by television.


Suspect in Stabbing Dies
A 35-year-old man wounded a woman yesterday during a robbery in a Brooklyn hospital and died after security guards apprehended him, the police said.
The man, Kevin Richardson, stabbed Maria Feliciano in the head and arm about 2 P.M. on the third floor of Brookdale Hospital in East New York, where she was visiting a friend, and took about $40 and some jewelry, the police said.


Writers of History Honored by Their Peers
The Society of American Historians has awarded the annual Francis Parkman Prize to David Levering Lewis for "W. E. B. DuBois, 1868-1919," published by Henry Holt last year.
Dean David Grodzins was awarded the society's Allan Nevins Prize, for best-written dissertation in American history, for "Theodore Parker and the American Transcendentalists."
The awards were announced on Thursday at the Union League Club in Manhattan by David McCullough, the society's president.


No Headline
Confirming that inflation remains subdued, consumer prices scarcely budged in April.
Nonetheless, the financial world is still bracing for an expected increase in interest rates when the Federal Reserve meets on Tuesday.
"These figures look very good," said Michael L. Penzer, senior economist at the Bank of America, referring to today's Government report showing that consumer prices rose just one-tenth of a percent last month.
It is very hard, he added, to find evidence of acceleration.


Lil Picard, 94, Artist and Critic Who Was Once a Hat Designer
Lil Picard, an artist and critic whose activities included painting, collage, film and performance as well as a stint as a designer of women's hats, died on Tuesday at her home.
She was 94 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of natural causes, said Jon Hendricks, a friend.


Paul Child, Artist, Dies at 92
Paul Child, a retired foreign-service officer, artist and husband of Julia Child, America's quintessential television chef, died on Thursday at the Fairlawn Nursing Home in Lexington, Mass.
A longtime resident of Cambridge, he was 92.
He had been ill for a long time, a spokeswoman for Mrs. Child said.


Heywood McGriff, A Dancer, 36
Heywood (Woody) McGriff, a dancer, choreographer and teacher, died on Sunday at Christopher House, a hospice in Austin, Tex.
He was 36.
The cause was AIDS, a friend, Pierre Apraxine, said.


Sprint and G.M. Unit Talk Merger
Sprint, the nation's third-largest long-distance company, is negotiating with General Motors' E.D.S. computer services to form a business alliance or possibly to merge.
The discussions, seeking to combine E.D.S.'s strengths as a contractor of corporate data-communications systems and Sprint's technologically advanced long-distance networks, which have been on and off for more than two years, became serious about five months ago, analysts said.


Utility Votes Not to Finish Atom Plants
A stormy chapter in the Pacific Northwest's nuclear-power history came close to an end today with a 9-to-4 vote by the board of the Washington Public Power Supply System to terminate two unfinished nuclear plants.
Public Power Supply has one nuclear plant producing electricity.
The only other nuclear plant in the Northwest that ever generated power, the Trojan plant in Rainier, Ore., owned by Portland General Electric, was closed in January 1993.


Foodmaker Inc.(FM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 17


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer prices scarcely budged in April, confirming that inflation remains subdued.
Still, the financial world is bracing for an expected increase in interest rates when the Federal Reserve meets on Tuesday.
The Government reported that consumer prices rose just a tenth of a percent last month.  [ Page 37. ] Companies
Sprint is in negotiations with General Motors' E.D.S. computer services unit to form a business alliance or possibly merge the two companies.  [ 37. ]
The mystery of Wardell R. Lazard's death deepened as it emerged that the investment banker's drug abuse, as well as his tax and financial problems, had escaped the notice of his closest confidants and co-workers.
Some did not know he had been arrested three years ago for drug use.  [ 37. ]
Kidder Peabody says a study of the firm's mortgage-backed bonds concluded that their prices reflected market conditions.  [ 39. ]
Shares of Cisco Systems plunged almost 20 percent as Wall Street showed its disappointment with third-quarter earnings that met, but did not exceed, expectations  [ 39. ]
Ricoh has developed a copier that automatically turns pages, making it easier to photocopy books and magazines.  [ 39. ]
A corporate party planner for Salomon Brothers pleaded guilty to billing the brokerage firm for $1.1 million worth of party goods she never bought.  [ 39. ]
The Washington Public Power Supply System voted to terminate two unfinished nuclear plants, ending a stormy chapter in the Pacific Northwest's nuclear power history.  [ 39. ]
The Federal Government sent letters to Eli Lilly and Oclassen Pharmaceuticals and four scientists saying they had violated scientific procedures and regulations in drug experiments.  [ 8. ] International
The United States and Japan agreed to revive stalled trade talks, but Americans are wary of the prospects for a deal.  [ 37. ]
Russia's diamond sellers say they regret a deal to export uncut diamonds to De Beers and are now talking of pursuing a more independent course.  [ 37. ]
The Oder-Neisse region of Poland has been transformed as millions of Germans cross the border to shop for bargains among special shopping centers that have sprouted to cater to them.  [ 6. ] Markets
Stock market traders reacted as if the Government's good economic reports were old news.
The leading stock indexes barely budged in trading volume that was below average.  [ 38. ]
Prices of Treasury securities were moderately higher, after a session that epitomized the trading of the week.  [ 47. ]
The dollar rose against the yen amid new efforts by the United States and Japan to resume trade talks.  [ 48. ]
Coffee soared to its highest price since it began trading freely on the world market in 1989.  [ 48. ] Your Money
The I.R.S. is turning to advanced technology to increase its tax collections to 90 percent of the money it is owed, and it is now looking for patterns in income rather than spikes.  [ 35. ]
A free program will help people monitor their investments so that they don't go unattended, something that can cause havoc with a portfolio.  [ 35. ]
Some insurance companies have policies that make up for lost pensions and retirement plan contributions during disability.  [ 36. ]


Oshawa Group (OSH.A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 16


A Victory for Abortion Rights
When Americans' constitutional rights are endangered, it is Congress's duty to protect those rights with statutory law.
Passage this week of the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act is firmly within that tradition.
The Supreme Court recognized in 1973 that the Constitution protects Americans' privacy and that American women have a constitutional right to make the private decision to have an abortion.
People who prevent women's access to the clinics that perform them -- or who stop doctors from performing them -- are depriving them of that right.
Making this sort of vigilantism a Federal crime is an appropriate way to attack a nationwide terror campaign waged by organizations that regularly cross state lines solely to interfere with women seeking abortions.


Executive Changes
FORUM CAPITAL MARKETS, Old Greenwich, Conn., appointed Hal Purkey partner and senior managing director.
ITT HARTFORD INSURANCE GROUP, Hartford, a subsidiary of the ITT Corporation, named William Stanway senior vice president and director of international property-casualty operations.


Rothmans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Inflation Remains at Bay
Consumer prices scarcely budged in April, confirming that inflation remains subdued.
Still, the financial world is bracing for an increase in interest rates.
Page 37.
New Effort for Bosnia Peace
Russia joined the United States and other Western nations in a new show of unity to pressure the Bosnian Muslims and Serbs for a cease-fire to resume peace negotiations.
Page 6.
Trade Talks May Be Revived
Senior American and Japanese officials have agreed to try to revive their stalled negotiations on opening Japanese markets to more imports from the United States.
Page 37.
Bulls Hold Off Knicks
After a bench-clearing brawl in the first half, the Bulls used a shot at the buzzer to beat the Knicks, 104-102, in Chicago.
Page 31.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Buckner  Baritone Merkin Concert Hall
Thomas Buckner, a powerful and persuasive advocate of contemporary vocal music, likes a mix of collaborators in his recitals.
On Thursday night, he was joined by the percussion ensemble Essential Music and the pianist Joseph Kubera for a program that included five world premieres.


PRESIDENT CHOOSES BREYER, AN APPEALS JUDGE IN BOSTON, FOR BLACKMUN'S COURT SEAT
After days of apparent indecision over his second Supreme Court appointment, President Clinton turned today to a man he had passed over once before, choosing Judge Stephen G. Breyer, the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, to replace Justice Harry A. Blackmun.
Judge Breyer, who is 55 years old, has a reputation as a consensus builder and a pragmatist whose court rarely produces a dissenting opinion.
He already has bipartisan support in the Senate, where he worked as an aide during the 1970's and helped build coalitions across party lines to deregulate the airlines.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTRAL COOPERATIVE BANK, Somerville, Mass., agreed to acquire the outstanding shares of Metro Bancorp Inc., for $7,575,000, representing $9.2425 a share.
MICHAEL ANTHONY JEWELERS INC., Mount Vernon, N.Y., plans to repurchase up to 500,000 shares, or 5.4 percent of its 9.2 million common shares outstanding.


A Wild Canadian Boy
THE MUSEUM OF LOVE By Steve Weiner. 214 pp. New York: The Overlook Press. $21.95.


THE LAST ALASKAN BUSHRAT
The Alaskan "subsistence" homesteader, Miles Martin, wouldn't be alive today if his distress signal hadn't been spotted by the jet that sent a helicopter to rescue him.


Finding Help to Preserve the Forests
STEPHEN BRODERICK was out admiring tree stumps and brush piles -- the work of people who have learned to look after woodlands and are helping others to do the same.
In East Haddam, Mr.
Broderick followed Sarah and Paul Gworek around their 40 mostly wooded acres.
"This is where we first saw the rabbits come back, when we cleared the larch and made brush piles," Mr.
Gworek said.
It was one of several areas, once dense with trees, where the Gworeks created conditions to attract a variety of creatures.


Data Bank/May 15, 1994
Data Bank/May 15, 1994
Producer Price Index
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.2
0.5
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
-0.8
1.7
1.9
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.3
0.3
Inventory to Sales
March
Feb.
Jan.
Monthly ratio
1.39
1.41
1.42
Weekly Jobless Claims
May 6
April 29
April 22
In thousands
378
352
336
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons
1,921
1,960
1,849
3-Month Treasury Bills
May 13
May 6
April 29
Rate in percent
4.10
4.15
3.85
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.66
4.61
4.28


U.S. Considers Supplying Arms to Cambodia
The United States and Australia have openly suggested that they may soon begin supplying arms to the struggling Cambodian Army because of its recent battlefield defeats at the hands of the Maoist-inspired rebels of the Khmer Rouge.
The arms have been requested by King Norodom Sihanouk, who has warned that the Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians during their rule in the 1970's, could overrun the country if the national army was not resupplied with weapons and ammunition.


Bouquets Made From Ink and Paper
AN ARTICHOKE THE SIZE OF A soccer ball, as rendered by Basil Besler, the 17th-century German master engraver, is one of many botanical splendors to be encountered at Ursus Books these days.
Bright green and thistlelike, Besler's depiction is from "Hortus Eystenttensis," a survey of a Bavarian aristocrat's garden, published in Nuremberg in 1613.
The copperplate is among the rarities assembled in "The Garden: Four Centuries of Books and Prints," an exhibition of 115 books, prints and watercolors at the gallery on Madison Avenue in Manhattan this month.


May 8-14: So Hard; For Rwanda and Bosnia, New Peace Plans
A month after ethnic mayhem broke loose in impoverished Rwanda, with slaughter on a scale far surpassing anything seen in Bosnia, the United Nations last week finally arrived at a plan to restore peace there.
Sort of.
The Security Council tomorrow is expected to approve sending a 5,500-member, all-African force to the country.
But so far not a single African nation has come up with a firm offer of troops.
Only Nigeria and Ghana say they might be ready to send some soldiers, but without vehicles and other heavy equipment.


Birthplace of the Uprising Experiences a New Birth
The Jabaliya refugee camp, birthplace of the Palestinian uprising and the scene of some of its most violent street battles, woke up today free of Israeli occupation.
In the dark of early morning, the last Israeli soldiers walked out of the base in the heart of this teeming refugee district of 72,000, leaving it to a detachment of Palestinian policemen who had come from a Palestine Liberation Army base in the Sudan.


Fateful Attraction


Administrative Costs Make Tuition Soar
To the Editor:
"Cost of 4-Year Degree Passes $100,000 Mark" (Education page, May 4) quotes Charles H. Long, Yale deputy provost, complaining of the costs of "scholarly periodicals, library books and scientific equipment, which rise in cost at a rate higher than inflation."


Evening Hours; Twirling th Night Away
A benefit for Ballet Hispanico, Plaza Hotel, May 2.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
If the hypothesis that aliens are already here is false and we mistakenly accept it, the worst that will happen is that we look a little foolish.
Perhaps we will resemble those who were ridiculed for building fallout shelters, preparing for something they hoped would never happen.
Loss of face and other vanities aside, we lose nothing.


World Markets; A Drop in Interest Rates. Ho-hum.
NOT too long ago, a half-point cut in German interest rates would have been enough to set off jubilant celebrations on Europe's financial markets.
But when the Bundesbank on Wednesday dropped its discount rate to 4.5 percent from 5 percent and its Lombard rate to 5.5 percent from 6 percent, the markets gave their version of a yawn.
The so-what reaction was the latest manifestation of the focus by investors not on short-term interest rates, which are set by central banks, but on long-term rates, which are a function of the prices investors are willing to pay for bonds.


Roosevelt Rallies for a Youth Center
THE fight to save a house in Roosevelt from being sold by the bank that owns it has become a community effort.
To a passer-by the two-story house at 104 East Clinton Avenue with a "For Sale" sign in front is one of many modest homes in a residential neighborhood.
But to many Roosevelt teen-agers the house has for three years been a community center, a site for parties and the headquarters for the I Am Corporation, an entrepreneurial program.


An Overlooked Sparkler
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor hit the nail on the head with his selection of the mid-1970's, specifically 1973, as the golden age of television  [ "When Networks Took Risks, and the High Road," April 17 ] .
But he neglected to mention the finest, most innovative police-detective show from that year: "Toma." Tony Musante's acting talent and charisma have seldom been matched since, at least until David Caruso showed up this season on "N.Y.P.D. Blue." KATHERINE WALKER  Litchfield, Conn.


As Political Terrain Shifts, Breyer Lands on His Feet
It was last Saturday, May 7, when President Clinton first began to appreciate that his effort to choose a Supreme Court nominee was going to be far more difficult than he had hoped.
Although Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's name had been under consideration for some weeks, Mr.
Clinton realized that his choice of the moment would not sail through the Senate and could create a wider set of political problems.
Further, one of the President's other two top candidates, Judge Richard S. Arnold, a friend from Arkansas, has cancer.
That left only Judge Stephen G. Breyer of Boston.
Mr.
Clinton had regarded him as aloof and unappealing when they met last year, but in the end, Judge Breyer presented the fewest problems, and his friends convinced the President that he had misjudged him.


Trash Plant: No Salvation
After more than a year of fruitless negotiations to salvage it, the only city-owned recycling plant closed its doors on May 1 when the Department of Sanitation decided against expanding the plant for more efficiency.
The decision came as a blow tocommunity leaders in East Harlem who had lobbied for city, state and Federal money to build the plant on East 127th Street in 1985 as a public-private partnership.


More Debate Over Bankruptcy Court
To the Editor:
So the bankruptcy lawyer Lawrence K. Snider feels the article "Let the States Deal With Bankruptcy" (Viewpoints, April 10) is irresponsible and without basis.
I find his rebuttal (Letters, April 24) to be baseless and professionally irresponsible.
A bankruptcy lawyer's giving his opinion of the bankruptcy system is like a trial lawyer's expounding on the need to revamp the tort system or the American Medical Association's discussing whether doctor's fees are too high or the Tobacco Institute's commenting on cigarettes and cancer.
Isn't Mr.
Snider feeding at the trough of debtors' assets while he testifies to the beauty of the system?
And aren't his bankruptcy fees subject to the approval of the Bankruptcy Court judges whom he so lavishly praises?
J.
E.
HESS  West Chester, Pa., April 25  The writer is a lawyer.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 15, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
2
2
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
3
3
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
4
13
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young boy learns a deadly secret.
5
1
SURRENDER MY LOVE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) Wrongly branded a spy, a ninth-century viking finds revenge and romance with the lady who imprisoned him.
6
4
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
7
3
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
8
3
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her reputation.
9
2
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
10
8
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
11
19
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
12
2
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
13
2
CHAINS OF COMMAND, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) An Air Force major restores his reputation in action on the Ukrainian border.
14*
8
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
15*
4
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
18
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
549
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
18
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
4
2
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
5*
65
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
6*
4
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
7
3
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
8*
7
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
9
135
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10*
28
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
11*
50
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
12
148
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
13*
10
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
14*
149
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15
6
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the 1970's and 80's.
16*
1
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
17*
50
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
165
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
172
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
30
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
2
THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $6.99.) Health and fitness advice for women.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


THE SOUND OF NON-MUSIC
John Tierney's use of his interview with me, in his attack on the musicans' union, is inappropriate and unfair to me and to our musical community (The Big City: "The Sound of Non-Music," March 13).
I was offered a job requiring that I understudy two guitar chairs in the orchestra of "The Who's Tommy." I accepted the job with the understanding that I was essential to the smooth running of the show.
JON HERINGTON New York, N.Y.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Sandra Feinberg; Making a Library Current and a Magnet for the Community
GONE are the days when librarians whispered, "Hush." With a loud voice Sandra Feinberg, director of the Middle Country Library in Centereach, has demonstrated that the library can be vital in improving life for families and children and an important means to share information.
In 23 years as a librarian, Ms.
Feinberg spent 17 in the children's department.
In 1979 she introduced the first model for the Parent-Child Workshop at Middle Country.
That program invited mothers and babies to the library to share in learning.
The workshops are now in 21 libraries throughout Suffolk County and 19 in Queens.
A grant last year trained 60 librarians around the state.


When Dogwood Lights Up the Land
THE name has absolutely nothing to do with man's best friend.
But who cares?
When the dogwood trees are in bloom, everything seems right with the world.
Actually, the name dogwood is an adulteration of "dagwood," referring to a time when the wood was used to make daggers for skewering meat.
The tree belongs to the huge Cornus genus, which contains about 60 species.
They range in size from the low-to-the-ground bunchberry (Cornus canadensis) to the stately Northwestern tree, Cornus nuttalli, which can be more than 70 feet tall.


Kit Loves Caboodle
THE MAGIC TOUCH By Rachel Simon. 307 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


Interface; And Now, the Digital Scream for Help
AS a catch-phrase of electronic self-protection, it may never achieve the mass circulation of "I've fallen and I can't get up." But it is certainly louder.
"Help me someone, help me!" a middle-aged woman's voice is heard at 112 decibels when the button is pushed on Voice Defense.
The new handheld device is being marketed as a $49.95 "personal security alarm" by the Bencel Company, a start-up venture in Owings Mills, Md.


Short on Soccer, U.S. Gears for Heavy Dose
In a month, the world's largest sporting event will come to the country with the world's smallest interest in soccer.
The World Cup, soccer's quadrennial international tournament, is expected to attract a cumulative television audience of 32 billion during the monthlong event, which starts June 17.
It will lure 1.2 million foreign visitors to the United States and pump $4 billion into the national economy.
And the organizers' biggest hope is that it will relieve the United States of its status as soccer's biggest undeveloped outpost.


Richard Link Jr., Andrea Horvath
Andrea Marianne Horvath, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Horvath of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Edward Link Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Link of Kensington, Conn.
The Rev.
Howard O'Shea performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Menlo Park, Calif.
Ms.
Horvath, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
She expects to receive an M.D. degree from Stanford University next month.
Her father is the director of mental health at the Department of Veterans' Affairs in Washington and is a professor of psychiatry at the State University at Stonybrook, N.Y.
Her mother, Csilla Horvath, is a decorative artist in Rye Brook.


On Sugar Hill, Caveat Emptor?
The 13-story neo-classical apartment building at 409 Edgecombe Avenue was once the address in the prestigious Sugar Hill section of Harlem.
Its tenants included W. E. B. DeBois, Thurgood Marshall and Roy Wilkins.
Just how far it has fallen since its glory days is reflected in a dispute between a group of the building's tenants and the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, the building's owner since 1979.


Beguiled Again By Amsterdam
NO ONE EVER calls Venice "the Amsterdam of the South," and with good reason, I suppose, but then one wonders why Amsterdam should have to suffer the sobriquet of "the Venice of the North." Apart from the canals, it is hard to imagine two cities so often conjoined in an epithet yet possessing less similar personalities and ambiance.
But Amsterdam deserves to be defined in its own terms and not in some negative counterpoise to La Serenissima.
And it wasn't until I started to think about how to form this definition, remembering my dozen or so experiences of Amsterdam, that I realized the first country I had ever visited in continental Europe was the Netherlands, and the first great European city I had ever visited, outside the British Isles, was Amsterdam.
Before that, if I had been asked where I had gone first in Europe, I would have unhesitatingly replied, "Paris, of course." But, in fact, I went to Amsterdam a full year before I ever saw Paris.


Sandra Leighton, Michael Galvin
Sandra Florence Leighton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Leighton of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Joseph Galvin, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. Galvin.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester, an Episcopal priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride, 31, tutors children with learning disabilities in New York and is also an exercise rider at Belmont Park Race Track in Elmont, L.I.
She graduated from Princeton University.


Against Nativism
THE STRAIGHT LINE IS IN BAD ODOR IN AMERICAN horticulture these days, along with just about anything else that smacks of Old World influence or the hand of man.
This was first impressed on me rather violently a couple of years ago, after I published in these pages an account of a disastrous attempt at making a "natural garden" in my yard.
As the local underbrush set upon my sorry little wildflower meadow, threatening to turn it into something more nearly resembling a vacant lot than a garden, I decided I'd better replant the bed in rows to make it easier to weed.
Though the neat rows of flowers began as an expedient, I came to like them, and I spoke in the article about the satisfactions of making a straight line in nature.
A benign-enough sentiment, you would think, yet it very nearly got my head bitten off.
By planting in rows, in a rectangle, I was behaving "irresponsibly," a landscape designer from Massachusetts charged in one of the more temperate letters I received.
By promoting even this small degree of horticultural formalism, this fellow argued, I was contributing to the degradation of the environment, because "existing esthetic conventions" cannot be realized in the garden without petrochemicals and technology.
We are to believe that only a "natural garden" -- i.e., one designed to look undesigned -- can qualify as ecologically correct.


Bulls Stress Unity the Day After Pippen's Sit-Down Strike
Under ordinary circumstances, the question put to Phil Jackson this afternoon was routine and would probably not even have been asked.
This, though, was the most extraordinary of circumstances.
The question: Would his starting lineup be the same Sunday against the Knicks as it was Friday?


Davies and Mallon Leading L.P.G.A.
Alice Ritzman has played 401 Ladies Professional Golf Association events, but she has never won.
And every time she finds herself in position to win, she comes up against a big name.
"It seems like every time I'm playing well there's a Hall of Famer lurking around, too," Ritzman said today.


Ban the Cars! A Historical Plea.
EACH weekday morning I ride my bicycle from my home on the Upper West Side to my work near Columbus Circle.
Most of my travel is on Central Park's circular drive.
It should be an idyllic way to commute, offering a tranquil interlude before joining the urban tumult.
But this is not the case for me and the many other bicyclists, joggers and Rollerbladers who frequent the park in the morning, late afternoon and early evening; instead, we are hemmed in by packs of hurtling, foul-smelling cars.
As I ride, I sometimes find myself brooding over how it came to pass, how New Yorkers allowed Frederick Law Olmsted's marvelous urban refuge to be invaded by that quintessential symbol of urban bustle -- the automobile.
I found the answer by following a trail of microfilm in my local library.


Donna S. Becker, Patrick C. Dignan
Donna Susan Becker, an account executive at Bozell Worldwide Advertising in New York, was married yesterday to Patrick Corcoran Dignan, a senior open-market trader for the Federal Reserve Bank in New York.
Rabbi Shimon Berris and the Rev.
Edward Avery, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the interfaith ceremony at the Pearl River Hilton, in Pearl River, N.Y.


When Ushers Don't Usher, Playgoers Shouldn't Tip
To the Editor:
Concerning the April 24 article about ushers, "Sentinels of Broadway," I cannot remember the last time I was escorted to my seat in a Broadway theater.
Leonard Soloway was quoted quite correctly in saying that ushers establish a certain tone concerning the patron's feelings about any theater.
The tone established these days is, at best, indifference and, at worst, hostility.
I remember theater ushers 40 years or more ago who were quite professional and courteous.


FILM: The Attack of the Big Summer Movies; Coming Soon: Whatever They Sent Us A Trailer Of
AUDIENCES WILL NOT BE surprised to encounter a coming attraction for "Wyatt Earp" when they go to see "Maverick," which opens on Friday; both are big westerns with popular stars, and both come from Warner Brothers.
But in the annals of trailer placement, such consistency is rare.
Conventional wisdom would have it that trailers -- those tantalizing outtakes from forthcoming movies set to stirring scores (often not from the real movies) -- should appeal to the same audience as the feature or that they should come from the same studio or at least that the movies being flogged will eventually play at the same theater.


WEDDINGS  &lt;HEADLINEStefanie Katz, James Rothman
Stefanie Faith Katz, the daughter of Doris and Donald Katz of Hollis Hills, Queens, is to be married today to James Andrew Rothman, a son of Barbara and Melvyn Rothman of Phoenix.
Rabbi H. Joseph Simckes is to officiate at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 27, is an assistant marketing manager in the food science group at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company, in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University and she and the bridegroom received master's degrees from the Yale School of Organization and Management.


Cold Feet; Companies Get Skittish On Altering Health Care
ONE of the great catalysts for remaking health care over the past few years has been American business, besieged by costs that kept climbing, recognizing that there was only so much the private sector could do about it.
Advocates of change believed that this spreading alarm in corporate America was a fundamental part of the political equation for passing reform this year: Big business would not be a hurdle, but a happy beneficiary of a vast new social program.
C.E.O.'s would link arms with labor and consumer groups and a Democratic President -- a "new Democrat" who preaches the glory of private-public partnerships -- and march into the post-industrial future.


Florence Barricelli, Thomas Nicosia
Dr.
Florence Barricelli, an internist, and Dr.
Thomas Arnold Nicosia, a cardiologist, are to be married today in Manhasset, L.I., where both are in private practice.
Msgr.
John J. Skelly is to perform the ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary.
The bride received undergraduate and M.D. degrees from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Barricelli of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens.
Her father is an internist in Brooklyn.


In Covenant With The Sacred
Some people take to cameras, some don't.
Whether out of laziness, snobbery, or superstition, I've never carried one on my travels.
But since travel is in part about memory, everyone needs some way of capturing and possessing what can never really be brought back.
Once, staying at a small inexpensive hotel in Saigon, I was provided by the management with a thermos bottle decorated with a picture of a rampant bat.
The bat, I was informed, was a lucky totem in Vietnam.
Luck was never to be despised -- certainly not by me -- and it made a conversation piece.
I have to admit that when I left the country, the bat thermos left with me.
Appropriately enough, I later lost it at a Buddhist monastery.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; Stamps: Beyond Elvis
Even after death, Abbie Hoffman continues to cause headaches for the Government.
Recently, the Postal Service delivered a letter that had, as postage, a bogus stamp of the Yippie leader in his infamous flag shirt.
The stamp was printed by a group of anarchic and anonymous artists who call themselves First Issue Reserved Edition (FIRE).
Other people in the stamp series are Amy Fisher, Tonya Harding and Charles Bukowski, the late beat poet and, as the stamp notes, a onetime postal worker.
Another stamp has an American Beauty rose with the word "Hate" below it.


Laura Radin, Charles Barber
Laura Beth Radin, the daughter of Justice and Mrs.
Royal S. Radin of Grymes Hill, S.I., is to be married today to Charles Matthew Barber, a son of Mr. and Mr.
William J. Barber of Middletown, Conn.
Judge Albert A. Blinder of the New York State Court of Claims is to officiate at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Radin, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.


Extra! See the Re-energized Mets
If this were an advertisement for the Mets, the kind that heralds a Broadway show or movie, the phrases in large type would read:
"Surprise team of 1994!" -- Kevin Malone, Montreal Expos.


Bridle Paths Are Gone From Ocean Parkway
To the Editor:
In regard to "A Long Quest for Turn Lights on a Perilous Parkway," April 24: Sad to say, the bridle paths along Ocean Parkway have been paved over.
I remember them fondly from the days when I was a girl living on the parkway between Avenue H and Fowler Avenue.
A riding stable was around the corner on Parkville Avenue, but no longer.


FILM: The Attack of the Big Summer Movies; Why Studios Can't (Won't) Stick to Those Opening Dates
THINK OF THE SUMMER AS a giant wave that only the strongest or most agile surfers can ride through a sea littered with broken boards.
Or think of it as a demolition derby with 50 movies crashing against one another.
Metaphor is the easiest way to understand what the 14 weeks between Memorial Day and Labor Day mean to Hollywood -- a fight for supremacy during the lushest box-office months of the year.
Last summer, moviegoers bought more than $2 billion worth of tickets, 41 percent of all those sold during 1993.


On Sunday; Speed Dreams And Spoilers For Idle Wild
OUT on the lonely straightaways of Conduit Avenue, a few Mustangs and Camaros still race each other through the weekend darkness, just as they have for generations.
Flying past Kennedy International Airport, boosted by computer-controlled tanks of nitrous oxide, the lovingly modified cars provide a brief but complete sensation of escape from the calcified traffic that seeps through the rest of Queens and New York.
But seven miles to the north, there is no escape from Queens Boulevard.
Though 12 lanes wide in some places, the thoroughfare is so hobbled by frequent and infuriatingly long lights that pedestrians fear to set foot in its crosswalks, lest maddened drivers vent their frustration directly toward them.
The boulevard has its own halting rhythm, one that seems to define movement in the city: a quick burst of acceleration, an aching reach to make the next light, then a grim shutdown for two minutes, long enough to feel the subway rumble mockingly underneath.


Anna Lorant, Bruce Proctor
Anna Blanche Lorant, the daughter of Fortuny and Andrew Lorant of Bronxville, N.Y., is to be married today to Bruce Nelson Proctor, a son of Roslyn and Seymour Proctor of Merrick, L.I.
Donald J. McGrath, a justice of the peace in Philipstown, N.Y., will officiate at Xaviar's restaurant in Garrison, N.Y.
The bride, 31, is a bridal consultant in New York.
She graduated from Ecole Superieur de Publicite in Paris.


Suddenly, Everybody's a Reformer
MEMBERS of Congress are in recovery, or so they think.
Embarking on the first phase of the political equivalent of a 12-step program to break lawmakers and lobbyists from their interdependence, the Senate last week passed a bill banning almost anyone from making a gift to a member of Congress.


Stephanie Joyce And James H. Vos
Stephanie Lynne Joyce, a daughter of Hugh E. Joyce of Beaverdam, Va., and the late Barbara Fiers Joyce, was married yesterday to James Hayden Vos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert D. Vos of Santa Barbara, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alan Dale Fiers, the bride's grandfather and a minister of the Disciples of Christ, performed the ceremony at the restored Woodson's Mill in Beaverdam.


Amsterdam Airport Offers V.A.T. Refunds
International passengers traveling through Amsterdam Airport Schiphol may now obtain value-added tax refunds there on purchases made in any of the 12 countries of the European Union.
The airport is among the most recent to offer the service, which is also available at airports in other European cities, including Frankfurt and Brussels.
Formerly only departing passengers were able to collect their refunds, and only on merchandise bought in the Netherlands.
The new arrangement allows even those who are just changing planes in Amsterdam to complete this transaction.


Cassandra Vogel, Bradley Hack
Cassandra Vogel, a daughter of Bernice and Barry Vogel of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Bradley Jacob Miller Hack, a son of Lorraine and Stephen Hack of Farmington Hills, Mich.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
The bride, 25, is a reporter for KTTC-TV, an NBC affiliate in Rochester, Minn.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
She received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father heads his own investment management concern in White Plains.


Corrections
An article on March 20 about Canyonlands and Arches National Parks in Utah misstated the route of the Santa Fe Trail.
A reader's letter received on April 5 points out that the trail turns south at Bent's Fort on the Arkansas River in Colorado; it does not continue west into Moab, Utah.
Efforts to reach the writer and to research conflicting statements about the route of the trail delayed this correction.


May 8-14: Mandela Sworn In; In South Africa's New Dawn, The Poignant Realization That at Last It Was True
The arrival of the new South Africa had been celebrated so many times over the past year that last week began with a sense of impending anticlimax.
After the negotiated surrender of white power, after the new Constitution, after the splendid ritual of the elections themselves, the superlatives had all been spent and the finale could hold few stirring surprises.
Wrong.
First on Monday the new members of Parliament took their seats.
South Africans could scan the faces as they took their televised oaths and consider the fearsome prices these men and women had paid to sit there -- wives and husbands murdered, bodies tortured, years in prison or exile, humiliations beyond number endured.
Their competence is yet to be proved, but few Parliaments have ever glowed with such a sense of entitlement.


Rhubarb Bites
My father has always referred to conflicts, arguments and confusion as "rhubarb." Squabbling children elicited a booming "What's the darned rhubarb?" Mistaken facts or divergent opinions were "a bunch of rhubarb." Contentious sportscasters and politicians who raised taxes "didn't know rhubarb" (the latter said in such a way as to convince us children that not knowing rhubarb was far worse, say, than being involved in, or responsible for, rhubarb).
But even without this early semantic confusion, rhubarb is a singularly difficult food to know.
It is very much a spring thing, yet it doesn't have a spring taste.
Unlike the delicate, herbaceous flavor of most vernal produce (which requires a short amount of cooking and little embellishment), rhubarb has a mean, sharp bite that demands coaxing, seasoning, sweetening and simmering.


Ms. Zwerling, Mr. Crossfield
Elizabeth Anne Zwerling, the daughter of Nancy Zwerling of Park Ridge, N.J., and the late Sidney Zwerling, was married yesterday to Andrew Michael Crossfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Crossfield of New York.
The Rev.
Donald A. Brevet, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, performed the ceremony at the Old Stone Church in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Crossfield, 30, is a sales and marketing manager in New York for Sonia Rykiel, the French fashion designer.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father was a partner in the law firm of Zwerling &amp; Zwerling in New York.
Her mother teaches English at the Cavallini Middle School in Upper Saddle River.


Presto! Yankee Magicians Do It Again
The magical baseball tour that began with a week of local performances in the Bronx continued here today with the Yankees reaching deep into their black top hats, past the rabbit, the rabbit's foot, the deck of cards and the colored scarves to unveil another scintillating late-inning performance.
They won in the final inning again and kept their winning streak intact.
On a frustrating gray afternoon when a temporary Brewers starter named Michael Ignasiak and three relievers silenced them for eight innings, the Yankees stored their best trick away until the end of the day by scoring five runs in the top of the ninth to sneak away with a 6-2 victory at County Stadium.
Wade Boggs ripped a long two-run double that delivered the decisive runs in catapulting the Yankees to their ninth straight victory, making it two straight days in which they have won in their last at-bat.


Caren A. Kabot, Matthew Posner
Caren Amy Kabot, the development producer for "Day One," a news program on ABC television, was married last evening to Matthew Alan Posner, a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the investment bank.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Posner, 29, graduated from Emerson College.
She is a daughter of Lynn Kabot of Quechee, Vt., and the late Carl Kabot.
The bride's father was an executive vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Habitats/Remodeling in Forest Hills Gardens; Out, Out! With the Old
MICHELINE DAVIDUKE and her fiance, Richard Rossin, who have gutted a 1921 stucco bungalow in Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and are putting it back together -- their way -- say the house resembled a dungeon when they bought it.
"You can only spend $20,000 a day for so long," said Mr.
Rossin.
"This makes 'The Money Pit' look cheap.  Mr. Blandings had it lucky -- and our story isn't over yet."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BACKYARD HABITATS
Sara Stein will make two appearances this week, talking about a subject for which she is achieving wide notice: ecologically sound gardening in the suburbs.
She is the author of "Noah's Garden: Restoring the Ecology of Our Own Backyards," published last year by Houghton Mifflin.
Her mission is to create rather than destroy bird and animal habitats by encouraging suburban homeowners to rethink the pursuit of a manicured lawn.


Bridget Gilbertson, C. J. Russo
Bridget Gilbertson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hunter J. Gilbertson of Barrington, Ill., was married yesterday to Christopher Joel Russo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel A. Russo of Darien, Ill.
The Rev.
Timothy Stevens, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Alice Millar Chapel at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.
Mrs.
Russo, 30, is a sales associate at Kentshire Galleries, an art gallery in New York.
She graduated from Denison University and from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the chief executive of Gilco Scaffolding in Des Plaines, Ill.


Fresh Air Fund Offers Camping With a Topical Side
Cindy Rosario recalls how last fall, as the workshop leader of a racially diverse group of 5- to 12-year-olds, she asked them to hold hands with the children next to them and one child would not.
"We asked him, 'Why won't you hold hands?' He said, 'Because he is black, and Mommy says blacks are dirty.' "


Q and A
South Korean B &amp; B's
Q.
I intend to visit South Korea, particularly Seoul.
Am I likely to find bed and breakfast accommodations there? -- Edward R. Kozub, Lackawanna, N.Y.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Easy Does It: The Met Edges Into the Future
BEFORE ANYTHING ELSE, BEFORE THE music or the singing or the sets, the Metropolitan Opera House is a place, an extravagant point in space.
No other musical hall in the country has such active, palpable, thick, warm atmosphere.
Sets are built to match the dimensions of the house, and voices are built or rebuilt with them.
In some sense it hardly matters who comes and goes through its creative channels.
This is its virtue and its curse: to be imperturbable in the face of change, or to absorb change imperturbably.
As always, there is a Byzantine world behind the grand facade, aswirl in rumors.
The season just ended was especially rewarding for inveterate Met watchers.
The company is in limbo, some say; no dominant personality guides its operations.
James Levine, the artistic director, is said to be out of touch, losing power, possibly losing his job.
After all, he vehemently opposed supertitles and cultivated the career of Kathleen Battle; now supertitles are coming in, and Ms.
Battle is out.
Is Joseph Volpe, the blustery general manager, taking control?
Is Bruce Crawford, president of the board, the power behind the scenes?
What role will Sarah Billing hurst, the artistic administrator of the San Francisco Opera, play when she becomes assistant manager of the Met in August?


INSIDE
U.S. May Arm Cambodia
The United States and Australia are considering a request by King Norodom Sihanouk to supply arms to Cambodia after recent victories by the Khmer Rouge rebels.
Page 20.
Warning on Racial Hatred
Gen.
Colin L. Powell told Howard University's graduating class that blacks could not afford "a detour into the swamp of hatred." Page 28.
Two Who Diverged
The death of a suspect in police custody on Staten Island involved two men who came from the same place but who were on opposite sides of the world of drugs.
Page 33.
Knicks' Harper Suspended
Derek Harper was banned for two playoff games for fighting with the Bulls' Jo Jo English, who will miss one game.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Regan Hofmann, Andrew Whiteley
Regan Somers Hofmann, a daughter of David Hofmann of Pennington, N.J., and Nancy Hofmann of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Stratford Whiteley, a son of George C. Whiteley 3d of New York and Mrs.
Robert E. Deeley of Manchester, Vt.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Rechter performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Trinity Church in Princeton, N.J.
The bride, 26, was until recently an account executive at Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College.
Her father, David Hofmann, is president and chief executive of the Graphic Packaging Corporation, a consumer products packaging business in Wayne, Penn.


Burger King Says No to Soy Patties in Berkeley
With her Burger King franchise situated in this city's gourmet ghetto, Beverly Tabb wanted to appeal to the culinary elite by offering something special -- a soy-based meatless burger.
But last week the Burger King Corporation, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan, a British conglomerate, told Ms.
Tabb to shelve her plans to sell the faux burger.
And now her meatless hamburger, "the Griller," which sells for $1.59, has become a rallying cry among some Berkeley residents who want vegetarian fast food.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Making Ballets, Just the Way Men Do
DIAMONDS MAY BE A GIRL'S BEST FRIEND.
BUT you couldn't tell that from the New York City Ballet's Diamond Project, which begins on Wednesday at the New York State Theater and continues on May 19, 21, 26 and 31 and June 3.
Only three of the project's choreographers are women.
But this disparity is not the fault of the company.
Fast-forward through ballet's 500-year history and the names of women known for choreographing can be counted on one hand.
While ballet has traditionally revolved around women, choreographers have been men.


At Yale, Broadway Tunes And Shostakovich, Too
IT is hail-and-farewell time around the state as orchestras, chamber groups and presenting organizations prepare to call it a season.
This afternoon at 2, the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society winds things up with an open stage at the Historical Society in Hartford, all performances courtesy of society members.
There's no admission charge, but for information about the society, call 249-7041.
The New Haven Chorale, which earlier presented such major works as Handel's "Messiah" and Poulenc's "Gloria" under its music director, Paul Mueller, lightens up for its last concert in Battell Chapel at Yale.
On Tuesday evening it's a "Broadway Spectacular" when the 8 o'clock curtain rises on melodies, lyrics and arrangements of songs and scenes from "Oklahoma!", "Gigi," "The Sound of Music," "Carousel" and more (787-1887).


Pen Pals Raise Young Scientists' Sights
LISA BRADEN HARDER says she likes it when children ask her questions, even if she can't always answer them.
How many different sounds are there?
How is a sound made?
Why do your ears pop on airplanes?
Ms.
Harder, a computer scientist who volunteers as a pen pal for the Science-by-Mail program sponsored by Science Port, the museum under development in Rye, takes such inquiries to heart.
Writing on her professional stationery from Somers, where she runs a consulting company, she encourages students at the Columbus Avenue Elementary School here to follow their curiosity and write back about their experiments with the world around them.


Kim A. Haber, Mark K. Goodman
Kim Anne Haber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan F. Haber of Huntington Woods, Mich., was married last evening to Mark Kenneth Goodman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Goodman of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Polish officiated at Temple Beth El in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The bride, 27, is an account executive at J H Collectibles, a women's sportswear manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


North Koreans Say Nuclear Fuel Rods Are Being Removed
In a direct challenge to the Clinton Administration, North Korea said late Saturday that it has begun extracting nuclear fuel from its largest reactor without international inspectors present, a process that the Defense Department said could provide enough material for four or five nuclear bombs.
The move was announced despite repeated warnings from the Administration that any effort to harvest the fuel would immediately end talks and result in a call for the United Nations to impose economic sanctions.


Anna McCain, William Madonia
Anna Tobin McCain, the founder and director of Tobin Fine Art, an agency in New York that represents artists, was married yesterday to Dr.
William James Madonia, a resident in pediatrics at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
The Rev.
Janet B. Kraft performed the Episcopal ceremony at Sheerlund Forests, a Christmas-tree farm in Reading, Pa.
Mrs.
Madonia graduated from Wellesley College.
She is the daughter of Sarah S. McCain and Thomas T. McCain, both of New York.
The bride's father is a retired member of the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother is an owner of Sheerlund Properties, which manages Sheerlund Forests.


New Off-Ramps On Info Highway For Couch Potatoes
THE INFORMATION superhighway, charted by the Clinton Administration as a main road to the American future, is likely to cut right through some familiar areas of home entertainment.
At present, two different kinds of enterprises collaborate in the field: Content companies, like film studios and other production companies, provide the entertainment.
And conduit companies, like television networks and cable broadcasters, distribute the goods.
Relations between the two have been quite cozy in the past.
As long as relatively few channels were available, the studios could ration out their product to broadcasters under mutually protective agreements.


Miners All
In addition to the ballets by the three women choreographers participating in the Diamond Project, nine other works will be given premieres.
Here are the creators of those ballets, along with their observations about the works.
David Allan Artistic director, Riverside Ballet Theater, Riverside, Calif.
"Pastoral Dances" (set to orchestral works by Erik-Lars Larsson, Kurt Atterburg and Hugo Alfven).
"I've lived with these Swedish pieces for a long time, and I see my ballet as a collage of emotional moments."


The Old Lion of Cameroon Wants Another Shot at Cup Glory
In the patchy grass that surrounds the Omnisport Stadium in Yaounde, not far from an unsightly stretch of chain-link fence, stands a life-size sculpture of Roger Milla.
It was put in place not long after the 1990 World Cup, when Milla, the so-called Old Lion, improbably led his team to a place in the quarterfinals and a place in a lot of hearts and minds.
Like most man-made things in this humid West African climate, the sculpture of Milla is showing signs of decay.
Green paint is peeling off his shirt; red paint is coming off his shorts.
His left arm is missing from the elbow down, and the right is dangling as if it might not last until this summer's World Cup in the United States.


New Off-Ramps On Info Highway For Couch Potatoes
THE INFORMATION superhighway, charted by the Clinton Administration as a main road to the American future, is likely to cut right through some familiar areas of home entertainment.
At present, two different kinds of enterprises collaborate in the field: Content companies, like film studios and other production companies, provide the entertainment.
And conduit companies, like television networks and cable broadcasters, distribute the goods.
Relations between the two have been quite cozy in the past.
As long as relatively few channels were available, the studios could ration out their product to broadcasters under mutually protective agreements.


Cherise R. Glick, Robert Bransfield
Cherise Rachel Glick, a daughter of Marilyn and Allan H. Glick of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., is to be married today to Robert Campion Bransfield, a son of Suzanne Barnett of Ivoryton, Conn., and Joseph P. Bransfield Jr. of Portland, Conn.
Rabbi Avi Magid will officiate at Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is a research analyst at Rreef funds, a pension-fund company in San Francisco.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner in the First Manhattan Company, a financial services concern in New York.


SURFACING
HEROES  Nelson Mandela, teen idol: In the person of South Africa's newly elected President, cynical American teen-agers seem to have actually found a politician to admire.
And they are giving him the full treatment, with posters, stickers and jacket patches.
GARDENING  Wildflower sod: Gardeners are using these specially seeded swaths of earth to create pop-up meadows -- sort of.
Proper care and luck are still essential.
FASHION  Kate see/Kate do?
The short-short-short cutoff jeans that some women are sporting could be attributed to the coming of spring.
But don't overlook the Kate Moss factor (as in the recent Calvin Klein advertisement, above.)


New York On Two Wheels
Like getting along with your neighbors, keeping a garden or gaining entry to a first-run movie on a Saturday night, bicycling is something that can be done in New York City but is easier almost anywhere else.
The traffic, the potholes, the irksome pedestrians, the windshield glass sprinkled across pavement like salt on a burger -- you stop and start, stop and start.
No rhythm on these roads.
It shouldn't be a surprise for people to learn -- or remember -- that back in the early 80's, when mountain bikes were first becoming popular, they were promoted here as city bikes.
As a New Yorker and a cyclist who rarely cycles in New York, I've never felt that simply wanting to ride was enough of a reason to haul my bike into the elevator, carry it down the front stairs and into the street and then begin the ongoing abrasive discourse with the urban elements that city cycling requires.
Elsewhere people ride bikes expressly for recreation, but New York is a place where a meandering, relaxing spin for its own sake is not just ill-advised; it's probably impossible.
There are the circular drives around the various parks, of course, but it seems as though the cyclists there travel only in fast-moving packs, which, for the independent practitioner, turns the enterprise of bike riding into a kind of join-them-or-die proposition.


Sharon Kivisto, David Fleming
Sharon Irene Kivisto, a daughter of George and Lillian Kivisto of Narragansett, R.I., is to be married there today to David John Fleming, a son of Thomas and Alice Fleming of New York.
Edgar J. Timothy, a retired clerk of the Washington County Superior Court in South Kingstown, R.I., will officiate at the Towers, a historic site.
The bride graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
She is the manager of the Long Cove Marina Campground, which her parents own in Narragansett.


Portia Bumbalo And John Wood
Portia Anne Bumbalo, a daughter of Linda Knell Bumbalo of Washington and Dr.
James T. Bumbalo of Jamestown, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Barry Wood, a son of John H. and Mary Wood of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
J.
Donald Freeze performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Washington.
Mrs.
Wood, 25, is a receptionist at McKenna &amp; Cuneo, a law firm in Washington.
Her father is a pediatrician in Jamestown.
Her mother is a lawyer in Washington.


Games People Play, but Won't Watch
TWO decades ago, promoters of the world's most popular sport were ecstatic: They had persuaded Pele, the world's best-known athlete, to come out of retirement in Brazil and play for the New York Cosmos in the upstart North American Soccer League.
That would do it, they said.
The millions of children playing soccer needed a pro league to watch, idols to emulate, merchandise to buy.
Soon a national television contract was signed.
And in 1977, Pele's third summer, with the Cosmos drawing crowds of 60,000 and more to Giants Stadium, the team won the league championship.
The future looked golden -- bankably golden.


It's Easy to Be Greedy When Viburnums Bloom
WELL, it's over.
That incredible rush of bloom that makes you want to hold all the flowering trees close -- because all too soon the petals of the magnolias, the cherries, the crab apples, the lilacs, the dogwoods, the red buds will drift to the ground and the world will be solidly green again.
Which is fine for grilling chicken and pulling weeds, but that wonderful ache is gone.
Unless you have viburnums, that is.
And plenty of them.
The Korean spice viburnum (Viburnum carlesii) is on the wane now, but for about three weeks, I have been reveling in its perfume.
Viburnums boast about 120 species and many cultivars, and they are all in the honeysuckle family, which is why they smell so good.
And some are just coming into bloom.


Behind the Scaffolding, a Surprise
The neighbors call it Little Restaurant Row -- four restaurants lined up along East 18th Street between Irving Place and Park Avenue South -- and they assumed that yet another place to eat was about to emerge from behind the green scaffolding at No. 117.
Then they discovered, to their dismay, that the State Office of Mental Health was planning a residence for mentally ill people on the site, a six-story building sandwiched between New Tokyo Restaurant Bar and Ottomanelli's Italian-American Restaurant.


IN SHORT: FICTION
IRISH NOVEL  THE BOOK OF INTRUSIONS  By Desmond MacNamara.
Dalkey Archive Press, $19.95.


Corrections
An article on page 28 of The Sophisticated Traveler today, about Kashgar, China, carries an incorrect identification of the authors' forthcoming book.
The book, by Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn, is "China Wakes."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Museum Company Store Claims Top Sales Volume
The two-story Museum Company store that opened recently at Fifth Avenue and 53d Street is likely to have the highest sales volume this year of any of the chain's 50 stores around the country, said Larry Hall, a vice president of the East Rutherford, N.J., company.
The stores buy the right to manufacture and sell reproductions of art objects in 200 museums around the world, ranging from jewelry -- both gold and gold-plated -- to posters and games.
Prices at the Museum Company store are considerably lower than at official museum stores like the Metropolitan Museum of Art Shop in Rockefeller Center.


Well Matched


Japanese Begin to Crack the Wall Of Secrecy Around Official Acts
The residents of the pleasant middle-class neighborhood of Kyodo never imagined themselves as firebrands.
But when they heard that the Government planned to improve the old commuter rail line crossing the area's narrow streets with a multibillion-dollar elevated railway, they did something extraordinary: They demanded to know why.
Traditionally, the Government bureaucracy has made such judgments in secret, and the people have simply had to endure them, with few means of taking part in the process or shaping the outcome.
But faced with the destruction of their neighborhood's quiet charm, a group of Kyodo residents wanted to know why this plan had been chosen over less disruptive alternatives, like tunneling.


The Lesson: M.B.A.'s and Engineers Need Each Other
IT was not a major project, just an effort to design new kinds of bicycle lights.
But it says a lot about how graduate schools are trying to respond to the needs of American manufacturers.
The lights were designed last fall by teams of graduate students from Stanford University's schools of business and engineering in an innovative joint project.
Afterward the students -- two engineers and two business students on each team -- built them in a machine shop on campus.
The main goal of the project: to break down the barriers between engineers and business people, barriers that lead engineers to call their opposites "bean counters" and business types to call engineers "propellerheads."


Finding Sites for Social Services Is a Thorny Task
Two years ago, a city plan to put 100 homeless families in two Upper West Side hotels was scuttled amid protests in a community dotted with shelters, treatment centers and bedraggled beggars.
In 1989, residents of a leafy street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, vehemently opposed the transformation of a home for retarded teen-agers into one for AIDS victims.
And in 1988, five Queens men were convicted of setting fire to a house on their Flushing block that was to be used to shelter foster-care babies.


RECORD BRIEFS
Stenhammar: Piano Concerto No. 2, Serenade in F, 'Florez och Blanzeflor'  Janos Solyom, pianist (Concerto); Ingvar Wixell, baritone ("Florez"); Munich Philharmonic (Concerto) and Swedish Radio Symphony (Serenade, "Florez") conducted by Stig Westerberg.
EMI CDM 5 65081; CD.


County Is Intensifying Its Effort to Immunize All 2-Year-Olds
DR.
Harold N. Adel, Westchester's deputy commissioner for Health Services, is quick to mention the following statistics when making the case for early immunization: during a resurgence of measles between 1989 and 1991, 11,000 people in the United States were hospitalized and 130 died.
In citing the statistics from the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, Dr.
Adel said that the 55,000 cases of measles recorded during the two-year period resulted from a failure to vaccinate preschool children on time.


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
I was riding the L train one evening when Jose Santos, a panhandler featured in your article, entered my car.
He talked his way through the car, following closely the script described in the article.
But now he had some new material: waving a copy of his photo in The Times Magazine, he said: "The New York Times . . . The New York Times . . . a story about begging on the subway, about why we have to beg, about the conditions . . . read the story."


CRIME
To reach the chamber mentioned in the title of Peter Dickinson's dazzling intellectual shell game, THE YELLOW ROOM CONSPIRACY (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95), one must cross the Central Hall, turn right down a corridor past the Drawing Room and the East Room, turn left at the Billiard Room into the East Corridor, continue past the Gun Room to the East Stairs and go through King William's Room.
Entering this special room in a stately English country home known as Blatch ards, one discovers that it is green.
In time past, when Lord Vereker's five daughters were in residence, Blatchards was the setting of a great scandal that came to light with a violent death in the Yellow Room.
"Two titles, a Government minister, a kinky tart, the minister's wife" and sundry others were mixed up in the affair, which involved "East End criminals, racketeering landlords, a dead body and cricket." In time pres ent, a woman and her lover take turns recalling the crime, of which each believes the other guilty.
Like the labyrinthine route one must take to the Yellow Room, the resolution of the mystery is lengthy and winding and delightfully disorienting.
Along with the split narrative perspective and the flashbacks, the serpentine plotting that defines the author's elegant style also supports his obsessive theme -- the undying "ache of irrecoverable time" that lingers in a place like Blatchards, in a country like England, after a devastating war.


The Parsons School Shows Off a Bit
Critics' awards, Marriott Marquis, May 3.


Promised Land


On the Town for $199.40
So there you are, sitting in Providence or Montreal or Montpelier.
You want to spend a weekend in New York, go to the theater, hit a museum or two.
But the things you have to do!
There's the hotel.
And the tickets and the parking and, of course, there's where to eat.
Sure, it would be fun to take a sightseeing bus or one of those boats that circle the island, but how do you find out where they leave from and how often?
Then there's the money. Ah, yes, the money.


Spain Premier Rejects Calls That He Quit
With a series of corruption scandals bringing loud demands for his resignation, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has been reduced to a shadow of the popular and charismatic young leader who swept to power here 12 years ago.
Mr.
Gonzalez's decline was already apparent in last June's general elections, when his Socialist Party lost its absolute majority of seats in Congress for the first time since 1982.
While he was returned for a fourth term as Prime Minister, it was as head of a minority government.


Worlds Apart, Arabs Here and There
IN the crowded Nodine Hill section of this city, where generations of newly arrived Italians and Irish once settled, prospered and eventually moved to more affluent neighborhoods, Walid Fanek, a 40-year-old delicatessen owner from Jordan, caters now to a new wave of immigrants -- his fellow Arabs.
He works in a neighborhood of shops and modest multifamily houses, where blacks, Hispanic residents and Arabs intermingle peacefully most days -- and where, at the corner of Elm and Oak Streets, he proudly stocks the bulging shelves of his tiny market with Middle Eastern delicacies like jameed (dried yogurt), pine nuts and fresh spices.


At Work; The Healthiest Business Cycle
NEW YORKERS take certain things in stride that would unnerve the residents of smaller metropolises: nails-down-the-blackboard police sirens and car alarms, raving street folks, muggers, Soon-Yi and Woody strolling down Columbus Avenue.
But ask many of them to hop on a bike for a mile or two spin to work and you would likely get a look of incredulity and a verbal response that would make a Bronx cheer sound cultured.
Not, however, from Catherine Fagan or Eileen Kapp, two Brooklynites who commute regularly by bicycle to jobs in lower Manhattan.
Given the chance, either will wax eloquent about the benefits of traveling to work on the back of a bike.
"It takes me 25 minutes to bike, 45 minutes by subway on three trains," said Ms.
Kapp, 33, a computer programmer at Smith Barney who rides in three times a week from Park Slope.
"When I'm done, I have my exercise for the day. I don't have to go to the gym. Time saving is probably the biggest factor." But there is also the glory of the Brooklyn Bridge in early morning.
"There is nothing like sunrise on the Brooklyn Bridge," said Ms.
Fagan, a resident of Greenpoint who works at the World Trade Center.
"After, I have such a great day."


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
How can you tell who is for real?
For me, it is easier to give money to those who ask, no questions asked.
When did being charitable become such a moral dilemma?
Dawidoff says that he assumes "the worst . . . that the money may be spent on drugs." That kind of reasoning is why most people do not give at all.


Urban League Celebrates 75 Years
New York Urban League's dinner, Sheraton New York, May 5.


A Government-Industry Environmental Partnership
To the Editor:
Michael Silverstein completely missed what is happening in Washington and around the country to promote the environmental industry.
A cluster of major policy initiatives to protect the global environment and promote this vital industry is in the final stage of development and many programs are already being implemented by the Clinton-Gore team.


Tasty Seasonings From the Indian Subcontinent
INDIAN restaurants are an endangered species on Long Island.
They are especially rare birds in Suffolk County, where until recently just Jhoola in Smithtown and a handful of storefront carryouts were available to Indian-food aficionados.
Huntington is typical.
Since Sitar closed last year, there was just a Jhoola carryout with extremely limited seating.
That changed last month.


Jeffrey MacDonald's Trial
To the Editor:
As the attorney for Jeffrey R. Mac Donald, I think Joe McGinniss doth protest too much in his letter (April 17) when he says that it was the jury, not his book "Fatal Vision," that convicted Dr.
MacDonald.


A Glance Back at Wharton
ALL SUMMER LONG, NEW Yorkers who think they were born too late will have a chance to bask in an earlier time.
"Glancing Backward: Edith Wharton's New York," an exhibition opening Wednesday at the National Academy of Design, captures moments, locales and personalities that Wharton described in her writing.
In the captions on this page, Eleanor Dwight, curator of the show and the author of "Edith Wharton: An Extraordinary Life," published this month by Abrams, matches some of Wharton's words to paintings of the era.


Save the Watershed
One of New York City's most precious capital assets is the 2,000-square-mile watershed that stretches northwest of the city for 100 miles on both sides of the Hudson River.
For 150 years, the watershed and its reservoir system have supplied New Yorkers with cheap, high-quality drinking water.
But decades of careless development and shoddy regulation have put the watershed at risk.
If the system is not cleaned up in three years, the Federal Government will require New Yorkers to pay as much as $8 billion to build a filtration plant and $300 million annually to operate it.
This would be a ridiculous price to pay for something that New Yorkers now get virtually free.
It is also an avoidable price, but only if city and state politicians are prepared to summon the energy -- through personal visits, town meetings and the like -- to woo upstate residents whose cooperation is crucial to the watershed's salvation.


U.N. and U.S. Seek More Iraq Oil Money for Victims' Fund
The United Nations and the United States have begun a drive to find more Iraqi oil dollars to compensate victims of the 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and to pay the cost of disarming President Saddam Hussein's Government.
In a letter to the Security Council, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has asked for authorization to enlist the major international oil companies in tracking down "hundreds of millions of dollars" believed to be owed Iraq for oil shipped before an embargo on trade with Baghdad took effect and Iraqi assets were frozen in banks around the world.


John Grossman and Katharine Olmsted
Katharine Harvey Olmsted, a daughter of Candace Wainwright and Robert M. Olmsted, both of New York, was married yesterday to John Andrew Grossman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen S. Grossman of Salisbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph Williamson, the dean of religious life at Princeton University, performed the interfaith ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 23, graduated from Princeton and lectures on medieval art at the Cloisters in New York.
Her father is an investment adviser at Auchincloss &amp; Lawrence, an investment advisory service in New York.
Her mother and the bridegroom's mother, Jane Grossman, are partners in Better Bookstore Consultants in New York.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Alfred Drake, originated starring roles in "Kismet," "Kiss Me Kate" and "Oklahoma!"


50th Liberation Day To Get Salute in Guam
Each year the residents of Guam celebrate Liberation Day on July 21, to mark the end of the two-and-a-half-year occupation by Japan during World War II.
This year, for the 50th anniversary of the recapture, the week of July 17 has been designated as the Golden Salute, with a full schedule of events planned.
Thousands of veterans and other visitors are expected to gather with island residents in tribute to those who battled the Japanese for this strategically important island, the westernmost United States territory.


Corrections
A report in the Manhattan Minute column last Sunday about the promotion of a police captain to head the Fifth Precinct in Chinatown misstated his surname.
He is Thomas M. Chan, not Chin.


Shoulda-Coulda-Woulda
A hard-edged question was posed to Hillary Rodham Clinton at her Whitewater news conference: what about "the suggestion in the R.T.C. memorandum . . . you and your husband knew or should have known that Whitewater was not cash-flowing and that notes or debts should have been paid"?
"Shoulda, coulda, woulda," the First Lady replied. "We didn't."


Jazz Picks And Rolls And Wins
Jazz 111, Nuggets 109
The pick-and-roll is one of basketball's most basic plays, and the Utah Jazz took the Denver Nuggets to school with it.


Ilene J. Zubli, Paul T. Stallman
Ilene Jeanette Zubli, a daughter of Yvette Zubli of Lake Success, L.I., and Avi Zubli of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Paul Todd Stallman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Stallman of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Gerald Skolnik officiated at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.
The bride, 27, is a lawyer.
She graduated from New York University and received her law degree from New York Law School.


Pamela Johnstone, Timothy M. Ognisty
Pamela Johnstone, the gallery associate at Linda Hyman Fine Arts, was married yesterday to Timothy Michael Ognisty, a vice president in the equity trading department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the nondenominational ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27, are graduates of Vassar College.
The bride also received an M.A. in art history from Hunter College.


'Closed for Renovation' May Mean Closed, Period
To the Editor:
In the May 1 F.Y.I. column, Pat Cohen of the Department of Consumer Affairs suggests that one reason owners put up "Closed for Renovation" signs when they are actually going out of business is that they are "embarrassed about closing." In fact, the signs are usually a ruse to distract and/or divert creditors.
And there are many variations of the sign.


America's Living Old Master
AMID SIGNS THAT ABSTRACT painting is making a comeback among young American artists, there is no American painter better able to demonstrate its potential to a new generation -- and everyone else, for that matter -- than Willem de Kooning.
The timing is right for the de Kooning exhibition that has opened at the National Gallery of Art.
At the age of 90 (Alzheimer's disease having put an end to his working life by the late 1980's), he seems such an enduring presence in the history of American art, a living monument to its heyday in the 50's, that it is possible to forget the rough-and-tumble of his past.
He became Public Enemy No. 1 among young artists clamoring for change in the 60's, his work too European in its roots, they thought, too lacking in irony.
Now it's clear that Mr. de Kooning's art was not a polar opposite of Pop, that it was full of references to the everyday world, including the smile he cribbed from a magazine advertisement for his best-known series of paintings, the "Women."


Nancy A. O'Shea, Christian Hughes
Nancy Ann O'Shea, a trust officer at Beverly (Mass.) National Bank, was married yesterday to Christian Weston Hughes, a partner in Coopers &amp; Lybrand in Boston.
The Rev.
Charles C. Forman, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at King's Chapel in Boston.
Mrs.
Hughes graduated from St.
Michael's College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. O'Shea of Morristown, N.J.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Racial Discrimination Statistics: Vote on a nonbinding resolution opposing a provision of the House crime bill that allows inmates to challenge death sentences by using statistics on racial discrimination.
Approved 58 to 41, May 11.
2.
Abortion Clinic Access: Vote on a compromise bill making it a Federal crime to block access to abortion clinics.
Approved 69 to 30, May 12.
3.
Bosnian Arms Embargo: Vote on a measure that says the United States should seek support from its European allies and the United Nations Security Council before lifting the Bosnian arms embargo.
Approved 50 to 49, May 12.
4.
Bosnian Arms Embargo: Vote on a measure that requires President Clinton to left the Bosnian arms embargo without regard for the allies' position.
Approved 50 to 49, May 12.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Nay
Nay
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
Yea
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Going to Vietnam as a Champ
More than a quarter century after he faced prison for refusing to fight in the battlefields of Vietnam, Muhammad Ali traveled to the former war zone last week to try to find comfort for the families of the Americans who disappeared there.
Mr.
Ali, the 52-year-old former world heavyweight champion, was a sight as wrenching as some of the scenes of war he visited in Vietnam.
He suffers from Parkinson's Disease, which has left him barely able to speak or walk, but his aides said he wanted to make the trip to Vietnam to demonstrate his support for the families of the more than 2,000 Americans still missing in action from the war. (As searching continued there last week, several sets of human remains were found, including some believed to be American.)


Look Who's Talking
WHEN Karl Lagerfeld and Gianni Versace made separate appearances on the PBS talk show "Charlie Rose," neither evoked the time-honored image of the couturier to describe his role.
There was no rapturous talk of fondling fabrics or precision cutting.
Instead, in defining themselves as designers, both chose imagery from the very medium that was beaming them to Mr.
Rose's culture-minded viewers.
Mr.
Versace said his greatest asset was "a fast vision of work, like an antenna." He continued, "You know, I love to live in an airport, to see what happens around me, not in an ivory tower."


Three Wildlife Trips To a Bering Peninsula
In many ways, Russia's Chukotka Peninsula on the Bering Sea is a geographical reflection of Alaska, with similarities in landscape and wildlife.
At least three trips to this little-visited region are scheduled in July.
Joseph Van Os Photo Safaris of Vashon, Wash., will take a group of 17 travelers from Provideniya through the Bering Strait to the Chukchi Sea aboard the Suchotsky, a 285-foot, ice-strengthened marine research vessel built in Finland.
The trip, from July 5 to 18, will be led by Dennis Paulson, a biology professor at the University of Puget Sound.
The price is $3,995 round trip from Provideniya, including a night's stay in Anchorage before and after the cruise.
Air fare to Anchorage is extra, as is air fare between Anchorage and Provideniya.


How to Earn Bank Interest While Paying No Fees
To the Editor:
In response to the April 17 article, "The Bottom Line on Banks," I would like to explain how I earn interest on all my acounts while paying no fees to any bank.


Universal Wants Children of All Ages To Yabba-Dabba-See It
TO HEAR UNIVERSAL TELL IT, EVERYONE will want to meet "The Flintstones." That is, everyone will want to see the new $45 million live-action movie of the classic Hanna-Barbera television cartoon when it opens on Memorial Day weekend.
In the studio's opinion, theaters will be mobbed by baby boomers, 20-somethings, children -- everyone who watched "The Flintstones" on television (either in prime time in the 60's or via endless reruns) or consumed Flintstones chewable vitamins or had a crush on Betty Rubble.
The television "Flintstones," after all, has been seen by 300 million people in 80 countries and 22 languages.
"The film is meant to be enjoyed on different levels by all audiences," says the director, Brian Levant.
Fred Flintstone and Barney Rubble, he adds, are more than just cartoon characters.
"They are spokesmen, celebrated figures in our culture. You don't make a Pez dispenser out of just anyone."


Stephanie Klein, Robert A. Horne
Stephanie Alison Klein, an associate at the law office of Bruce S. Rosenberg in Elmsford, N.Y., is to be married today to Robert Allen Horne, an associate at Goldberger &amp; Dubin, a law firm in New York.
Justice Anthony A. Scarpino Jr. of State Supreme Court in New City, N.Y., is to officiate at the Eldorado Club in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride, 30, graduated from Hunter College.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from Pace University.
She is the daughter of Robert and Rita Klein of Lake Hiawatha, N.J.


The World; Asia's Having One Huge Nicotine Fit
THE Marlboro Man has found greener pastures.
The cigarette-hawking cowboy may be under siege back home in the United States from lawmakers and health advocates determined to put him out of business, but half a world away in Asia he is prospering, his craggy all-American mug slapped up on billboards and flickering across television screens.
And Marlboro cigarettes have never been more popular on the continent that is home to 60 percent of the world's population.


Janis Ephron, Steven Feinstein
Janis Ephron, the daughter of Hazel Ephron of New York and Arthur Ephron of Arlington, Tex., is to be married today to Steven Jay Feinstein, a son of Arlene Gross of Nanuet, N.Y., and Barry Feinstein of New York.
Rabbi David Fass is to officiate at the Sheraton New York Hotel.
The bride, 32, is a sales representative for Don't Stop, a children's clothing company in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a senior buyer for Color Tile, a distributor of floor coverings in Arlington.
Her mother is a partner of Wank Adams Slavin &amp; Associates, an architectural engineering firm in New York.


Kashgar, On China's Silk Road
AT THE END of the world, where the oasis of Kashgar rises like a mirage from the surrounding desert, I expected that the only things on sale might be sand and water.
But, even in the age of the information highway, Kashgar, on the ancient Silk Road, clings proudly to its heritage as a trading center.
So, as I pushed my way through the crowd of about 100,000 at a recent Sunday bazaar in Kashgar, I was surrounded by a cornucopia of merchandise ranging from slices of watermelon (3 cents) to silk bedspreads ($20) to ruby-laden daggers ($100) to fine camels ($525).
The market area covers more than a square mile, and, in the center of it, I unexpectedly found myself caught in a traffic jam.
No motor vehicles were in sight, but the gridlock still lasted for half an hour, as fat-tailed sheep baaed imperiously and horse-cart drivers shouted, "Hosh," the local equivalent of beeping a horn.


Katharine Doyle And Tim Weiner
Katharine Temple Lapsley Doyle, a foreign policy analyst at the National Security Archive in Washington, was married yesterday to Tim Weiner, a Washington correspondent for The New York Times.
Judge Mary Ellen Fitzmaurice of Queens Family Court performed the ceremony at Union Theological Seminary in New York.
Ms.
Doyle, who is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Susanna and L. F. Boker Doyle of New York.
Her father, the chairman of the executive committee of the Fiduciary Trust Company International, is a trustee of the American Museum of Natural History and the Frick Collection, all in New York.
Her mother is a freelance writer at The Village Voice.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; The Poison Pen Is Mightier
Nothing is more fun than nastiness, and who better to be nasty than writers on other writers?
The following quotes are from "Fighting Words" edited by James Charlton, to be published next month by Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The more I read him, the less I wonder that they poisoned him.
Thomas Babington Macaulay on Socrates


Thompson Clears Bases; Smoltz Clears Benches
Ryan Thompson did not expect to cause so much trouble.
All he wanted was a hit.
He did not think about a homer -- not even when John Smoltz loaded the bases to pitch to him with two outs.
Thompson could not think about grand slams.
He was obsessed with the demons in his head.
"It haunted me up there," said Thompson, who had struck out six consecutive times before he faced Smoltz in the fifth inning yesterday at Shea Stadium.
"I heard these voices. They were saying 'He'll strike out. He'll strike out.' "


Cuernavaca's Secret Gardens
CUERNAVACA IS A city of walls, not as high as those of Southampton, L.I., or Palm Beach, Fla., but high enough to make their point.
They quietly remind you that not only are you a tourist here, you are an outsider.
The walls fill your imagination with visions of the idle lives behind them, a world of carefully tended bougainvillea, and of servants and cellular phones and jewelry that is worn to the swimming pool.


Janet Reno's Choice
FROM HER BULLY PULPIT, Janet Reno cuts a contradictory figure.
She is tall (6 foot 1 1/2) and large-boned, and as she looks out at her audience with an intense, darting gaze, she appears to embody the power of the office of Attorney General of the United States.
But with her feet spread at parade rest, a self-conscious hunch to her shoulders and her arms dangling awkwardly, she seems unvarnished and unthreatening.
Women, nuns in particular, tell her she reminds them of their mothers, sisters, former teachers, aunts.
And the introduction she receives usually casts her in similar paradoxical terms -- as the Attorney General next door, a country folk hero from the big city.
Reno speaks without notes in a slow Florida twang: Tuesday comes out Tewsdee; poetry is poitree.
She invariably reminisces about a personal connection to the place she happens to be.


William Rosato and Susan Lee
Susan Lee, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Woon Soon Lee of Alpine, N.J., is to be married today to William John Rosato, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest F. Rosato of Ardmore, Pa.
The Rev.
William Scafidi will perform the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride, 27, and the bridegroom, 29, are architectural designers in New York, she with Davis, Brody &amp; Associates and he with Buttrick, White &amp; Burtis.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a psychiatrist in New York.
Her mother, Aija Lee, is a piano teacher in Alpine.


Sports of The Times; The Original Ranger, Murray Murdoch, Turns 90
HE uses the word "we" as if he were still on the Rangers, still their center on the checking line.
And nobody else has a better right to use the word.
Murray Murdoch, who will be 90 Thursday, is the original Ranger, the first player signed by the Madison Square Garden hockey team that would win the Stanley Cup in 1928, its second season, and again in 1933.
Now, 54 years after the Rangers won the cup in 1940 for the third and last time, the current Rangers hope to win it.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Joe Hall, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Bob Zupcic, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.


For the Good of the Dogs, Make Dog Runs Childless
To the Editor:
I was saddened to read in the April 17 article, "Where Dogs Romp and Humans Sue," of the law suit brought against the Mercer-Houston Dog Run by members expelled because they did not follow the rules.
I used the run for my basenjis Betty and Nigel until I moved recently.
The run is a clean and safe haven for dogs precisely because of the published rules it maintains including the "no children under 12" rule at issue.


Miss Wirth, Mr. Bjorneboe
Katharina Wirth and Andreas Bjorneboe, both dancers, were married yesterday in Zug, Switzerland.
The Rev.
Erwin Bentz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the St.
Oswald Kirche.
The bride, who is 25 and is known professionally as Katja Wirth, is a member of Feld Ballets/NY.
Miss Wirth studied at the St.
Gallen Theatertanzschule.
She is a daughter of Madeleine N. Wirth of Hinwil, Switzerland and the late Peter Wirth.


When Dogwood Lights Up the Land
THE name has absolutely nothing to do with man's best friend.
But who cares?
When the dogwood trees are in bloom, everything seems right with the world.
Actually, the name dogwood is an adulteration of "dagwood," referring to a time when the wood was used to make daggers for skewering meat.
The tree belongs to the huge Cornus genus, which contains about 60 species.
They range in size from the low-to-the-ground bunchberry (Cornus canadensis) to the stately Northwestern tree, Cornus nuttalli, which can be more than 70 feet tall.


Graphically Absurd
For a nation whose art was dominated by turgid Socialist Realism, Poland during the 1950's and 60's was the wellspring of modern posters.
The Polish school of graphic art was noteworthy for its reprise and synthesis of Dada and Surrealism into a symbolic language that was at once playful and subversive.
Roman Cieslewicz, a master of the Polish school, reinvigorated prewar Surrealism through his wit and humor.
His eclectic typography, at various times influenced by Russian Constructivism, the Bauhaus, Art Nouveau and Art Moderne, and absurdist conceptual collages reminiscent of Max Ernst and Marcel Duchamp, helped revitalize a moribund visual culture.
Perhaps he was too influential, for Poland allowed him to emigrate to Paris in 1963, where he first took a job as a layout designer and illustrator for Elle, and was soon sought after as a freelance designer of book jackets, posters, advertisements and screen prints.
Mr.
Cieslewicz did not invent the photo-collage, but judging from his late Polish and later French work he was certainly its pre-eminent modern practitioner.
Margo Rouard-Snowman's ROMAN CIESLEWICZ (Thames and Hudson, paper, $29.95) is an extensive catalogue of his best-known pieces -- from the sarcastic covers of the magazine Opus International to the haunting collages about human cruelty that illustrate a 1988 edition of Anatole France's novel "The Gods Are Thirsty." The brief texts at the beginning of each chronological section and an interview with the artist by Ms.
Rouard-Snowman, who teaches graphic design at the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Arts Decoratifs in Paris, tersely explain motives and methods, but the book would be valuable if only for the extraordinary record (from 1955 to the present) of Mr.
Cieslewicz's impressive output.
STEVEN HELLER


Business Group Seeks to Extend Sphere to Shelter
The Grand Central Partnership, whose reach in providing social services is spreading thoughout Manhattan, is negotiating with the city to take over the women's shelter in the armory at Lexington Avenue and 26th Street.
The contract, if signed, would represent one of the most significant moves for the Business Improvement District, which has been called upon by neighborhood groups and businesses to get homeless people off the streets and out of the parks and into jobs and housing.
But the Partnership has never operated a shelter.


Elna E. Jelstrup, Charles Iachetta
Elna Elizabeth Jelstrup, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Axel Jelstrup of Pelham, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Charles Joseph Iachetta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Iachetta of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
William P. Saum 2d performed the ceremony at the Huguenot Memorial Presbyterian Church.


Jesse Jackson Asserts NBC Shows Hiring Bias
Decrying what he called a skewed depiction of minorities by the news and entertainment media, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson released a study yesterday that he said showed widespread hiring discrimination at NBC's local and network operations in New York.
He also announced plans to negotiate with NBC and its affiliates in 25 cities, and said that if the network did not respond promptly to his demands to increase minority staff members, he would call for pickets and boycotts.
He noted pointedly that May was a lucrative sweeps month and that the operating license of WNBC, the local affiliate, was coming up for renewal.


End of Program Upsets Parents
Less than a month ago, Dorothy Franklin saw her 2-year-old daughter, Anysia, stand up in her crib for the first time.
It was something doctors told her that Anysia, born at a low birth weight, might not ever do.
She credits Anysia's school, the New York Institute for Special Education on Pelham Parkway, for much of the accomplishment.
Her daughter has been enrolled at the school for about 16 months.


For East Europe Exiles, Lives in 2 Worlds
Theirs is the emigre story with a post-cold war postscript.
They came for freedom -- to think and write and speak.
Some were visiting, but became stranded when things back home in Eastern Europe turned nasty.
Others came for good, assuming they would never look back.
Time passed and they became Americans and New Yorkers.
They found work in universities, theaters, journals.
They made the leap, painful as it was, to writing in English.
Their children grew up here, listening to Pearl Jam.


'History Is Real Enough'
To the Editor:
Maybe Peter Eisenman's excavations intentionally falsify history to make a point, but I'm not sure that "history is fiction" is the point to be made  [ "Repulsion Is the Attraction," April 24 ] .
History is real enough; trying to pass off historical re-creations as reality is futile.
Post-modern architects who do try might learn from the forger of the Etruscan Horse.


Corrections
A credit line on May 1 for an illustration of the entrance to Penn Station under construction on West 34th Street misidentified the source.
The drawing was from the architectural firm of Kliment &amp; Halsband.


The Pager as a Tool of Liberation
To the Editor:
Christopher Reed's gloomy article "Be Wary of Beeper Bondage" (Viewpoints, April 17) concentrated solely on the potentially negative effects of personal communications but overlooked the liberating, stress-reducing power of pagers, cellular phones and new-generation personal communications services.


BEST SELLERS: May 15, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
3
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
3
3
4
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
4
5
92
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
5
1
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
6
4
4
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder, stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
7
6
5
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
7
5
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
9
8
17
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
10
13
57
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
11
9
13
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
12
11
28
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
13
10
3
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart transplant operation, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
14
15
2
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
15
14
6
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
53
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
2
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
3
3
21
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
10
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
6
5
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
6
5
11
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
7
8
4
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
8
7
9
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
9
12
24
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
10
10
18
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
11
9
9
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
12
14
91
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13*
11
4
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
14
13
32
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
15
15
38
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
3
3
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
3
2
17
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
51
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AFRICAN AMERICANS AT MARS BLUFF, SOUTH CAROLINA, by Amelia Wallace Vernon. (Louisiana State University, $29.95.) What was a community of black rice growers doing 60 miles from the sea in the heart of cotton country?
This important and surprising book transcends the domain of local history.
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) Three previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.
KAY BOYLE: Author of Herself, by Joan Mellen. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A fervent telling of the turbulent, unexamined life of a modernist author whose popularity peaked in the 1940's.
LEADING WITH MY HEART, by Virginia Kelley with James Morgan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.50.) This intimate, posthumously published memoir throbs with the vitality of its gregarious, gambling, hard-drinking author, who was also the President's mother.
LEARNED HAND: The Man and the Judge, by Gerald Gunther. (Knopf, $35.) Penetrating and delicate, this study of a judiciary eminence known for his self-restraint and fortitude explores the inner tensions and doubts that shaped Hand's character.
NIXON: A Life, by Jonathan Aitken. (Regnery, $28.) A Tory Member of Parliament argues that Nixon was not only the 20th century's most innovative foreign-policy President, but also wrongly condemned for Watergate and the 1972 Christmas bombing of North Vietnam.
ONE ART: Letters, by Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.
ROALD DAHL: A Biography, by Jeremy Treglown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) This deft, revealing unauthorized biography of the bullying author of children's books serves as an antidote to Dahl's own sparky but none-too-truthful image of himself.
THE TRACK OF REAL DESIRES, by Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $21.) At the center of this comic, spirited novel are a terrific dinner party and a story of loss, malice, ruin, envy and, finally, trust.
THE TROUBLESOME OFFSPRING OF CARDINAL GUZMAN, by Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow, $25.) Mr. de Bernieres's third novel set in the imaginary Latin American city of Cochadebajo de los Gatos concerns good and evil and a clergyman who has his inner demons removed, surgically.
WITHOUT A HERO: Stories, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr.
Boyle's unaverted gaze, caustic sensibility and attraction to everything queasy are all evident in his fourth collection of short stories.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
John Mack's boss snaps that she wishes he were doing something else.
If Mack's career is destroyed, it won't be because of his belief in what the abductees tell him.
The character assassination of Mack will happen because of intolerant people like his boss or "kind friends" like Carl Sagan who will do him in.
LOUIS HOCHBERG Berkeley, Calif.


The Enduring Legacy of 'West Side Story'
"I DON'T know how many people begged me not to waste my time on something that could not possibly succeed," Leonard Bernstein once said.
"After all, how could we do a musical where there are two bodies lying on the stage at the end of the first act, a show that's so filled with hatefulness and ugliness?"


Cadets Embark on a Sea of Learning


How I Cracked 'The Nutcracker'
IF ONLY I HADN'T BEEN BORN WITH flat feet, I could have played Clara in "The Nutcracker." Or at least that's my revisionist-ballet-history version.
Being flat-footed meant that when it was time to escalate from soft ballet slippers to hard toe shoes, I would remain forever doomed to plie at the barre while the girls with the golden arches could ascend to the heights of classical ballet.
But my early years of classical training led directly to a phone call I got last summer from William Ivy Long, the Tony Award-winning costume designer.
"You know, I've always thought of you primarily as a dancer," my old friend giggled on a trans-Atlantic call from the London costume shop of "Crazy for You."


Mother's Day Owes It All to Julia Ward ('Battle Hymn') Howe
To the Editor:
"The Bum Who Fathered Mother's Day" (Op-Ed, May 8) tells a fragment of the story of the day's origin.
Mother's Day was actually founded in the 1870's by Julia Ward Howe, poet, lecturer, social reformer and abolitionist from a prominent New York family.
A strong partisan of the Union cause, she wrote "The Battle Hymn of the Republic." Her effort to create this national holiday has an inspiring and important message.


A Government-Industry Environmental Partnership
To the Editor:
Michael Silverstein simply is incorrect in his assertions that the Clinton Administration "does not see a vibrant environmental industry as crucial to cleaning up the world or revitalizing our economy" ("Why No Help for the Cleanup Industry," Viewpoints, April 24).
Fostering technology businesses, creating high-quality jobs for Americans and protecting the environment all go hand in hand; in fact, sustained economic growth requires a healthy environment.
Building this environment-economy link is central to the President's environmental agenda, and in particular is a core mission of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
The U.F.O. abductee phenomenon is leading the public away from traditional belief systems and toward a strange, syncretic faith that incorporates elements of occultism, "exobiology" and popular mythology, all bound together with gassy New Age talk of extraterrestrials and the "evolution" of humankind.


Island School Districts Bracing to Meet Increases in Expenses
SCHOOL districts planning for next year are facing rising expenses over which they have no control.
Those costs are mainly a result of increasing enrollments, expired union contracts, necessary building repairs and state mandates that districts have to pay for.
For most districts, shrinking revenues from declining property values and lost state aid in recent years have led to rising budgets, translating into tax increases next year of 4 to 7 per cent across much of the Island.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Industrial production, April, percent change
0.5
0.4
Capacity utilization, April, percent
83.6
83.8
Tuesday
Housing starts, April, millions, annual rate
1.47
1.49
Housing permits, April, millions, annual rate
1.31
1.35
Thursday
Trade balance, March, billions of dollars
-9.7
-8.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
355
378
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Federal Open Market Committee Meets
Thursday
Philadelphia Fed Business Outlook Survey for May


The Big Divide
BEFORE THE SHOOTING BEGINS Searching for Democracy  in America's Culture War.
By James Davison Hunter. 310 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


THE LAST ALASKAN BUSHRAT
Go, Miles Martin!
You are just trying to be the kind of free spirit many of us only dream about.
Hey, bureaucracy!
Too bad you can't move in on a drug house as easily as you can on a frontiersman.
MARY JANE VAN DE CASTLE Kansas City, Mo.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.09
101.70
110.80
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6715
1.6540
1.6020
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3786
1.3823
1.2743
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4984
1.5185
1.5390
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$380.50
$376.60
$367.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Savoring Bamboo in Rain Or Wind
THE ground floor interior of Yale University Art Gallery has been painted a green that lies between jade and the color of Granny Smith apples.
The color is in honor of "The Jade Studio," an exhibition of Ming and Qing painting from the collection amassed by Wong Nan-ping (1924-1985), a Chinese businessman who lived the latter part of his life in Hong Kong.
Hanging scrolls are displayed behind plexiglass panels, the horizontal kind lie unfurled in glass cases and the overall effect is of images suspended in water rather than air.
The production is the work of many parties, beginning with Richard Barnhart, professor of the history of art at Yale, and Colin Mackenzie, who succeeds Mary Gardner Neill as curator of Asian art, and ending with the unnamed designer of the installation.
Add to this a fully illustrated catalogue with essays by Professor Barnhart and seven authorities on Chinese art who were Wong Nan-ping's friends.


Figure in Shooting On Bridge Arrested
The man accused of helping to cover the tracks of the suspect in the Brooklyn Bridge shooting was arrested on Friday evening after authorities learned that he had planned to leave the country, the police said.
Bassam Reyati, 27, was arrested about 9:30 P.M. outside the livery cab company he owns at 326 Van Brunt Street in Brooklyn, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck-Malvinich, a police spokeswoman.
He had been out on bail.


Truffaut Knew The Feeling
To the Editor:
That the death of a leading actor during filming is among a director's darkest nightmares  [ "From the Grave the Show Still Goes On," May 1 ]  is evident in Francois Truffaut's 1973 comedy of errors "Day for Night."


A Chance for Reform
To the Editor:
More than 100 incumbents are leaving Congress -- largely because they are fed up with fund raising for their re-election campaigns.


Lenz of North Fork Acquires Bridgehampton Winery
PETER CARROLL, Eric Fry, Thomas Morgan and Sam McCullough have their work cut out for them.
North Fork wine lovers know them, respectively, as the operator, wine- maker, sales manager and vineyard manager of Lenz Vineyards in Peconic.
Now they also hold the same titles at the reprieved Bridgehampton Winery on the South Fork.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
SHOWDOWN: Grand Central Partnership sought a pedestrian mall on the block below 42d Street on Park Avenue.
Community Board 5 opposed it.
The Partnership wins.
The city says the mall will start May 23, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., weekdays. . .
GOTCHA: Pepper bombs are thrown into Bar NY and The Tavern on Second Avenue near 95th Street.
A new security patrol set up by five bars catches a suspect and turns him over to the police. . .
WALK ON BY: The Transit Authority thinks about closing the subway station at Lexington Avenue and 53d Street for six months to make repairs to the escalators.
It receives protests. . .
GIVE PEACE A CHANCE: The Black-Korean Mediation Project is graduating its first team of 20 "certified" mediators to address disputes between members of the two groups . . .
IN THE COURTS: The Coalition High School for Social Change and the Landmark High School have been crammed in at an East Harlem building.
So the Board of Education decides to move them to 220 West 58th Street.
The Park South Tenants Corporation, a co-op across the street, is suing.
The schools have 100 students each. . .
TAKE FIVE: Looking for an edge, New York Dolls, a topless bar on Murray Street, decides to entice stockbrokers with continuous stock and commodity quotes.


'The Soul of the American University'
To the Editor:
In his review of George M. Marsden's book "The Soul of the American University" (April 17), John Patrick Diggins poses what he calls "a theodicy question." He asks, "How can a God so omnipotent as to have created the world become so insignificant on the American campus as to be denied tenure?" Mr.
Diggins goes on to suggest (mistakenly) that the transformation of our system of higher education from a largely religious to a largely secular framework has resulted in the removal of religion from the curriculum.


1930's To 1960's, When Dance Grew Strong
THE WORD FROM PARNASSUS, hallowed shrine of Apollo and the Muses, must have filtered down as dance developed in America from the 1930's through the 1960's.
Creativity was the order of this golden age.
Never had so many dancegoers owed so much to so many choreographers, and never had Americans been exposed to so many kinds of dance and dancers.
A country that lacked the permanent theatrical dance traditions of Europe and Asia suddenly witnessed the emergence of pioneers who became titans in the field.
Three of their many achievements were paramount: They freed creativity of the dictates of state or private patronage, of the commercial pressures and utilitarian functions still found in the other arts.
They liberated choreography from the historic synthesis of dance, music and painting.
They triumphed over the legacy that made dance suspect in America -- a Puritan heritage born in Cromwell's England, where theaters were shuttered and maypole dancing banned.


Europe's Next Giant Step
In an important vote the other day, the European Parliament opened the way to admitting Austria, Sweden, Finland and Norway to the European Union.
Thus what began in 1957 as a six-member common market can by next year grow into a European Union with 16 members and 370 million inhabitants.
That would open frontiers for free movement of people and goods from the Adriatic to the Arctic Circle, from the Hebrides to the gates of Russia.
Americans are only beginning to catch up with what this epochal change may imply.
It was widely predicted that the vote in the 517-seat parliament in Strasbourg would be close.
In fact, it was a blowout: in the first of four votes, Norway was approved with 374 in favor, only 24 against and 58 abstentions; the approval margins were about the same for the other applicants.
This bodes well for the next hurdles, four national referendums, beginning in Austria on June 12 and concluding in Norway on Nov. 26.


Invoking King and a Kennedy, Clinton Calls for Peace
President Clinton renewed an appeal against violence today at the site where a grief-stricken Robert F. Kennedy told a campaign crowd of black Americans in April 1968 that the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. had been assassinated.
That address by Senator Kennedy just two months before he himself was assassinated is remembered as an extraordinary call for racial harmony, and Mr.
Clinton sought today to carry its message to a nation feeling ever more plagued by gunfire.


All Right, So Maybe Haydn Didn't Write Them. So What?
THE AUSTRIAN PIANIST AND scholar Paul Badura-Skoda sits in the front row of the large classroom, looking slightly disoriented.
"My husband still thinks they're genuine," says his wife, Eva, a musicologist.
She has just given a talk, "The Haydn Sonatas: A Clever Forgery."
This was to have been one of the first public discussions of what had been billed as the find of the century, with the Badura-Skodas involved as principals: a manuscript of six newly discovered piano sonatas by Joseph Haydn.
In the January issue of BBC magazine, H. C. Robbins Landon, the dean of Haydn scholars, certified the works as genuine.
The February issue printed a retraction: the handwriting in the manuscript seemed to date from the 20th century; the engraver probably used a steel-nibbed pen, which came into use only in the mid-19th century; staves were peculiar, and so on.
The latest evidence suggested what Mr.
Robbins Landon called "a rather sinister forgery."


Corrections
Picture captions last Sunday with an article about businesses emerging from scandals reversed the identifications of two company executives.
Joseph Franklin, chairman of Frequency Electronics, was in the lower photograph; Melvin Sharosky, president of Circa Pharmaceutical, was in the upper right.


India Resists Plan to Curb Nuclear Arms
After weeks of uproar from irate opposition parties in Parliament, the Indian Government appears to have hardened its opposition to American proposals that would freeze India's secret nuclear weapons program in return for a similar cap on the nuclear arsenal believed to have been developed by Pakistan.
In the latest of a series of clashes with opposition leaders who have demanded that there be no concessions, the Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao conceded in Parliament on Thursday that it had ordered a delay in the test firing of a surface-to-surface missile so the test would not coincide with Mr.
Rao's departure today for an official visit to the United States.


Manager's Profile
Steven L. Colton Fund: Benham Income and Growth Fund, $225 million in assets.
Manager since 1990 inception. (Sponsor: the Benham Group, Mountain View, Calif.)


'Changes of Heart' in Its World Premiere
HOW on earth could the McCarter Theater match a triumphant occasion like "The Triumph of Love"?
The play by Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux, adapted and directed by Stephen Wadsworth, was the New Jersey theater's godsend in 1992 and the McCarter was the messenger.
The answer turned out to be a cinch.
Get Mr.
Wadsworth, allow him another go at Marivaux, setting him free once more, and that would be the end of earthly considerations.


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
I don't know how Nicholas Dawidoff discovered that the "magnificent tale" told him by David Clark (one of the panhandlers) was untrue.
In fact, David was not "pulling his leg from start to finish." David Clark was a classmate of mine at the Little Red School House, a private school in Greenwich Village.
He went there beginning in kindergarten and transferred to another New York City private school in the seventh grade.


When Dogwood Lights Up the Land
THE name has absolutely nothing to do with man's best friend.
But who cares?
When the dogwood trees are in bloom, everything seems right with the world.
Actually, the name dogwood is an adulteration of "dagwood," referring to a time when the wood was used to make daggers for skewering meat.
The tree belongs to the huge Cornus genus, which contains about 60 species.
They range in size from the low-to-the-ground bunchberry (Cornus canadensis) to the stately Northwestern tree, Cornus nuttalli, which can be more than 70 feet tall.


Community Board Dates: In the Bronx
DISTRICT 1: Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven; last Thursday of the month; next June 30, 6:30 P.M., Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
DISTRICT 2: Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of the month; next May 25, 6 P.M., Feldco Building, 1029 East 163d Street (corner of Southern Boulevard); (718) 328-9125.


Your Witness: What Might Have Happened
The opening credits of L.A.
Law spell out the show's name on a classic Southern California symbol: the vanity plate of a Jaguar.
But after eight seasons of cruising -- and 15 Emmy Awards -- the keys are being taken out of the ignition.
The last episode of will be broadacst on Thursday.
That means no more evolution of the struggles for power within McKenzie, Brackman, Chaney &amp; Becker, no more courtroom dramas over trendy issues, no more intra-office sexual politics.
For those who like to speculate on what might have been, The New York Times asked several actors who had starred in the series to envision what would have happened to their characters.
"Benny's future will be more of the same. He may be looking for a job -- although he's more limited than most people -- and he'll do his damnedest to stay employed. He's just made the biggest purchase he's ever made (a racehorse), and it'll be interesting to see how he and his wife deal with winning. He'll be fine. He's got the right attitude toward life, kind, sincere, and good."


Unfazed North Leads in Virginia G.O.P.
Ronald Reagan has criticized him.
So have Colin L. Powell, the retired chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Senator John W. Warner, the dean of Virginia Republicans.
But with less than three weeks before the state Republican party picks a nominee to face Senator Charles S. Robb in the fall, Oliver N. North, the former Marine lieutenant colonel and central figure in the Iran-contra scandal, has pushed ahead with his conservative agenda, unfazed by his attackers and, evidently, unharmed.


REMEMBERING RWANDA


THE LAST ALASKAN BUSHRAT
It is a little ironic that I should be reading Ted Morgan's article "The Vexing Adventures of the Last Alaskan Bushrat" (April 17) while I sit in the middle of Disney World.
Would my 8-year-old daughter have preferred a week on the Alaskan frontier with Miles Martin to a vacation in Frontierland with Mickey and friends?
I think not, but it hurts to say it.


The Relentless Prophet
JAMES BALDWIN A Biography.
By David Leeming.
Illustrated. 442 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


At a Crystal Ball
Benefit for Mount Sinai Medical Center, May 5.


Sound Bytes; Maverick Remakes Kaleida
Mike Braun compares the stresses of running a joint venture of I.B.M. and Apple Computer to those of raising teen-agers: "They only agree when you wish they didn't."
Mr.
Braun is president and chief executive of Kaleida Labs Inc., the three-year-old joint venture of the International Business Machines Corporation and Apple Computer Inc. that set out to create a multimedia software development language for Macintoshes, I.B.M. personal computers and compatible models and Unix computers, as well as for future interactive television devices.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a picture on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today appears without a caption in some copies.
It shows Chris Merritt, a tenor, who will give a recital, including works by Berlioz, Haydn, Liszt and Duparc, on Friday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.


Keeping Yourself, and Your Bicycle, Safe
At The Times's request, Charles Komanoff, a board member and former president of Transportation Alternatives, organized a panel of city bicyclists to dispense advice for those who care to join their intrepid breed.
In addition to Mr.
Komanoff, the panelists were Cindy Arlinsky, T.A.'s director of bicycle programs; Mark Roland, the editor of In Traffic, a magazine devoted to city cycling; Tercio Bretas, a bicycle messenger for Breakaway Courier Systems, and Jeffrey Vogel, a member and former officer of the New York Cycle Club, a recreational organization.
All of them were bicycle optimists, the kind of people who, asked about the virtues of New York as a cycling venue, pointed out that the city is so well-lighted that it is just as safe to ride on most streets at night as it is during the day, and that cyclists here don't have to worry about being stranded because in the event of a breakdown, the subway is there as a backup.


Judge Finalizes Parent Switch By Florida Girl
A judge has approved a settlement that gives custody of Kimberly Mays, the girl who was switched at birth, to her biological parents.
Judge Stephen Dakan of State Circuit Court issued an order on Friday that officially granted parental rights to the biological parents, Ernest and Regina Twigg, while preserving the rights of Bob Mays, who reared 15-year-old Kimberly.


The Deadly Art of the Ninja Isn't All That Deadly
Bad Girls  Madeleine Stowe, Andie MacDowell, Drew Barrymore, Mary Stuart Masterson Directed by Jonathan Kaplan R 93 minutes


Tips for Making the Most of Spring Ingredients
SPRING in the Northeast may bring warmer weather, but before the end of May it offers relatively little to entice the cook.
The artichokes, strawberries and even the fresh herbs that enhance springtime menus are rarely from local farms.
Never mind.
The season still calls for assembling menus that are lighter, featuring ingredients that suggest the season.


The Guy Behind the Voice
JUST as humble humans can rise to greatness under the pressure of events, even the lowliest horses can show a flash of the Secretariat spirit.
So it was in the first race at Belmont Park on its second day of racing.
The purse was modest.
The talent was suspect.
But the stretch drive was a thriller, and Tom Durkin, the track announcer, cranked it up.


Randy M. Mastro, Jonine L. Bernstein
Jonine Lisa Bernstein, an epidemiologist at New York University Medical Center, was married yesterday in New York to Randy Michael Mastro, the chief of staff to Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani, who performed the ceremony at Gracie Mansion.
Dr.
Bernstein, 35, graduated from Brown University, received a master's degree in biometry from the University of Southern California and a Ph.D. in epidemiology from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Calvin and Roslyn Bernstein of Hollywood, Calif.
Her father, a commercial photographer and director, owns Dove Films, a production company in Hollywood, of which the bride's mother is executive director.


Michael S. Hokin and Dana J. Brown
Dana Jill Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Brown of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Selig Hokin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Hokin of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Essex House in New York.


Darkness at Noon


Political Notes; Queens G.O.P. Postpones Its Decision
For the second time in a month, the Queens Republican Committee has refused to endorse a candidate for governor, deciding to remain uncommitted until the party's state convention in New York City May 23-25.
The decision, made on Friday night, is at least a partial victory for Senator George E. Pataki, who is heading into the convention as a front-runner for the party's designation.


Western Music Is Not the End-All
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "Why West Is More Than West"  [ April 10 ]  makes a number of questionable points in supporting a recently proposed national curriculum for arts education, while saying little about how such a curriculum would actually work.
Instead, he quotes minimally to make an ethnocentric call for what he sees as "the creation of a 'shared culture' . . . that can 'transcend and universalize' contemporary concerns based on gender and race." I fear that the only thing likely to result from his approach would be that traditional music continues to be swallowed up, digested and regurgitated in the most salable form -- a process now going on.


A Century of The Circus, Preserved
THE world of the circus is a world of mystery, excitement, apprehension and thrills, all rolled into one.
For children, the wonder of the circus is best experienced sitting in the dark, eyes wide, a tingle of excitement shivering up the spine.
For adults, that magic is magnified by a behind-the-scenes look at the circus in all its glitter and glory.
And that is precisely what you get at the Circus World Museum, in Baraboo, Wis.
The museum is less than an hour's drive from Madison, the state capital, and an easy day trip from Chicago.
I confess that at first I was reluctant to visit the museum.
The magic of the circus is under the big top, not stuffed between four walls.
But the Circus World Museum is like no other museum you have ever visited.


Anne Zahringer And Craig Poler
Anne Moss Zahringer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Zahringer of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Craig Whitney Poler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Poler of Grafton, Mass.
Msgr.
Daniel A. Peake performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
The Rev.
Mark Heilshorn, a Congregational minister and a cousin of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.


Conversion of Methane Gas To Energy Planned at Landfill
UNTIL 1984 the Croton Landfill was the dumping site of much of Westchester's garbage and solid waste.
But beginning in 1996, what might once have been considered science fiction will become reality.
A county program, now in the design stage, will convert the methane gas produced at the landfill into a source of revenue.
The program will use existing technology to capture the methane, a gas that is produced by the decomposition of vegetable matter, purify it and convert it to electricity and compressed natural gas.
Methane at the landfill is now burned off and must be eliminated to prevent the possibility of fire.
The county is also studying the possibility of taking another landfill gas, carbon dioxide, and capturing it for commercial sale.


Norway Cruise
To the Editor: In the l Q &amp; A column on April 3 you replied extensively to a question about the service provided by the Norwegian coastal steamships.
One of the high points of the Norwegian cruise my wife and I took 20 years ago was the Ringve Museum of Musical History in Trondheim.


Another Round


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
ESSEX HORSE TRIALS
Saturday will be the most exciting day of the M &amp; M/Mars/Essex Horse Trials at Gladstone, an expert on equestrian shows says.
The schedule calls for horses and riders to negotiate challenging jumps set into the landscape of Hamilton Farm.
But there will be plenty of skillful action to observe every day of the event, beginning Thursday and ending next Sunday.
The Miller's/United States Equestrian Team Final Dressage Selection Trials will be an added attraction for this 26th year of the Essex Trials -- one of five international events held in the United States that are at least three days long.
The dressage selection, held in conjunction with the Essex event, will determine the United States dressage team for the World Equestrian Games from July 27 through Aug. 7 in The Hague.


The Nominee, in His Own Words: a 'Mandate of Equal Justice Under Law'
The speeches and writings of Judge Stephen G. Breyer, nominated by President Clinton for the United States Supreme Court on Friday, provide a glimpse into his intellect, passions and personality.
His legal opinions for the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit are long on analysis and short on flourishes, reflecting his preference to be understood rather than to dazzle.
He tries to use plain language and everyday examples, for instance using the need to fill a car with gas to make an argument of logic.
He makes few appeals to emotion, but he is passionate about making the law available to people and cites a need for flexibility from the bench.
While his opinions are dry, his personality, and self-deprecating wit, peek through clearly in his speeches and nonjudicial writing.
Following are excerpts.
On His Motivation
From his speech when he was sworn in to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston on Dec. 18, 1980:


At War, Angola's Bread Basket Lives, Barely, on Handouts
Angola's unending civil war has many shifting front lines, but one of the most fixed and strangest runs smack down the middle of Main Street in this provincial capital.
On one side are the rebel Unita forces loyal to Jonas Savimbi, sometimes only boys of 10 or 12.
They are ragged in patchwork uniforms but at least marginally disciplined.
Their commander is a baby-faced 35-year-old nicknamed "Terrible" because of his propensity for killing with a knife instead of a gun.


Gentlemen in the Trenches
THE EYE IN THE DOOR By Pat Barker. 280 pp.
New York:  A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $20.95.


Q. &amp; A.
Subleasing A Co-op to A Diplomat Q I presently sublease my co-op apartment to a foreign deputy consul general.
Although there are three months remaining on the sublease, he is refusing to make any more rent payments and says that he has diplomatic immunity.
Is there any way for me to take such a person to court to recover unpaid rent? . . .
Perry Meyers, Bronx.


Jill Miller, Francois Perrin
Jill Elizabeth Miller, a senior director of marketing at American Express in New York, was married yesterday to Francois Maurice Perrin, the general manager of Essroc, a cement company in Murray Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Arthur Caliandro officiated at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
The Rev.
Daniel Morrisey, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Perrin, 34, graduated from Stanford University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Janet T. Miller of Fort Worth and the late J. Richard Miller.


Power Authority Increases Money for Conservation
The New York Power Authority has increased the money available to promote energy conservation, even as investor-owned utilities are cutting back.
The authority recently set aside another $45 million in loans for modernizing lighting and other electric devices in public schools and community colleges, raising the total available in loans to $280 million, and stretched out the repayment period to 10 years.
Recipients repay the loans from their savings on electric bills.


Commercial Property/The Ian Bruce Eichner Phenomenon; A Deal-Maker's Comeback
IAN BRUCE EICHNER is on the phone with a Florida banker he's never met.
He's talking about a house near Boca Raton that he thinks he may want to buy.
And he is giving her a hard time.
"This house has problems, but I wouldn't be interested in anything without problems," is his answer to one question.
To another comes, "I've built three million square feet in Manhattan and none of it came in on budget or on time." And through it all, he's deliberately mangling words -- busyNASS, princiPAL, architect with the "h" pronounced.


Wall Street; When Things Go Wrong on Wall St.
WHEN detectives probing at the scene of a crime are getting paid by the perpetrators -- or by a perpetrator's boss -- can you count on there being a thorough investigation?
On Wall Street and in corporate America just such a system exists, and it is undergoing its latest test at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
In Kidder's case, a team of legal and accounting sleuths is attempting to piece together how $350 million in profits magically showed up on the books when in fact no one had made a dime.
Kidder's top investigator on the team is Gary Lynch, the Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell lawyer who used to be the top cop at the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Working with him are five other Davis Polkers; an accounting firm; the law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel; and the audit team from General Electric, which owns Kidder.


Sarah P. Sword, Kenneth Lazarus
Sarah Pratt Sword, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Sword of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Kenneth Brett Lazarus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Lazarus of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wallace M. Alston Jr., a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz officiated jointly at Pretty Brook Farm.
The bride, 30, is an account executive at Schofield &amp; Company, a public relations company in Boston.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is a managing director and the founder of Wm.
Sword &amp; Company, investment bankers in Princeton.


French Menu, River View and Theater
RARELY have two buildings complemented each other so well as the Goodspeed Opera House and the adjacent Gelston House in East Haddam.
Both are in Italianate style, perched grandly on a bluff above the Connecticut River.
Having a place for his operagoers to eat and stay overnight was an important consideration to William Goodspeed when he chose a building site in 1883 (30 years after the inn opened).
It is just as important today, and having the Gelston House reopened after a five-year hiatus is welcome news indeed.
Being able to park behind the theater, dine at reasonable cost on the theater menu, then walk unhurriedly the few steps to the theater makes for a happy, stress-free outing.
Even better news is that the Gelston House (now under the same ownership as Goodspeed) is first-rate.


Apartheid Homelands: A Messy Inheritance
The new parliament building, smelling of freshly polished wood and brass, is abandoned, unlocked and unguarded.
In the lobby of the Law and Order Ministry, a trash can overflows, spilling cola cans and old chicken bones onto the floor.


As Shouting in Jericho Dies, Palestinians Turn to Details
With the celebrating mostly finished, Palestinians in Jericho got down today to the nuts and bolts of running their own affairs after 27 years of Israeli occupation.
"The devil is in the details, and there are many of them," said Saeb Erakat, a local leader who has been named to the Palestinian National Authority that will oversee the self-rule just getting under way in Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Black and James and Hard-Sell Social Work
EVERY day for two months last year, James Lewis would go to the squatter's encampment on the Esplanade under the F.D.R.
Drive and get right up in Tyrell King's face and say, "Howya' doin', Black? My name is James," and when Mr.
King just glared at him, Mr.
Lewis would say, "See ya tomorrow," and walk away.
"I wanted him, I wanted him bad," said Mr.
Lewis, as he strolled around the Bleecker Playground in the West Village the other day, waving back at old women and young mothers grateful to see him.
"Black was the leader. They called him 'The Teflon Don' because he was so smooth."


Some Indians See a Gamble With Future In Casinos
THE rise of gambling halls on Indian reservations from California to Connecticut has added a layer of confusion to what Americans think about the Indians among them, but to the tribes themselves, it has focused attention on a centuries-old question: survival.
Among the clan mothers and other traditional leaders of the Iroquois in Western New York, and among Oglala Sioux elders in the Black Hills of South Dakota, casinos are feared as a threat to the communal way of life they have struggled to preserve.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PSYCHOLOGY  OBSESSION  The Bizarre Relationship Between  a Prominent Harvard Psychiatrist  and Her Suicidal Patient.
By Gary S. Chafetz  and Morris E. Chafetz.
Crown, $25.


The Sandman Doesn't Call Only When You're in Bed


Decks Need Cleaning and Other Maintenance at Least Yearly
OUTDOOR decks need cleaning and other maintenance at least once a year.
Spring is a logical time for that.
It is before winter damage can worsen and before outdoor entertaining begins in earnest.
Ordinary washing can brighten most decks.
Use a stiff-bristle brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong detergent or trisodium phosphate, the high-phosphate powder that can be used where it is legal.


The Deadly Art of the Ninja Isn't All That Deadly
Clean Slate  Dana Carvey, Valeria Golino, James Earl Jones Directed by Mick Jackson PG-13 107 minutes


Janet Malcolm's Opinions
To the Editor:
As a friend and colleague of Janet Malcolm's and a great admirer of her work, I read Caryn James's review of "The Silent Woman: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes" (March 27) with interest, but also with some puzzlement.


1786 and All That: Dusting Off Some Pages of Medical History
For 30 years a major piece of Brooklyn's medical history was kept in boxes in a dusty subbasement at the State University of New York Health Science Center in East Flatbush, out of reach of scholars and other Brooklyn history aficionados.
But with a $52,000 grant from the National Historical Publications and Records Commission, the one-of-a-kind documents, including manuscripts as old as 1786 and as recent as 1950, will be properly catalogued and made available to the public.


CROSSING LAKE MESSINGER
Thanks to the efforts of local politicians like Ruth Messinger, national environmental organizations and the 30,000 Indians of New York City, Con Edison recently canceled the second of two multibillion-dollar contracts it had signed with the Quebec utility that is considering building the James Bay II hydroelectric project.
Rather than finance a megaproject far from home, we hope that Con Edison may now use this money locally.
ROSEMARY RICHMOND Executive Director American Indian Community House Inc.
New York, N.Y.


Word for Word/Stephen G. Breyer; Stops Along the Paper Trail Of a Supreme Court Nominee
AMONG the contentious philosophical matters dividing modern judges is the question of legislative history: whether it is legitimate to use the background of a law -- the speeches and debates about its meaning and purpose -- to help determine its correct interpretation.
Judge Stephen G. Breyer, who was nominated by President Clinton Friday for the Supreme Court, is among the energetic defenders of the practice; his colleague-to-be, Justice Antonin Scalia, is the leading critic. (The Scalia faction argues that the language of a statute is all that counts.) In January 1992, in the Southern California Law Review, Judge Breyer tried to turn Justice Scalia's view on its head by showing that even this opponent of legislative history depended on it in one of his opinions.
Even the strongest critics of the use of legislative history concede that a court should take full account of any special meaning that a statutory word may have.
The word "standing," for example, means something quite different in a statute than on a subway poster because the word carries with it a host of technical meanings growing out of context, case law and history more generally.
Presumably the critics see nothing wrong with looking to history to help determine whether a particular word has a specialized meaning and, if so, what sort.
But why should that history specifically exclude legislative history?


DMZ ASAP, Says City Island
A year ago, Jane Ferrero says, a bomb blast blew open a locked door in the kitchen of her two-story, red-brick colonial house on City Island.
Two years ago, a powerful explosion cracked her second-floor ceiling, she says.
And she says she has replaced more windows than she cares to count.
"I sat for 20 minutes trying to calm myself," says Mrs.
Ferrero, recalling the blast that blew open the door.
"I was so frightened. I thought there had been an explosion inside my house."


A Cautionary Tale From the Other Side
When Rochelle Zabarkes opened her multi-ethnic spice and condiment store at 75th Street on the east side of Broadway with high hopes in May 1991, one of the first to welcome her to the neighborhood was Harold Seybert, a partner in Fairway Fruits and Vegetables across the street.
"Nearly every day just after I opened, Harold would yell over to me, 'Hey, girlie, don't you know you're on the wrong side of the street?" Ms.
Zabarkes remembers.


Miss O'Grady, Mr. Prato
Bernadette Marie O'Grady, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin F. O'Grady of Malverne, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory Paul Prato, a son of Salvatore C. Prato of Armonk, N.Y., and Loretta V. Prato of Cross River, N.Y.
The Rev.
Andrew J. Garavel, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Mariners Chapel of the United States Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, L.I.


A Rara Avis Far From Home
I do not ordinarily expect to see flamingos in England.
That June evening I was strolling aimlessly in Lynmouth, a small village in North Devon nestled under Exmoor's cliffs.
In season, tourists throng to Lynmouth, and its shop windows held an assortment of souvenirs, from Exmoor fudge to sheepskin slippers to bottles of "scrumpy," a potent local cider.
I glanced without interest at these familiar offerings -- until I suddenly saw the flamingo.
Perched on a heap of commemorative mugs and cottage-shaped teapots was a large, coral-pink, cloth bird.
Its head drooped from an extravagantly curved neck, and from a plump stuffed body, floppy cloth legs hung down at least three feet.
It was actually quite handsome.
Sewn from hand-printed quilted fabric, it had rather abstract gray feathers and a bravura splash of black for eyes and beak.
Cheerfully exotic, this flamingo had landed on an improbable shore of craggy cliffs, heather-covered moors and dark woods.
One bright eye seemed to be winking at me.


The Kukoc Disgrace: He's Too Different
It's a money thing, people have said, about this resentment of Toni Kukoc that Scottie Pippen has carried around for years, often wearing it on his sleeve.
It's about contracts, and ego, about attention and adolescent-like privation.
It's about Pippen's awkward attempts to set his team's agenda, to Be Like Mike.
All those elements, in addition to another horrifying fourth-quarter meltdown, precipitated Pippen's incredible, indefensible refusal to play the final 1.8 seconds of the Bulls' 104-102 victory over the Knicks Friday night.


Beats Return to Washington Square
FOR the television generation, the word "beatnik" conjures up the image of Maynard G. Krebs, Dobie Gillis's erratic pal on the old sitcom who had a scruffy goatee, wore disheveled clothes, and read poetry.
But when professors at the School of Education at New York University talk about the beats, they mean the literary and artistic movement of the late 40's and 50's that they think continues to influence today's world.
The Beat Generation will be celebrated this week in a six-day program that will include a conference, art exhibition, a film festival and poetry readings.
Those who are scheduled to take part in the event include Allen Ginsberg, David Amram, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Ann Charters, Hunter S. Thompson, Michael McClure and Jan Kerouac.


Becker Will Take On Sampras in Final
Playing with patience, and helped by an adversary who was missing in action for large stretches of the match, Boris Becker eliminated Goran Ivanisevic, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5), today to reach the final at the Italian Open.
Becker, who has never won a tournament on clay, will face top-seeded Pete Sampras, who has won only one, in the title match.
Sampras scored a 6-1, 6-2 victory over the unseeded Czech Slava Dosedel in the day's other semifinal.
Varying his speeds and tempo deftly to defuse the Croat's baseline game, Becker tiptoed through the first set in only 33 minutes.
By pinpointing his slice backhand at Ivanisevic's feet, Becker knocked his opponent totally out of sync and sapped his confidence.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Lowest Air Fares chart on May 1 omitted a carrier under the heading "Unrestricted Fare." The airline, Lufthansa, matches the lowest unrestricted fare, $1,248, available on the New York-Frankfurt route.


A Boy in Search of Respect Discovers How to Kill
Cynthia Kierstedt's 15-year-old son, big as a linebacker, foolish as a child, was handcuffed to the wall of a Brooklyn police station house.
He had just been arrested in the killing of a man who delivered candy bars to bodegas.
Ms.
Kierstedt cried and hollered at Shaul to give her a reason, but he just hung his head.
He later said he had robbed the man so he could buy a pair of Nikes to replace his three-month-old pair.
"The sneakers I had was messed up," he said.
"I'd walk down the block and people who know me would start laughing."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
UPPER EAST SIDE  $5.05 million
1049 Fifth Avenue (86th St.)  4-bedroom, 7-bath, 4,661-sq.-ft. penthouse condo in reconfigured prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, family room, 4 terraces; common charge $4,312, taxes $51,774, listed at $5.6 million, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Sotheby's International Realty)


Traveler's Checks
To the Editor: American Express advertises its two-signature traveler's checks as a convenience to travelers.
Some ads show a separated couple using them in a resort hotel.


Making Do With Less
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was asked at the unveiling of his budget last week how he could cut 15,000 jobs from the city payroll without devastating city services, he made it sound simple enough.
"I'm going to ask people for something revolutionary," he said.
"Work harder. Work a little harder."
The fact is, the Mayor has entered unchartered territory, fiscal monitors and budget officials say.
He has said he will cut the 217,000-strong city work force by 7 percent through attrition and by enticing retirements with a $200 million severance program.
At the same time, he has insisted that he can limit the damage to city services by managing better and by shifting employees from one agency to another.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Birds as Baseball Fans
THE Cardinals and Blue Jays were winning, and the ospreys were watching.
"They've got the best seats in the house," Ron Varrichio of Sayville said.


Honoring the Harlem Hellfighters


Fragments Of a Musical Enigma
THERE ARE DESIGNS IN THE NATURAL world with such coherence that examination of a fragment gives a sense of the whole: the whorl of a snail shell, the array of seeds in a sunflower.
A strand of DNA holds within it the inherited characteristics of a human being.
Francois Girard's lovely new film, "Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould," with its miniature views of the Canadian pianist, suggests that both he and his music may have similar properties.
The same cannot be said of most musicians.
Even the greatest player requires a long career to develop gifts and grow into an important artist.
The artistry in individual performances also requires room to unfold.
A fragment usually remains just that; the whole is needed to find the whole.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE By T. Coraghessan Boyle.
Penguin, $10.95.
For the characters in this novel, the road begins in 1907 in Battle Creek, Mich., where they are guests at the sanitarium of Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg, the inventor of cornflakes and exponent of rigorous and purgative cures.
The author's "prose is a marvel, enjoyable from beginning to end," Jane Smiley said here last year.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire By David Remnick.
Vintage, $14.
Winner of the 1994 Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction and named one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The Times Book Review, this account captures the period from 1988 to 1991, when the Soviet Union -- and Communism itself -- was collapsing.
Mr.
Remnick gives detailed portraits of the people involved, from Soviet leaders and party functionaries to ordinary workers.
Last year our reviewer, John Lloyd, said, " 'Lenin's Tomb' is an extraordinary confluence of observation, hard work, knowledge and reflection; a better book by a journalist on the withdrawing roar of the Soviet Union is hard to imagine."


Suzanne Bachner, Neil P. Hillan
Suzanne Jouve Bachner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Bachner of New York, was married yesterday to Neil Patrick Hillan, a son of Joan Hillan of Bingham, Nottinghamshire, England, and the late John Montgomery Hillan.
Judge Jane M. Bolin, a retired judge of the Family Court in Manhattan, officiated at the Mayfair Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Bachner, who is 24 and is keeping her name, is an administrative assistant at Pindar Press in New York.
She is also a playwright and a translator from Norwegian to English.


Wartime


The Guy Behind the Voice
JUST as humble humans can rise to greatness under the pressure of events, even the lowliest horses can show a flash of the Secretariat spirit.
So it was in the first race at Belmont Park on its second day of racing.
The purse was modest.
The talent was suspect.
But the stretch drive was a thriller, and Tom Durkin, the track announcer, cranked it up.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; A New Leaf
When the anti-smoking movement meets the law-and-order movement, look out.
Sheriff Larry Powell recently took spinach off the menu of the McPherson County, Kan., jail because he had heard that inmates at another smoke-free lockup nearby hoarded spinach from their meals, dried it, used toilet paper to roll it into cigarettes, and lit them with chewing gum foil stuck into live electrical outlets.
He feared the same would happen in his domain.


Cheryl Lesnewski, Thomas Hannan
Cheryl Anne Lesnewski, a consultant at Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software in Paramus, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Patrick Hannan, an associate at J. P. Morgan Services in Stanton, Del.
Archbishop Philip M. Hannan of New Orleans, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


From Soup to Nuts
As the shadows lengthen and life's menu grows shorter, I have been forced to shed certain nonessential baggage and fanciful yearnings.
Hair.
Bone mass.
Annoying acquaintances.
Cigarettes and butter.
A wistful ambition to play second base in the major leagues.
And now dinner.
It came first as a proposal from a doctor -- one of those casual suggestions that sound crackpot at first.
Or second.
Try not eating after 3 in the afternoon, he said when I complained of periodic sleeplessness often accompanied by an acid reflux.
"But what about dinner?" I asked.
He looked at me with a pitying, lopsided smile, as if I had questioned why he had to puncture the skin in order to take blood.
"Skip it," he said.
He meant dinner.


Real-Life Dynasty; Benazir Bhutto
In all the world there cannot be another plane quite like the official jet of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto.
The front section is a kind of office-cum-nursery, jammed with toys, briefcases, newspapers, nannies and Bhutto's children, Bilawal, 5, Bakhtawar, 4, and Asifa, 1.
In the main cabin, political advisers, security commandos and generals are keeping an eye on the Prime Minister they cautiously support.
"Hullo, gentlemen. . . . Hullo, babies," Bhutto calls as she enters the plane.


Laime Vaitkus, C. M. Hattenbach
Laime Vaitkus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Vaitkus of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., is to be married today to Charles Matthew Hattenbach, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Hattenbach of Norwalk, Conn.
Rabbi Jacob Lantz is to officiate at Cobb's Mill Inn in Weston, Conn.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 24, graduated from Clark University, and each received a master's degree in journalism, she from Boston University, he from Northeastern University.


The Monster In the Mists
REMEMBERING SATAN By Lawrence Wright. 205 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
SUGGESTIONS OF ABUSE True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma.
By Michael D. Yapko. 271 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
UNCHAINED MEMORIES True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found.
By Lenore Terr. 282 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $22.


May 8-14: Neo-Fascists; Italy Says Ciao to the Past; Was That Goodbye or Hello?
With neo-Fascists at his side and in most of Europe's headlines, Silvio Berlusconi took over last week as Italy's new Prime Minister, leading a right-wing alliance that has yet to prove whether it really represents a break from the past.
Most attention has focused on the five neo-Fascists named to his 25-member Cabinet and on fears that, as they evoke the dictatorial past, they may also break the enduring postwar taboo on the extreme right elsewhere in Europe.


The Deadly Art of the Ninja Isn't All That Deadly
Three Ninjas Kick Back Max Elliott Slade, Sean Fox, Evan Bonifant Directed by Charles T. Kaganis PG 99 minutes


Doctor With Art as a Passion
DURING his ceaselessly active day as a professor of medicine, Dr.
Mark H. Swartz supervises cardiovascular education at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, directs the Morchand Center for Clinical Competence at Mount Sinai -- a groundbreaking training program in which actors portraying patients interact in simulated situations with medical students -- and writes textbooks on the art of physical diagnosis that receive rave reviews in medical journals.
Then, if he isn't lecturing on humanistic patient care in some faraway capital -- his most recent speaking engagement was in London -- he returns to the home he shares here with his wife, Dr.
Vivian Hirshaut, an ophthalmologist, and their 16-year-old daughter Talia, and sits down at a computer.
That is when the creative part of his day begins, said Dr.
Swartz, who is apt to stay up half of most nights working on a burgeoning art form -- electronically altered photography.


Tips for Making the Most of Spring Ingredients
SPRING in the Northeast may bring warmer weather, but before the end of May it offers relatively little to entice the cook.
The artichokes, strawberries and even the fresh herbs that enhance springtime menus are rarely from local farms.
Never mind.
The season still calls for assembling menus that are lighter, featuring ingredients that suggest the season.


Shade W. Cronan, Stephen Grahling
Shade Wooten Cronan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Cronan of Madison, N.J., was married there yesterday to Stephen Michael Grahling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary F. Grahling of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Lewis E. Pelkey performed the ceremony at the Madison Presbyterian Church.


Bryan R. Seyfried, Page T. Crimmins
Page Tench Crimmins, a vice president at J. P. Morgan in New York, was married yesterday to Bryan Robert Seyfried, an associate at Goldman, Sachs in New York.
The Rev.
Elizabeth I. Rechter performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Seyfried, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Marcy T. Crimmins of Princeton and of James Custis Crimmins of Atherton, Calif.
Her mother is the executive director of the Princeton Housing Authority.
Her father is the chairman of the Telecoupon Network in San Jose, Calif., a company that provides coupon machines to grocery stores.
The bride is a descendant of Martha Washington.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column on May 1 about programs on religion and the arts misstated the time for a bell-choir concert today at the Reformed Church in Bronxville.
It is at 7:30 P.M., not at 3.


With Most Closers, There's No Lead That Is Safe This Season
It's open season on closers.
The late-inning relief pitching fraternity has never taken such a battering in the first six weeks of a season.
While the veteran Lee Smith and a few new closers and substitute closers have flourished, some of their established and not-so-established colleagues have suffered agonizing developments.
Their teams have suffered with them.
According to figures compiled by the people who operate the Rolaids relief program, relievers, entering yesterday's games, had registered saves 63 percent of the times they had entered games in save situations (218 of 347).
That success ratio is by far the lowest relievers have compiled at this stage of any season since the Rolaids people began tracking blown saves in 1988.


Decks Need Cleaning and Other Maintenance at Least Yearly
OUTDOOR decks need cleaning and other maintenance at least once a year.
Spring is a logical time for that.
It is before winter damage can worsen and before outdoor entertaining begins in earnest.
Ordinary washing can brighten most decks.
Use a stiff-bristle brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong detergent or trisodium phosphate, the high-phosphate powder that can be used where it is legal.


Journal; Wonderful Town
The rebirth of 42d Street, slumbering entertainment crossroads of the world, begins officially on Tuesday, with a ground-breaking for the renovation of the Victory Theater.
Disney's restoration of the New Amsterdam Theater is to follow, right across the street.
But while we wait for these plans to become reality, the most effective if least acknowledged booster of a Times Square renaissance is to be found at another recently renovated playhouse a dozen blocks up Broadway: David Letterman.
For all that has been said about the Letterman phenomenon in the eight months of his ascent -- all the praise, in my view, deserved -- his huge impact on New York has been understated.
It shouldn't be.
Night after night, his "Late Show" is remaking the image of the Big Apple's notoriously rotten core -- and thus that of the city around it -- on a scale that money cannot buy and that developers, urban planners, tourism commissions and politicians cannot match.


Kathryn Wagner, M. F. Cavallon 4th
Dr.
Kathryn R. Wagner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan R. Wagner of North Haven, Conn., was married yesterday to Michel F. Cavallon 4th, a son of Mr.
Cavallon 3d and the late Harriet Baird Cavallon of St.
Simons Island, Ga.
The Rev.
Phillip Washburn performed the Congregational ceremony at Yale University's Dwight Chapel in New Haven.
Dr.
Wagner, 30, is keeping her name.
She received her Ph.D. and M.D. from Johns Hopkins University, where she will begin her residency in neurology in July.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale.
Her father is a professor of psychology at Yale.


Technology; An Alternative Auto Alternator
INVENTING a new alternator for cars and trucks may be the last thing anyone would deliberately set out to do.
For 50 years, the automobile industry has relied on the same basic technology to produce countless millions of alternators, tried-and-true gizmos that do nothing more than convert mechanical power from the engine into electricity for recharging the battery and operating the headlights, horn, radio and such.
Certainly, the founders of the Ecoair Corporation never set out to re-invent the alternator.
But now the tiny startup company, based here, may be on the verge of selling a new type of alternator technology to the Ford Motor Company.
And other auto companies, domestic and foreign, are said to be interested.


Denmark Telling Viking Saga This Summer
Viking marauders made their mark throughout the coasts of northern and western Europe from the 8th to 11th centuries.
In addition to being warriors and sailors, Vikings were also farmers and artisans.
A series of plays and exhibitions commemorating their heritage will be held throughout Denmark this summer.
From May 28 to June 12 historic dramatizations of Viking life will be presented in the Viking House at Fyrkat, near Hobro in Jutland.
Fyrkat is the site of one of four circular Viking forts found in Denmark.


Correction
A profile last Sunday about the Utah billionaire Jon M. Huntsman misidentified a book he had recently read.
It is "Den of Lions: Memoirs of Seven Years," by Terry Anderson.


How Better Scheduling Could Help the B Train
To the Editor:
The headline on an April 17 article poses the question, "How to Help the B Train?" One answer is better scheduling.


Offensive Outburst Helps Elevate Winfield's Status
Twins 8, Orioles 5
Dave Winfield hit two home runs and drove in five runs, moving past Frank Robinson into 12th place on baseball's career runs batted in list and carrying the Minnesota Twins past the visiting Baltimore Orioles, 8-5, last night.


Western Music Is Not the End-All
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "Why West Is More Than West"  [ April 10 ]  makes a number of questionable points in supporting a recently proposed national curriculum for arts education, while saying little about how such a curriculum would actually work.
Instead, he quotes minimally to make an ethnocentric call for what he sees as "the creation of a 'shared culture' . . . that can 'transcend and universalize' contemporary concerns based on gender and race." I fear that the only thing likely to result from his approach would be that traditional music continues to be swallowed up, digested and regurgitated in the most salable form -- a process now going on.


Robert J. Mazzone, Kimberlee Kiner
Kimberlee Anne Kiner, a daughter of Ralph M. Kiner of Palm Springs, Calif., and the late Barbara Ann Kiner, was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Mazzone, a son of Judge and Mrs.
A.
David Mazzone of Wakefield, Mass.
Judge Mazzone performed the ceremony at Hildene, the Robert Todd Lincoln house in Manchester, Vt.
Mrs.
Mazzone is the director of marketing for Atlantic Foods, a developer of Boston Chicken franchises, and for New York/New England Video, a developer of Blockbuster Video franchises, both in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, the former Pittsburgh Pirates outfielder and member of the Baseball Hall of Fame, is a television broadcaster for the New York Mets.
Her mother was a columnist for The Boston Herald.


In the Region/Connecticut; Stamford and Norwalk Join to Revive Manufacturing
IN a joint project, Stamford and Norwalk will try to revitalize manufacturing in southwestern Connecticut by renovating 240,000 square feet of industrial space.
Backers say the project, which involves one industrial building in each of the two cities, will be undertaken in cooperation with private businesses.
And they say it could bring private investors back into the industrial real estate market.


Viviane de Cordier, Andrew Giangola
Viviane de Cordier, a psychotherapist at the New York Association for New Americans, a refugee resettlement organization in New York, was married last evening to Andrew Jon Giangola, the vice president of communications at Paramount Publishing in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Pease officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Louis Padovano, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review on April 24 about "Sowing the Seeds of Democracy in China," by Merle Goldman, referred incorrectly to the journalist and historian Dai Qing.
She is a woman.


Let's Go Get Stocious
To the Editor:
Regarding the hymn from "Watt," sung by Samuel Beckett and John Montague in Paris in the days before Beckett died: It is also sung by Krapp, albeit unsuccessfully, in "Krapp's Last Tape."  EDWARD NAWOTKA  New York


Depths of a Salesman
THE FORCE By David Dorsey. 315 pp. New York:  Random House. $23.


The Deadly Art of the Ninja Isn't All That Deadly
The Inkwell  Directed by Matty Rich R 112 minutes


Right, Then: Your Policy Covers Fido For Therapy
FOR hundreds of thousands of Britons, it is a sterling example of affordable, privately financed health care coverage that works.
With modest annual premiums of less than $150, there is a full menu of coverage for surgical and medical procedures, from hip replacements to acupuncture; reimbursement for the costs of medical tests and physiotherapy, and even a lump sum payment of cash to replace the insured, once he or she, as they say, passes on.
But unlike Britain's National Health Service, which relies on taxpayer revenues to provide health care for every man, woman and child, this insurance plan is for the dogs.
Not to mention cats, horses, budgerigars and the odd boa constrictor, parrot and gerbil.


Dry Barbados
To the Editor: Early this spring I visited Barbados, staying at a house in Sandy Lane Estates, St.
James.
On March 24, water was shut off in the middle my shower at 7:30 A.M.
At 9:30 P.M. there was still no water.
All day I had no shower, no dishwater, no cooking water, no toilet facilities -- in 80-degree weather.
This occurred three other times during my stay.


F.Y.I.
Smell of the Forest
Q.
Is it true that they're using bottled skunk scent to teach children about nature at the Prospect Park Zoo?


Correction
CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a letter on April 24 from Samuel Bernstein of New York omitted an essential phrase.
The letter concerned an April 3 essay by the writer David Leavitt on his dispute with the poet Stephen Spender.
It should have begun in these words (with heavy italics indicating the omitted phrase): "Attacking David Leavitt's right to imagine a story based on a real event is tantamount to attacking the act of creation itself."


Keenan Keeps Up Pressure, Pumps Down the Volume
Well, sure, said Stephane Matteau.
Mike Keenan behaves rather differently now than he did when he coached in Chicago and Matteau played there earlier this decade.
"Before," said Matteau, "he was screaming a lot. He was wild on the bench."
Matteau now plays for Keenan on the Rangers, who begin the third round of the Stanley Cup playoffs tonight against the Devils at Madison Square Garden.
Also noticing the moderation in the boss's demeanor are Matteau's teammates, Greg Gilbert and Mike Hudson, who also worked for Keenan's Blackhawks.


If You're Thinking of Living In/ Highland Falls; In the U.S. Military Academy's Shadow
A ONE-SQUARE-MILE village, Highland Falls is almost completely overshadowed by the neighboring United States Military Academy at West Point.
Cadets in camouflage fatigues can be seen walking down the same 19th-century Main Street where such graduates as Robert E. Lee, Ulysses S. Grant and Dwight D. Eisenhower once walked.
Every year 2.3 million tourists stop at the West Point Visitors Information Center, a large complex at the northeastern tip of this Orange County community.


PRIME MOVERS
1.
NEW ORLEANS The Top of the Mart, purportedly the largest revolving bar in the United States, overlooks the Mississippi and the French Quarter from the World Trade Center on Canal Street.
On a clear day, you can watch the the river unwind for 30 or 35 miles. (Caveat: New Orleans is notorious for haze.) 2.
DALLAS From the Top of the Dome, perched above the plains in the Hyatt Regency Hotel, you can sometimes see all the way to Fort Worth.
Sunsets and electrical storms are on call; the house drink, the Electrical Storm, is a jolt of dangerously alcoholic Long Island iced tea, colored blue and served with a ittle plastic lightning bolt. 3.
COVINGTON, KY.
Riverview Restaurant, Quality Riverview Hotel.
Hillary Rodham Clinton was interviewed here, 18 stories above the banks of the Ohio River, during the 1992 campaign.
Otherwise known for its views of Cincinnati. 4.
SEATTLE The Space Needle.
In "It Happened at the World's Fair" (1963), Elvis Presley serenades Joan O'Brien in this setting as twilight falls over Puget Sound.
He drinks only coffee. 5.
NEW YORK The View Lounge, Marriott Marquis Hotel.
Watch the sun set in chemical splendor over New Jersey.
In the heart of Times Square -- what more needs to be said? 6.
ATLANTA The Sundial Lounge, Westin Peachtree Plaza.
Built by John Portman, the grandmaster of rotating restaurants, atop the tallest hotel in North America.
The Peach State is honored by a peach daiquiri served in a pretty peach-shaped glass.
Atlanta is also the home of Coca-Cola, but so what. 7.
FT.
LAUDERDALE, FLA.
The Pier Top Lounge, Pier 66 Resort and Marina.
High above the Atlantic, where you can spy on submarines and battleships or greet the QE2. 8.
DETROIT From the Summit Lounge in the Westin Hotel, another John Portman design, all of Detroit, to say nothing of parts of Windsor, Ontario, lies at your feet.
The Summit Cloudbuster, a house favorite, consists, once again, of Long Island iced tea.
This time it's tinted green.


Lincoln Center: Symphony of Food
FISHIN' EDDIE * (212) 874-3474; 73 West 71st Street; $$$; all major cards
A short distance from Lincoln Center, this attractive spot offers reliably fresh seafood that is generally well-prepared.
The setting has a rustic feel, with a big iron chandelier, yellow-green faux-antique chairs, painted furniture and blackboards on the walls for daily specials.
For starters there are steamed mussels in white wine and garlic; minestrone with clams; carpaccio of smoked tuna, and grilled shrimp with a white bean salad.
Among main courses are blackened catfish served with sweet potato fries and cole slaw; roast cod with garlicky mashed potatoes; baked brook trout stuffed with mushrooms and leeks; linguine tossed with clams, garlic, prosciutto and tomato, and roasted salmon set over saffron onions and served with aioli. (Review: 4/24/92)  CAFE DES ARTISTES ***  (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $$$; all major cards
Housed in a turn-of-the-century building, Cafe des Artistes is one of the most romantic restaurants in New York.
Its old world setting, bursts of colorful flowers and sylvan murals contribute to an ambiance of warmth and gentility.
One can start with something as rustic as duck foie gras terrine with cracklings and brioche toasts, or brandade de morue, the garlicky puree of cod and potatoes served gratinee.
Other good options are Manila clams steamed in garlic and white wine; leek and asparagus vinaigrette, and ripe tomatoes tossed with white anchovies, sweet onions and basil.
Lusty entrees include pot-au-feu with its marrow bone and vegetables; duck confit; herb-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes, and soft-shell crab prepared three ways: sauteed with almonds, stuffed with crabmeat or grilled. (Review: 4/6/90; article: 1/17/92)


A Prophecy Written In Holy Water
On a shelf in my kitchen is a tiny transparent glass bottle filled with water, clear but for a cloud of some feathery substance that has been growing slowly over the past 16 years and now resembles a fuzzy white slipper on the brown foot of the cork.
The water comes from the Ganges, from the banks near the burning ghats of Varanasi.
I have never cared to speculate about what the white cloud might be.
The water was given to me by a Hindu holy man in 1977, when I traveled with my husband to India.
I had never seen the swami before and never saw him again.
I gathered he made his living selling Ganges water to tourists.
I gave him some rupees, and he gave me the bottle of water.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  JAPAN'S BUREAUCRATS CHALLENGED  Japanese bureaucrats are accustomed to acting as they choose, but a Tokyo neighborhood's challenge of a decision on an elevated railway was a watershed in a freedom of information revolution.  1  NORTH KOREA CHALLENGE TO U.S.
North Korea said it has begun extracting nuclear fuel from its largest reactor without international inspectors present, a process that the U.S. has said could provide material for four or five nuclear bombs. 1


Broadway Business Blues? Well, Cross the Street.
For commercial real-estate brokers on the Upper West Side, it is an age-old debate: Is the west side of Broadway north of 72d Street really financially superior to the east side, a mere 80-foot stroll away?
Many say it was ever thus, calling the east side of the street a lonely "frontier" that has yet to be successfully settled, and citing west side commercial rents that are often 30 to 40 percent higher than equivalent space just across the pavement.


A Little Sex, a Little Dostoyevsky
THE RUSSIAN GIRL By Kingsley Amis. 296 pp. New York: Viking. $22.95.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler  Magazine Part 2


Deals and Discounts
FARES TO EIRE Tower Air will inaugurate nonstop flights between Kennedy International Airport and Ireland in June with fares starting at $199 each way.
Nonstops to Shannon will start on June 19 and operate on Sunday, departing Kennedy at 7:30 P.M. and arriving at 6:30 the following morning; the return flight will leave Shannon on Monday morning.
Nonstops to Dublin, starting on June 24, will leave New York at 9:30 on Friday nights, arriving 8:25 A.M.
Saturday.
Return from Dublin is on Saturday morning.
The $199 fare is good in June and September; in July and August it rises to $229.
Business class costs $50 more each way.
The fares have no restrictions and are fully refundable.
For information: (718) 553-8500 or (800) 348-6937.


The Soul-Searching Downtown
DOWNTOWN Manhattan just cannot shake that empty feeling. Prozac won't help.
For all the money being made on Wall Street these days, the heart of New York's financial district is remarkably quiescent.
Since the peak in 1987, lower Manhattan has lost 100,000 workers in a wave of corporate cutbacks and an exodus to newer and better-equipped offices in midtown, Jersey City and elsewhere in the metropolitan area.
Coupled with the overbuilding of the 1980's, that has left a lot of the owners of downtown's office buildings crying the blues.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
If a dolphin, temporarily removed from the sea for study by humans, communicated its abduction story to other dolphins, that story might be disbelieved ("John Mack's Abductees," by Stephen Rae, March 20).
The skepticism evoked by human stories about encounters with extraterrestrials is understandable in a world as lacking in spiritual perception as ours is.
Once, I, too, would have scoffed.
A number of undeniable experiences, beyond place and time, have forever altered "reality" for me.
Sober, daytime experiences, I might add, and I've yet to see an extraterrestrial.


POSTINGS: Rockefeller Center; A Parking Lot, Pro Tem
For more than four years, the empty lot on the east side of Seventh Avenue between West 49th Street and 50th Streets in mid-Manhattan has been the planned site for the long-delayed Rockefeller Plaza West, a 55-story office complex that will be part of Rockefeller Center.
The half-block lot is still the planned site of the building, but until the commercial real estate market improves and an anchor tenant is found, the Rockefeller Center Development Corporation wants to do something else with the space.
Specifically, the developers want to turn the lot into a parking lot.


Bank-Style Card Eases Welfare's Pain in Camden
In the basement of the Camden County administrative building, welfare evolves from a paper past to an electronic future.
A group of welfare recipients sat patiently watching a videotape.
On screen, a perky actress said that they would no longer have to wait for a mail carrier to deliver their monthly welfare checks, or fumble with food stamps at the checkout line.
Instead, they would be given a blue card, which looks just like a bank card, with which they could withdraw money from bank machines or use directly at grocery stores to pay for food.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THEME AUSTRALIA
The Wadsworth Atheneum goes Down Under next weekend with programs related to its exhibition of Australian aboriginal art.
The museum cafe will serve Australian foods and wines on Friday at 5:30, preceding the showing of four short contemporary Australian films.
An introduction will be presented by Patrick McCaughey, the Atheneum's director, at 7:30.
The films deal with racial and sexual violence, the problems of half-caste aborigines and government-enforced assimilation.
Admission will be $39 for dinner and the films, $5 for the films alone.


Laurie M. Goldstein, Joseph P. DeLuca
Laurie Michele Goldstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold M. Goldstein of Whippany, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Joseph Peter DeLuca, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis J. DeLuca of Winchester, Mass.
Harris T. Lifshitz, a cousin of the bride and a family support magistrate of Connecticut Superior Court in New Haven, is to officiate at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride, 26, is a senior marketing consultant with the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University.
Her father is the manager of the planning and environmental sciences division of Exxon Biomedical Services in East Millstone, N.J.
Her mother, Betty Goldstein, is a group leader with a Weight Watchers franchise in Livingston, N.J.


Emigres Make Chess King
They were compatriots, and suddenly they found themselves citizens of different nations.
Now they are reunited at Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn by a common love for, and prowess in, chess.
A group of 25 students, mostly emigres from the old Soviet Union, has elevated the high school's once-moribund chess team to three consecutive national high school chess championships, the latest won last month at the annual competition in Detroit.


Trouble in the Gardens?
They certainly don't rival the Watts Towers, the Los Angeles landmark of fantasy, folk art and a lot of glass, but the community gardens of the Lower East Side have long been places where New Yorkers have turned a lot of found material into their own artistic obsessions.
In the garden at Sixth Street and Avenue B is the Toy Tower, built 10 years ago by a man named Eddy Boros, destroyed by a snowstorm two years ago and rebuilt from scratch.


Putting Hot Air to Good Use


The Executive Computer; Sharing Sights and Sounds With Your PC Correspondents
DESPITE the profusion of networks, modems and electronic mail, sharing a single computer file long distance has always involved a certain amount of groping in the dark.
That will soon change, as new technologies for mingling data, voice and personal video-conferencing come to a computer near you.
If the Intel Corporation, its collaborators and competitors are successful, video cameras will soon be as ubiquitous an extension of the personal computer as hard disks and printers are today.


9 Cities Win Aid for Math And Science
The National Science Foundation has awarded nine large cities with troubled school districts, from New York to Phoenix, $135 million over the next five years to improve science and math education.
"We are known for our patchwork approach to education, but it does not work," said Ramon C. Cortines, Chancellor of New York City Public Schools, who on Tuesday accepted the award for New York.
"This is a systematic approach. It is not instant Cream of Wheat."


May 8-14: Doubts About Force; Tough Talk on Haiti Is Answered With Defiance
Two and a half years after military leaders seized power in Haiti, their standoff with the United States moved another step last week toward a clash of impatience and intransigence.
Even as President Clinton made clear that he is prepared to consider military force to oust the Haitian army from power, a rump group of right-wing legislators installed an 80-year-old Supreme Court justice, Emil Jonassaint, as Haiti's provisional president.


Peace Outline Has Its Flaws, Bosnians Say
The Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina said today that the peace plan embraced on Friday by the United States, Russia and several European nations is flawed because it does not include a mechanism to insure that Serbian nationalists withdraw from the land they have conquered.
"Once an agreement is reached, I think force should be used to implement that agreement," the Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, said.
"We are looking for guarantees. We are looking for a commitment from the international community."


Let the Music Speak for Itself
To the Editor:
Judging by David Schiff's article "In Brooklyn, a Sandblasting for Stravinsky"  [ May 1 ] , the "Russian Stravinsky" festival sounds much like the story of Tropicana orange juice.
First there was the orange, then the juice in a carton, then the "pulp" was added.
Many of us prefer the orange.


Megan Holbrook, Frederick Vogel 4th
Megan Wells Holbrook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Holbrook Jr. of Greens Farms, Conn., was married yesterday to Frederick Vogel 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vogel 3d of River Hills, Wis.
The Rev.
William Bryant, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Holbrook, 24, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the managing partner in Bradley Resources, a venture investment firm.


Gifts for the Cause
UPTOWN -- It was near midnight on May 5, and the New York Shakespeare Festival's benefit in a tent in Central Park had just ended.
All Kevin Kline, who is an associate producer for the downtown theater, was trying to do was to make a quick exit past the departing patrons, each of whom had something to say to him.
"Nice job, Kevin!"


K. L. Shapiro, M. J. Konigsberg
Kimberly Lee Shapiro, a regional coordinator in the international licensing department of the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation, was married last evening to Michael Jay Konigsberg, a vice president of Lehman Brothers.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
Mrs.
Konigsberg, 25, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Shapiro of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The bride's father is the president of the Lundermac Company, an equipment-leasing company in Dedham, Mass.


Profile; West Pointer Commands Tenneco
BEFORE he ever marches into battle, Dana G. Mead, the chief executive of Tenneco Inc. since February, has always been one to plot grand strategy.
As a West Point professor on leave, he wrote four volumes of the Pentagon Papers report.
Then he went to Vietnam.
Now as a corporate general, Mr.
Mead runs one of the nation's 35 largest industrial companies.
"Plan deliberately; execute violently" is the motto, adapted from General Patton, that he has impressed on his Tenneco troops.
They meekly protest by trying to get him to change "violently" to "aggressively" or something else that's a bit less bellicose.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


How to Fix a Film at the Very Last Minute (or Even Later)
SOME FILMS ARE BORN beautiful.
Others undergo makeovers.
They are put through a ferocious regimen of dieting, sent to charm school and then coaxed, cajoled and bullied into getting out there on stage and bringing the house down.
And if the film is any good, the audience can't tell the difference between the two.
It's a peculiarity of film making that the beautiful images on the screen, unfolding in what can seem like a divinely ordained sequence, are as often as not the result of turmoil, trouble, anguish and even systemic breakdown.
"Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" started out ugly.
The film, directed by Gus Van Sant, is based on Tom Robbins's best seller from the 70's about Sissy Hankshaw, a beautiful hitchhiker with oversize thumbs, and her adventures on an all-girl ranch in Oregon.
It opens on Friday, but moviegoers can be forgiven if they somehow feel as if the film has already come and gone several times.


A Picked-On Nonsmoker Says Turnabout's Fair Play
To the Editor:
My heart goes out to poor, persecuted Sharon B., quoted in the April 24 Coping column, "A Lonely Cry From the Smoking Section." As a smoker, she says, she is a member of "the last group of people you can pick on and still feel good about yourself."


Julia L. Trotman, James H. Brady
Julia Lyman Trotman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley S. Trotman Jr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to James Hampshire Brady, a son of Frances Bradford Peterson of Waynesville, N.C., and Dr.
Henry G. Brady of Clearwater, Fla.
The Rev.
William M. Hale performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Brady, 26, is a marketing representative for Dennis Conner Sports, a sports marketing company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a managing director of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.


Decks Need Cleaning and Other Maintenance at Least Yearly
OUTDOOR decks need cleaning and other maintenance at least once a year.
Spring is a logical time for that.
It is before winter damage can worsen and before outdoor entertaining begins in earnest.
Ordinary washing can brighten most decks.
Use a stiff-bristle brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong detergent or trisodium phosphate, the high-phosphate powder that can be used where it is legal.


W. Graham Claytor, Architect Of Amtrak Growth, Dies at 82
W.
Graham Claytor Jr., who ended a long career in the railroad industry by guiding Amtrak to a measure of prosperity, died yesterday at the Blake Memorial Hospital in Bradenton, Fla.
Mr.
Claytor, who lived in Washington and Holmes Beach, Fla., was 82.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


A Matter of Opinions
It is good news that Judge Stephen G. Breyer, President Clinton's nominee to succeed Justice Harry Blackmun on the Supreme Court, writes his own opinions.
Too often in the past, the Senate Judiciary Committee has neglected to ask nominees for the Court: Do you write your own opinions?
Do you write the first draft?


Hats Bloom In the Park
A fashionable spring ritual, the Central Park Conservancy's Frederick Law Olmsted Awards Luncheon was held on May 4 in a large white tent in front of the band shell.
Many of the more than 1,100 guests wore flower-trimmed hats, evoking memories of the early Easter parades.
Nancy Missett (center at right), one of three people honored for their involvement with the conservancy, walked through the park flanked by two friends.
Applauding John Rosenwald Jr., an honoree, were Betsy Gotbaum (below), a former Parks Commissioner, and Mr.
Rosenwald's wife, Patricia (left).
The third honoree was Fernanda Niven.
The luncheon's proceeds will help support the conservancy's programs.


Sports of The Times; Pippen Lost Something Precious
THE Bulls lost another lead.
The Knicks lost again in Chicago.
Derek Harper lost his cool, which will cost him two games of suspension.
The league lost a little more glamour because of one more ugly brawl.
And Scottie Pippen lost a great big chunk of his reputation.
That was the biggest loss of all.
The Bulls and their fans and the rest of the league now know that in a moment of crisis, Scottie Pippen of the Dream Team and three championships just might let his personal resentments take him out of a game.
Literally.


Evening Hours; Armenian Treasures
An exhibition at the Pierpont Morgan Library, May 3.


Sandra Waugh, Jonathan Stern
Sandra Jean Waugh, a daughter of Hillary Waugh and Mrs.
Kenneth Grubbs, both of Guilford, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Wesley Stern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Stern of New York.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Inn at Mystic in Mystic, Conn.
The bride, 34, is the artistic director of Echo Repertory, a theater company in New York City.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
Her father is a mystery writer and the recipient of two Grand Master Awards from the Mystery Writers of America and the Swedish Academy of Detection.
Her mother, Diana Grubbs, is the administrative assistant in the Secretary's Office of Yale University.


Putting the Squeeze on the Printed Word
THIS story is being written on a Compaq ProLinea computer that was bought at ComputerLand with a MasterCard.
The machine is equipped with XyWrite software (but not WordPerfect, PageMaker or QuarkXpress), and attached to a LaserJet printer.
The person doing the writing has been drinking a soft drink that contains NutraSweet and trying to remember a line from a movie he saw last night, one long segment of which was in CinemaScope.
Shakespeare wondered what's in a name.
This is about what's not in names like those in the preceding paragraph: the space between words that have been pushed together -- unceremoniously yoked by violence, as Samuel Johnson might say -- leaving a capital letter in the middle.
Sometimes these hybrids are invisible to the naked eye -- many newspapers, including this one, often lower-case the second capital letter.
But squeezed-together words do seem to be on the increase.


At Yale Rep, 'School for Wives'
TO marry a stupid wife is smart, Arnolf says, for an educated woman is the devil's tool.
To insure a wife forever true and schooled to specification, the middle-aged Arnolf keeps the young Agnes in seclusion until she is deemed ready to fulfill the three wifely duties he has set forth: "To sew, to say prayers and pleasure me in bed."
Not unexpectedly, Arnolf, outsmarted by Agnes's candor and true innocence, suffers the consequences of his crazed singlemindedness.


Tips for Making the Most of Spring Ingredients
SPRING in the Northeast may bring warmer weather, but before the end of May it offers relatively little to entice the cook.
The artichokes, strawberries and even the fresh herbs that enhance springtime menus are rarely from local farms.
Never mind.
The season still calls for assembling menus that are lighter, featuring ingredients that suggest the season.


We Smoke Around
We are seated in the smoking section.
In fact, we are the smoking section.
A party of five, coughing in counterpoint.
When the waitress appears to take our drink orders, Bob points to a glass container brimming with little pink packets, a vestigial ashtray.
"We'll have five more of those babies," he says to the waitress, "and hold the Sweet'n Low."


No Headline
To the Editor:
In the F.Y.I. column of April 24, about the source of the term "86'ed," the theory is offered that it rhymed with "nix." I remember hearing another theory -- that the term developed during Prohibition at the speakeasy still known as Chumly's, hidden in the back of a courtyard on Barrow Street.


The Very Practical Side of Bell Labs
To the Editor:
In "It's the Birthplace of 300 Channels" (Technology, April 17) Richard R. Green, chief executive of Cable Labs, implied that AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories' scientists and engineers develop things that industry can't use.
In fact, Bell Labs is dedicated to the present and future needs of AT&amp;T's 22 decidedly profit-oriented business units.
Most of our scientists and engineers do work financed by business units that can reduce or withdraw the funds if our work does not meet their market-oriented needs.


THE LAST ALASKAN BUSHRAT
It seems that, more and more, the best our legal system can do is to come down upon those without the money and the clout to thwart it or subvert it to their own interests.
The intent of the law becomes all but irrelevant, while the letter of the law is enforced without discretion by every petty bureaucrat and constable trying to cover his own behind.
RICK ROBINSON New York, N.Y.


BENEFITS
Photography Awards  MONDAY -- The International Center of Photography will hold its annual Infinity Awards dinner at the New York Hilton to honor Henri Cartier-Bresson and Howard Chapnick.
Charles Kuralt will be the master of ceremonies.
Reception at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $450, from (212) 860-1763.
Harlem Museum Benefit  MONDAY -- The Studio Museum in Harlem will hold its 26th anniversary benefit at the museum, 144 West 125th Street.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. in the museum's newly completed sculpture garden, followed by dinner and then champagne, dessert and dancing until 11 P.M.
Tickets, $350, or $100 for dessert and dancing alone, from (212) 260-1070.
For Families of Sick Children  MONDAY -- The Ronald McDonald House of New York City, which provides housing for families near hospitals where their children are being treated for serious diseases, will hold its annual benefit dinner at the Plaza, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Jay Leno will be the master of ceremonies, and Stockard Channing and Matthew Broderick will make presentations.
Stiller and Meara will entertain.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Quilts on Display  MONDAY -- A preview of an exhibition entitled "New York Beauties: Quilts From the Empire State" will be on display at a cocktail benefit from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. at the Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street.
The display of the handmade quilts will benefit the Voluntary Association for Senior Citizen Activities, which maintains 11 camps for the elderly in the New York City area.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 645-6590 or at the door.
Mets vs.
Marlins  MONDAY The Leake &amp; Watts Children's House in Yonkers, which has been providing care for New York area children and their families for more than 160 years, is having a baseball benefit at Shea Stadium.
Before the 7:30 P.M. game between the Mets and the Florida Marlins, there will be a cocktail buffet at 6:30 P.M. in the left field Terrace Suites, where guests can also watch the game.
A bus will leave for the stadium from Park Avenue and 66th Street at 5:15 P.M. and return after the game.
Tickets, $100 plus $15 for round-trip bus tickets, from (914) 963-5650, extension 281 or 362.
Edith Wharton at Home . . .
MONDAY -- Miriam Margolyes, an English actress, will give a dramatic reading of Edith Wharton's short story "Roman Fever" at the Union Club, 101 East 69th Street.
The evening, starting with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by the reading and dinner, will benefit the restoration of the house Wharton designed and had built in Lenox, Mass.
Tickets, $250 for the reception, reading and dinner, or $125 for the reception and reading alone, from (212) 677-9725.  . . .
And in New York  TUESDAY -- The National Academy of Design will hold a black-tie benefit for its exhibition and education programs at its Beaux-Arts town house, 1083 Fifth Avenue (89th Street).
The event will mark the opening of the exhibition "Glancing Backward: Edith Wharton's New York" with paintings, drawings, sculpture and rare books that evoke Wharton's real and fictionalized worlds.
Cocktails and exhibition at 6:30 P.M., dinner at 8 and dancing and dessert from 9 to midnight.
Tickets, $500, or $125 for dancing and dessert alone, from (212) 369-4880.
East Side Tour  TUESDAY -- Seven homes on the East Side, including a penthouse triplex and three combined suites in the Essex House, will be open for a tour from 6 to 9 P.M., a benefit for United Cerebral Palsy.
Tickets, $70, from (212) 683-6700, extension 217.
Art for Foster Children  TUESDAY -- Foster Pride, in association with Sheltering Arms Children's Services, provides art classes for foster children in programs meant to instill a sense of identity and self-worth.
Those programs will be the beneficiary of a cocktail reception from 6 to 8 P.M. at the Georgian Suite, 1A East 77th Street.
Andrea Marcovicci will sing from from 8 to 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 925-7895.
Lung Association Auction  TUESDAY -- The American Lung Association will hold a reception and auction of sports memorabilia, airline tickets and jewelry, among other items, starting with a 6 P.M. reception on the 50th floor of the Equitable Building, 787 Seventh Avenue (51st Street).
Tickets, $30, from (212) 889-3370.
Evening at the Museum  WEDNESDAY -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art will introduce a new event at its annual spring dance: an auction of a birthday party for young and old, involving a treasure hunt through the museum galleries; cooking classes in the Trustees Dining Room; a private tour of the museum conducted by its director, and a behind-the-scenes tour of the museum's notable fakes and forgeries.
Black tie.
Cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner, dancing and the auction.
Tickets, $500, or $125 for the dancing and auction alone, starting at 9 P.M., from (212) 570-3948.
Helping Young Musicians  WEDNESDAY -- John Browning, a pianist, will perform as part of a benefit for Young Concert Artists, which seeks to discover young classical musicians and to help them begin successful careers.
Dinner at Palio at 6:15 P.M. will be followed by the concert at 8:30 P.M. and then a reception, all in the Equitable Building, 787 Seventh Avenue (51st Street).
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, or $250 for the concert and reception alone, from (212) 307-6655.
Fund-Raiser for Eyesight  WEDNESDAY -- The National Association for Visually Handicapped will celebrate four decades of service with a dinner-dance at the Pierre, starting with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Dr.
Stanley Chang, a professor of ophthalmology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, will be honored.
Tickets, $240, from (212) 889-3141.
SoHo Party for Montefiore  THURSDAY -- The Junior Committee of Montefiore Medical Center will hold a benefit for three programs at the Bronx hospital.
From 9 P.M. to 1 A.M., there will be cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and reggae and jazz bands at The Time Is Always Now, an art gallery at 476 Broome Street, near Wooster Street.
The three beneficiaries will be the adolescent AIDS program, the program to prevent lead poisoning and the treatment program for abuse survivors.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 924-0868.
For Local Services Uptown  THURSDAY -- The Washington Heights-West Harlem-Inwood Mental Health Council, which has been providing health, housing and other community services to northern Manhattan for 24 years, is holding a benefit reception and awards presentation from 6 to 8:30 P.M. at the Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street.
State Senator David A. Peterson, Democrat-Liberal of Manhattan, and Ana Pereira, who is active in several community projects, will be honored.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 234-2600.
Straightening Out Inmates  THURSDAY -- The Stay'n Out program of New York Therapeutic Communities, a 16-year-old rehabilitation program for drug-addicted inmates in New York State prisons, will benefit from a concert at Weill Recital Hall.
Jane Stroll, a comedian, will introduce the featured performer, Jamie Knight, a 9-year-old jazz singer.
Tickets, $25, $50 and $75 depending on seat location, from (212) 971-6033.
African Evening at the U.N.
THURSDAY -- Raising money for scholarships to bring African students to the United States is one of the goals of the Phelps-Stokes Fund, which will sponsor a dinner-dance at the Delegates Dining Room of the United Nations.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie or national dress.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 427-8100.
Alzheimer Fund-Raiser  THURSDAY -- The Junior Committee of the New York Alzheimer's Association will hold a spring fund-raising party with hors d'oeuvres and dancing at Ten, 10 East 60th Street, from 7 to 10 P.M.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 983-0700, or $70 at the door.
Voices of the Young  THURSDAY AND FRIDAY -- The New York Young People's Chorus of the Children's Aid Society -- 85 youngsters 8 to 15 years old -- will present a concert, each night 7:30 P.M., at the Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue (64th Street).
On Thursday, a 5:30 P.M. reception at the Cosmopolitan Club, 122 East 66th Street, will precede the concert.
The Friday concert will be followed by a reception at the church.
Tickets for each evening are $10 for adults, $5 for children 12 and under, from (212) 876-9449.
Supporting Theater  NEXT SUNDAY -- In its 25-year history, the Theater Development Fund has subsidized 500 plays, rented costumes at minimum fees and maintained TKTS booths at Times Square and the World Trade Center selling cut-rate tickets to Broadway performances.
The group will hold an anniversary celebration honoring Hal Prince, the theater impresario, starting with a 6 P.M. black-tie reception under a tent in Shubert Alley, followed by a performance by many Broadway personalities at 7 in the Broadhurst Theater, after which guests will return to Shubert Alley for dinner.
Tickets, $500, or $50 for the performance alone, from (212) 221-0885, extension 230.
Children's Museum Carnival  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Children's Museum of Manhattan will hold its annual spring carnival of music, dance, art and an auction at the River Pavilion and Galleria of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
Lunch will be at noon, and the carnival will run until 3:30 P.M.
Tickets, $200 for adults, $50 for children under 17, or $400 for a family package (two adults and two children), from (212) 721-1223.


Arrested Alien: Political Hero Or a Smuggler?
To Federal officials combating the widespread smuggling of aliens from China, Chen Guo Ping is rare catch: a top "snakehead," they say, an organizer of such illicit trafficking in human cargo.
Those usually caught in connection with this China trade are low-level participants, the officials say, making Mr.
Chen's recent arrest in Queens a significant step in the struggle to stem the smuggling.
But where officials last week described Mr.
Chen as a smuggler, able to live as a legal alien in the United States through a marriage of convenience to an American citizen, his lawyer painted a different picture.
He said that Mr.
Chen was innocent of the smuggling charges and that he had been granted legal-alien status in the United States because of his participation in the pro-democracy demonstrations that Chinese troops crushed in Tiananmen Square in 1989.


New York On Two Wheels
Like getting along with your neighbors, keeping a garden or gaining entry to a first-run movie on a Saturday night, bicycling is something that can be done in New York City but is easier almost anywhere else.
The traffic, the potholes, the irksome pedestrians, the windshield glass sprinkled across pavement like salt on a burger -- you stop and start, stop and start.
No rhythm on these roads.
It shouldn't be a surprise for people to learn -- or remember -- that back in the early 80's, when mountain bikes were first becoming popular, they were promoted here as city bikes.
As a New Yorker and a cyclist who rarely cycles in New York, I've never felt that simply wanting to ride was enough of a reason to haul my bike into the elevator, carry it down the front stairs and into the street and then begin the ongoing abrasive discourse with the urban elements that city cycling requires.
Elsewhere people ride bikes expressly for recreation, but New York is a place where a meandering, relaxing spin for its own sake is not just ill-advised; it's probably impossible.
There are the circular drives around the various parks, of course, but it seems as though the cyclists there travel only in fast-moving packs, which, for the independent practitioner, turns the enterprise of bike riding into a kind of join-them-or-die proposition.


UP AND COMING: Audra Ann McDonald; A Young Singer Grasps the Brass Ring
WHAT TO DO WHEN you're an aspiring 23-year-old actress and you faint dead away during the final, crucial audition for one of Broadway's most anticipated musical revivals?
"Get right back up and do it again," said Audra Ann McDonald.
As a trouper who's been performing since the age of 9, no other option was conceivable.
And so, Ms.
McDonald picked herself up and sang her audition song, "Mister Snow," a second time (she'd fainted after the first run-through).
Then she delivered a reading from the script.
And then she got the part: that of Carrie Pipperidge, the wise and witty mill-working gal pal of the lovestruck Julie Jordan in Nicholas Hytner's "Carousel," the Rodgers and Hammerstein classic.


If Not Sardinia, It Must Be Southampton
CALALUNA is the first hit of the 1994 resort season.
It is fitting that this stylish newcomer, named for a lovely Sardinian beach, is in Southampton, itself known for beautiful beaches.
Pietro Vardeu, born in Sardinia, has broken with the trendy Tuscans to bring authentic Sardinian food to the Hamptons.
Mr.
Vardeu was formerly at Sapore di Mare in Wainscott and later at I Santi in Water Mill.


A Colin Powell Warning on Race Hatred
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told Howard University's graduating class today that blacks could not afford "a detour into the swamp of hatred" and would break faith with their history to "show tolerance" for any philosophy based on ethnic or racial hatred.
General Powell used his commencement address to respond to the recent furor at Howard over the speeches of Khalid Muhammad of the Nation of Islam, speeches that have spurred a national debate over black-Jewish relations.
General Powell defended the university as "rigorously protecting the freedom of speech," noting that the First Amendment "is intended to protect the controversial, even the outrageous word, not just comforting platitudes too mundane to need protection." Listeners' Responsibility
Being host to "controversial speakers who shock our sensibilities" he added, is quite different from endorsing their views.
But General Powell told his audience that the freedom to hear all views bore with it the responsibility to "sort out wisdom from foolishness."


Admirers and Fans Take Note: 'Passion' Will Divide You
BE PREPARED: "PASSION," Stephen Sondheim's hypnotic, rigorous, very risky new work now at the Plymouth Theater, is unlike anything the composer and lyricist has done before.
Though the music is pure Sondheim, we are in Verdi territory.
The place is the north of Italy and the time 1863, when the Risorgimento is winding down and the country's unification is virtually complete.
Yet "Passion" is not a a grand Verdi opera about lovers ennobled by their own strengths and overwhelmed by forces beyond their control.
Rather, it's as if some discarded Verdi libretto had been rewritten by a wicked and ardent witch.
"Passion" is a tale of an obsession so profound that it has the power to create a transforming love where no love before existed.
It seems a completely modern idea that, at heart, is also agelessly romantic.
Alien territory for Mr.
Sondheim.


Roy J. Plunkett Is Dead at 83; Created Teflon While at Du Pont
Dr.
Roy J. Plunkett, the scientist whose accidental invention of Teflon 50 years ago not only changed the way Americans cook but also helped develop a multibillion-dollar plastics industry, died on Thursday at the Wooldridge Place Nursing Home in Corpus Christi, Tex.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Lois.


As Indicated Extends Streak
As Indicated, the star of New York's otherwise dismal winter racing season, won his sixth straight race yesterday when he outran Devil His Due by 2 1/2 lengths in the $600,000 Pimlico Special in Maryland.
Robbie Davis spurred the 4-year-old gelding through the deep homestretch with a powerful move on the outside that snatched the race from Devil His Due in the last strides and kept him from winning the race for the second year in a row.
Valley Crossing finished third, two lengths farther back in a field of six older horses.


Kelley Holland, S. J. Kanengiser
Katherine Kelley Holland, the money and banking editor at Business Week magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Jay Kanengiser, a pediatric pulmonologist and critical-care specialist at Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
Justice Herbert J. Lipp of New York State Supreme Court, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Old Inn on the Green in New Marlborough, Mass.
Ms.
Holland, 35, is known as Kelley and is keeping her name.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman N. Holland of Gainesville, Fla.
Her father is the Marston-Milbauer professor of English at the University of Florida.


Rangers-Devils Matchup: More Than a Local Affair
How quaint that sports fans in the New York megalopolis see the Rangers-Devils playoff series primarily as a local affair, sort of like North High playing South High in an annual Thanksgiving Day football game.
But in fact, this isn't just a New York-New Jersey series.
The whole hockey world is watching.
It is now Seven Games in May between the two best teams in the best hockey league on the planet.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; Doctor, Lawyer, F.B.I. Agent?
What do high-school students want to be?
Would you believe: physical therapist, F.B.I. agent and accountant?
In that order.
The figures come from Careers &amp; Colleges, a free magazine for high-school juniors and seniors.
In each issue, the magazine prints a list of jobs it has covered.
Students can send in for information on any job listed, and the three careers cited were tops among 4,900 requests in 1993.


NEW YORK MAY USE INDUSTRIAL ZONES AS SHELTER SITES
The chairman of the New York City Planning Commission proposed yesterday that zoning regulations be changed to allow increased placement of social-service centers -- including some kinds of homeless shelters and drug clinics -- in neighborhoods now zoned for light industry.
The official, Joseph B. Rose, said the Giuliani administration was "actively considering" the proposal.
It could lead to a major change in the city's approach to equitably locating such services, an issue that has been a political lightning rod in neighborhoods across New York.


Sarah Merians Amy Selverstone, Andrew Silberfein
Amy Lyn Selverstone, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Selverstone of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Andrew Paul Silberfein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Silberfein of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Robert Orkand officiated at the Greenwich Hyatt in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Silberfein, 27, is a training and development instructor at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a psychologist in Westport.
Her mother, Harriet Selverstone, is a library media specialist at Norwalk (Conn.) High School.


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
Is there some special privilege attached to being homeless that turns criminal harassment into mere "panhandling" ("The Business of Begging," by Nicholas Dawidoff, April 24)?
Subway begging is assault.
It is verbal and often physical abuse.
Panhandlers attack the innocent while making a demand, like any mugger or rapist.
Dispatching 4,500 policemen to stop these criminals is not as "uncivilized" as a society in which liberal guilt elevates antisocial behavior to a cover story and citizens hand over money to drug addicts.
Perhaps giving to panhandlers ought to carry the same penalty as panhandling.
NEIL L. GLEIT Forest Hills, Queens


An Honor 100 Years Overdue
A century ago, two firefighters died while battling a large fire in Cobble Hill.
But until now there has been no move to honor the men.
The two firefighters' present-day colleagues at Engine Company 204 would like to install a plaque in their honor inside the red brick firehouse, at 299 DeGraw Street.
They are looking for relatives of the men to invite to the dedication in September during ceremonies to mark the station's 125th anniversary.
But Capt.
Joe Grzelak, the commander of the station, said that finding relatives of the firefighters, Wayne A. Estes and John F. Spaulding, has not been easy.


To Grill or Not to Grill: Learning to Share a Park
To some residents, the stretch of Prospect Park near the band shell along Ninth Street in Park Slope is a great place to barbecue.
But to others, the barbecuing means only the nuisance of litter and smells.
Now, the issue, which has increasingly pitted residents of the neighborhoods surrounding the 526-acre park against one other, is being addressed by park officials, who have mapped out a compromise.


School Crowding and the Budget Debate: What's at Stake?
The overcrowding in city schools is already bad, and it seems sure to get worse over the next few years.
Just how the city should, or can afford to, deal with the situation is one of the latest issues of contention between Mayor Giuliani and the Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines.
Citywide, enrollment rose above a million students this year, for the first time in 15 years, and Board of Education officials predict that it will grow by 125,000 students over the next five years.
Enrollments in 15 of the 32 school districts already exceed building capacities.


Ellen Ginsberg, Edwin Nusbaum
Ellen Cheryl Ginsberg, a daughter of Marian R. Ginsberg and Morton L. Ginsberg, both of Fort Lee, N.J., is to be married today to Edwin Joseph Nusbaum, a son of Harvey and Marilyn Nusbaum of Belle Mead, N.J.
Rabbi Frederic Pomerantz is to officiate at the Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange, N.J.


A Little P.C. Might Help
To the Editor:
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry when reading the capsule reviews in your new guide to children's movies  [ "From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina," April 17 ] .
Janet Maslin commented on the negative portrayal of Icelanders, not exactly your most maligned group, in "D2: The Mighty Ducks," but the reviewer of "Thumbelina," Patricia S. McCormick, gave not one word of warning about the prejudicial treatment of Latin Americans.
The arch villains in this story are toads, all of whom the movie portrays as Latinos.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  High above the finish line, his binoculars trained on the track, Tom Durkin is the undisputed voice of horseracing in New York, capable of going 7 furlongs in 70 very finely articulated seconds.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Wall Street, the industry, may be booming, but corporate cuts and moves have left Wall Street, the place, strangely empty.
What, then, is the future of its grand old monuments to capitalism?


Ms. Hubbard, Mr. Ragsdale
Katherine Fullerton Hubbard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Hubbard of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to Smith Fensom Ragsdale, a son of the late Clifton and Dr.
Jean Ragsdale.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Hubbard, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wittenberg University and is studying for a master's degree in creative writing at New York University.


Corrections
An article on May 8 about Upper East Side hospitals misstated the capacity of the Guggenheim Pavilion at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
It has 625 beds, not 362.


Ms. Ippolito, Mr. Zetterstrom
Loretta Ann Ippolito, an associate at Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm, was married yesterday to H. Erik Zetterstrom, an industrial engineer for the Long Island Lighting Company in Hicksville, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert Romano performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Ippolito of East Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Her father is a urologist at Methodist Hospital and at Long Island College Hospital, both in Brooklyn.


Paula A. Chin And John Saar
Paula Ann Chin, an associate editor at People magazine, and John Saar, a senior editor at Time magazine, both in New York, are to be married today.
The Rev.
George Robinson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the couple's apartment in New York.


Washington Also Has a Role in Boating Safety
To the Editor:
We agree with "Alabama's Boat Law" (editorial, April 30), that other states should copy much of Alabama's new boating safety law.
Getting drunk operators off the waterways and everyone into life preservers could cut boating fatalities at least 50 percent.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; Beetlemania on Wall Street
A rare insect has been discovered on Wall Street.
The creature appeared in the vault of a downtown securities firm, and in those of a jeweler and other companies.
The insects weren't eating money.
But they were dropping dead in unsightly heaps.
So baffled pest control experts called Louis Sorkin, a forensic entomologist at the American Museum of Natural History.
Sorkin's verdict: the insect was Micromalthus debilis, the telephone pole beetle, a problem for the vaults, but a rare find for Sorkin.


Wall Street; Institutions' Money Keeps Pouring Into Stock Funds
STRONG stomachs have been the rule this year among stock fund investors, who have continued to pour money into equity mutual funds even though these investments are down almost five percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services.
In fact, in the week ended last Wednesday, more cash cascaded into the growth category of stock funds than any time since the opening days of 1994, according to AMG Data Services in Arcata, Calif.
But those numbers may overstate individual investors' appetite for stock funds.
Robert Adler, proprietor of AMG, noted that of the $1.8 billion that flowed into growth funds, the bulk -- $1.4 billion -- surged into a single fund: Fidelity Magellan.
And Fidelity confirmed that institutions, more than individuals, have been flooding the fund with cash.


Dispute Holds Up U.S. Extradition Treaty With Mexico
After months of negotiation to revise the United States extradition treaty with Mexico, American officials say they are holding up ratification of the accord because of Mexico's refusal to surrender a man convicted of kidnapping and raping a 4-year-old girl in California.
United States officials say President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and other senior Mexican officials promised to try to extradite the Mexican man, Serapio Zuniga Rios, in their effort to win approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The assurances were among the concessions demanded of Mexico by members of Congress in return for their votes.


Voyager


When Dogwood Lights Up the Land
THE name has absolutely nothing to do with man's best friend.
But who cares?
When the dogwood trees are in bloom, everything seems right with the world.
Actually, the name dogwood is an adulteration of "dagwood," referring to a time when the wood was used to make daggers for skewering meat.
The tree belongs to the huge Cornus genus, which contains about 60 species.
They range in size from the low-to-the-ground bunchberry (Cornus canadensis) to the stately Northwestern tree, Cornus nuttalli, which can be more than 70 feet tall.


Constance Boyle And Saif U. Khan
Constance Anne Boyle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian T. Boyle of New Springville, S.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Saif Ullah Khan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Muhammad Nazir Khan of Quetta, Pakistan.
Samuel A. Spina, the Mayor of West Orange, N.J., is to officiate at Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange.
Miss Boyle, 35, is the nursing care coordinator for the Richmond Kidney Center and Richmond Stat Dialysis in Sunnyside, S.I.
She graduated from the Beth Israel School of Nursing in New York.


May 8-14: Whose Freedom First?; Congress Moves to Deter Abortion Clinic Attacks
Outraged by bombings, shootings and other violence at abortion clinics, Congress did something last week that even  some abortion opponents applauded: it made them a Federal crime.
The idea was to focus Federal power on protests that have overwhelmed local police and frightened away women seeking medical help.
After the Senate's 69-to-30 vote (and President Clinton's expected signature), protesters will face up to 10 years in prison and $250,000 in fines for violent acts.
"The health of American women hangs in the balance," Senator Barbara Boxer of California said.


South Africa Sanctions Didn't Undo Apartheid; On the Front Lines
To the Editor:
In "Joy, and Fear, Across the Limpopo" (news article, April 30), you describe reactions to South Africa's elections by its neighbors, and note that these countries once called themselves "front-line states" to "conjure up an image of bellicose relations" with South Africa.


Business Diary, May 8-13
THE ECONOMY Inflation?
It's Like Prosperity, Just Around the Corner  An old New Yorker cartoon pictured an eager homeowner, rake in hand, rushing to nab the first autumn leaf to invade his lawn.
Those who keep crying "inflation" seem equally zealous, for the statistics just keep telling a different story.
Look at last week's numbers: consumer prices rose just 0.1 percent in April, while at the producer level inflation vanished altogether, with prices actually falling 0.1 percent.
In addition, retail sales were down for the month, and initial jobless claims took an unexpected turn upward.
But is all this going to stop the Federal Reserve from raising rates yet again when it meets on Tuesday?
The financial markets don't seem to think so, for even though bond rates fell a bit and stocks rose on the price reports, there was no euphoria.
The Fed, economists keep saying, is watching for inflation way out on the horizon.
Those with a short view probably wouldn't even dig the rake out of the garage until the lawn was covered with leaves.


Broader Backing for the Buick Classic
IT is 8:30 on a bright May morning and several corporate outings are already in full swing at the venerable Westchester Country Club here.
The club holds scores of similar golfing events a year, but none as prestigious as the Buick Classic, a premier event on the P.G.A. tour.
Taking place at the peak of the golf season, June 6 to 12, it serves as a warmup for the United States Open a week later.
The tournament, which has been a fixture at the Westchester Country Club for 27 years, has been sponsored for the last four years by the General Motors Buick Motor Division.
The Classic is also a strong fund-raiser for hospitals.
Contributions are raised through the sale of various business-entertainment sponsorship packages like the Pro-Am tournament or corporate hospitality tents.
For years, large corporations had an opportunity to dispense corporate hospitality by becoming a sponsor.


Bam! Summer Films Stomp In
'TIS SPRING, AND FEATHER-FOOTED through the plashy fen passes the questing vole.
Brooks babble in bed, moths thrill to the drift of pollen through the trees.
Moviegoers twine fingers 'neath marquees for gentle romantic comedies.
"Four Weddings and a Funeral" clingeth atop the charts like a drop of early dew on a gladiolus.
Meanwhile, just over the ridge, summer looms like the snout of a velociraptor.
The huge films, some of them caged up since Christmas, rage to be loosed.
Last year, "Jurassic Park" thundered over the landscape, biting whole limbs off competitors scrambling for audiences.
Arnold Schwarzenegger's "Last Action Hero" was snapped in half; Sylvester Stallone's "Cliffhanger" lost a few toes.


Salzburg
With its Alpine scenery and Italianate Baroque architecture, Salzburg would be a delight even without its lovely sounds.
But as Mozart's birthplace, it is also a shrine to which devotees flock all year, especially during its Summer Festival.
A square near the festival buildings is now Herbert-von-Karajan-Platz, and memories of the great conductor who died almost five years ago linger in Mozart's city, which he dominated.
Yet the committee in charge of the Salzburg festival is striving to go beyond Karajan's conservatism, broadening the festival's cultural scope.


Jack, the Beanstalk and His Marginalized Mother
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES By James Finn Garner. 79 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $8.95.


A Logical Fallacy
To the Editor:
I find it remarkable that a reviewer with credentials as impressive as those of F. Gonzalez-Crussi, a pathologist at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, would repeat without comment Russell Martin's opinion from his book "Out of Silence: A Journey Into Language" (April 10) that his nephew's autism resulted from brain damage due to a vaccination.
I find it reprehensible that the editors of the Book Review would let this assertion pass, apparently without question.


Borrowdale: Up Peaks, Over Tarns
THE winter snow lingered on the high ground of England's Lake District, yet spring was on the way, its advent trumpeted gently by some of those same, hardy daffodils as inspired William Wordsworth.
On the map, the familiar landmarks pointed the way north: Lake Windermere, the biggest of the 15 lakes, and Rydal Mount, once the poet's home.
Then the slow, gentle pass of Dunmail Raise before the somber, pine-bound plunge of Thirlmere, the only artificial lake in the entire region, and for us -- a family spanning three generations -- more personal coordinates: Jacksons' farm at Thirlspot, where we once camped, and the stream where we tried to tickle sleek trout.


POSTINGS: Six-Story SoHo Building; When a Landmark Is Deemed Unsafe
Owners of landmarked property may often wonder what happens when a landmark building is deemed unsafe.
Can it be torn down without approval of the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission?
The answer, as the owners of 46 Wooster Street in the SoHo section of Manhattan recently discovered, is no -- unless, of course, there is an imminent threat to public safety.


Driving on The Safe Side
VACATION time nears, bringing plans for long auto trips to Disney World or the family vacation spot, to pick up children at school or leave them at camp.
Anxiety about driving has surged in recent years because of carjackings and attacks on tourists at roadside rest areas.
The biggest hazard, however, remains motorists themselves: the National Safety Council attributes 70 percent of crashes to driver error.
The following tips for safe car travel are arranged chronologically, in the order they would apply on a trip.


Wife Makes Plea for Jailed Chinese Official
In an unusual public appeal, the wife of the highest-ranking Communist Party official imprisoned after the Tiananmen Square uprising has asked for international help in winning his release on medical grounds.
The case of the former official, Bao Tong, who was expelled from the party for opposing the crackdown on pro-democracy students in 1989, has drawn the attention of the United States Senate and the Clinton Administration.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER EAST SIDE  Saved From Fire, a Church Plans Dancing in the Aisles
Nine months after a fire that caused more than $4 million damage, the Church of the Heavenly Rest is planning a black-tie dinner and dance, the Heavenly Restoration Ball, in the church nave.


No Headline
"As the world goes forward, we cannot start going backwards. African-Americans have come too far, and we have too far yet to go, to take a detour into the swamp of hatred. We as a people who have suffered so much from the hatred of others must not now show tolerance for any movement or philosophy that has as its core the hatred of Jews or the hatred of any other group." GEN.
COLIN L. POWELL, addressing graduates of Howard University.  [ 28:3. ]


The Misadventures of Mario Vargas Llosa
A FISH IN THE WATER A Memoir.
By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane. 532 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Poland's Old Royal City
I BELIEVE THAT MY unconscious is geographical, and its sources are hidden deep in Cracow.
I was born and grew up there in the 1950's, and left in early adolescence; and it was a long time -- 17 years -- before I could return.
Since then, I've visited Cracow on several occasions; and yet, each time I'm surprised that it actually exists, that I didn't dream it, make it up.
But then, if one had to imagine an archetypal, or fairy-tale, city, one might come up with something very much like this.
Perhaps it is the manageable, small scale combined with the density of the past; perhaps the low arches and crooked streets and echoing cobblestones; but Cracow speaks of something close to the center -- not only of Europe but of the imagination.
By contemporary standards, Cracow is provincial in size -- it has a population of around 800,000 -- but it's a town with a grand history and vital traditions and an almost sensuous concentration of architectural beauty; a place confident of its idiosyncrasies, and its own, plentiful sufficiency.
Unlike Warsaw, Cracow was spared destruction during World War II; and the accumulations of its history are evident everywhere, in the venerable landmarks and the texture of daily life.


Construction Below, Opposition Above
PERHAPS because land-use battles are tough to fight hundreds of feet underground, New York City's third water tunnel has faced little organized opposition as it has bored through the boroughs.
But an enterprise of such colossal scale was bound to get snagged somewhere.
And at the Bulova Corporate Center in Jackson Heights, Queens, the tunnel's second stage has reached its first major impasse.
More rough going can be expected in the West Village and lower Manhattan, too.


E. C. Parkinson, J. S. Wyner
Elizabeth Charlotte Parkinson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Parkinson 3d of New York, was married there last evening to Joshua Seth Wyner, a son of Lila F. Hochberg of Washington and David Wyner of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Elizabeth K. Shequine, the town justice of Washington, N.Y., officiated at the Colony Club.
Mrs.
Parkinson-Wyner, 27, is studying for a nursing degree at Catholic University in Washington.
She graduated from Colorado College.
Her father retired as a vice president of Citibank in New York.
Her mother is a social worker at Brooklyn Catholic Charities.


Still Waters
A plunge into the fathomless pool of image . . . where treasure is buried on the surface . . . and women walk on water.


Southwest Ranked No. 1 In U.S. Airline Survey
Southwest Airlines garnered the highest rating in a recently released survey of performance in 1993, replacing American Airlines, which had held the top spot for the previous three years.
The fourth annual report by researchers at the University of Nebraska at Omaha and Wichita State University in Kansas released last month rated airlines in 19 categories, using data from government agencies and the airlines.


Elise M. Kaplan, Jason H. Brett
Elise Michele Kaplan and Jason Howard Brett were married last evening at Temple Beth Torah in Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz officiated.
The bride and bridegroom, both 26, expect to begin residencies this summer in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
Both received their M.D. degrees from Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


Cameroon Tries to Raise a Dream While All ELse is Collapsing
It was a day that sorely tested the patience of the Indomitable Lions, the once, and not necessarily future, kings of African soccer.
But then such days had become the rule of late: days tainted by miscommunication, mismanagement and, most maddening of all, missing money.
The irony was that this Saturday in late April was supposed to have represented a rare point of light.
The Zambians were coming to Cameroon for a friendly, the first international match at home for the Cameroonians since their qualification for the World Cup.


The New Orchestra Selects a New Name
WHEN callers to the offices of the New Orchestra of Westchester here are greeted with "Hello, Westchester Philharmonic," they should not assume they have reached the wrong number or that another orchestra has moved into town.
The New Orchestra, now 11 years old and obviously not new anymore, has simply changed its name to the one it wanted in the first place when it arrived in 1983.


Mutual Funds; Readers' Mail: Worries About Bonds
Question: My husband and I are retired schoolteachers in our 70's.
We own 15 different California-insured municipal bonds that mature in 10 to 20 years.
We bought them for the income and plan to hold them to maturity.
You have warned that the value of bonds drops as interest rates rise.
Can you tell us about a better investment?
Answer: Because you plan to hold the bonds to term, your principal amount will remain intact in spite of rising rates.
But what you have is not the best deal because your income could be improving, said Harold R. Evensky, an investment adviser in Coral Gables, Fla.


Sarajevo Spring Brings Lilacs Out of Dead Land
It is spring in a weary city.
The lilacs are in bloom and women clutch bouquets as they stroll through streets newly silent.
For the first time since war erupted here in April 1992, the surrounding Serbian guns are almost quiet and the sun can be savored without undue risk of a sniper's bullet.
Slowly, tentatively, people emerge.
They sip coffee at sidewalk cafes and plaster over shrapnel-scarred store fronts.
Children clamber on sandbagged positions.
Incongruous trams, propelled by -- of all things -- electricity, rumble down empty streets past wrecked cars, smoldering garbage, shell-shocked dogs, and building after building reduced to rubble.


The Deadly Art of the Ninja Isn't All That Deadly
Backbeat  Sheryl Lee, Stephen Dorff, Ian Hart Directed by Iain Softley R 100 minutes


IN SHORT: FICTION
BRAZILIAN NOVEL THE TREE OF THE SEVENTH HEAVEN  By Milton Hatoum. Atheneum, $18.


Listening to Voters: Proposal in Congress for Polls
To help it serve the people, Congress already has barbers and garage attendants and elevator operators on automatic elevators.
It has parliamentarians and sergeants-at-arms and even ordinary cops.
For advice, it can turn to economists, scientists and accountants.
Even so, its work is widely viewed as imperfect.


Decks Need Cleaning and Other Maintenance at Least Yearly
OUTDOOR decks need cleaning and other maintenance at least once a year.
Spring is a logical time for that.
It is before winter damage can worsen and before outdoor entertaining begins in earnest.
Ordinary washing can brighten most decks.
Use a stiff-bristle brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong detergent or trisodium phosphate, the high-phosphate powder that can be used where it is legal.


Update; Six Men Area Acquitted In Arms Conspiracy Case
Six men who were accused of taking part in a conspiracy to transport 2,900 explosive detonators to Ireland for use by the Irish Republican Army have been acquitted by a Federal jury.
Four of the men -- Patrick Moley, Denis Leyne, Gerard Anthony Brannigan and Thomas Oliver Maguire -- were arrested in the New York area in November 1992.
They were indicted by a Federal grand jury in Tucson, Ariz., along with two other men from Florida, on charges of hatching a scheme to buy the detonators from the Ireco Inc. mining supply company in Tucson, ship them to New York on a Greyhound bus and then mail them to Ireland.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Trevino Shares Lead With Three Others  Before Lee Trevino could enjoy a seven-under-par 65 at the PaineWebber Invitational that came despite constant trouble on the back nine, three more golfers chased him down and earned a share of the second-round lead at nine-under-par 135.
DeWitt Weaver, Jimmy Powell and Jerry McGee all shot 66's to tie Trevino at Piper Glen in Charlotte, N.C. (AP)


Lemaire Coaches To the Beat Of Lemaire
Jacques Lemaire cannot tell a joke the way Tom McVie did.
And Lemaire has no colorful past like another predecessor behind the New Jersey bench, John Cunniff, whose tattoos told of his rough-and-tumble days as a boxer in Boston.
Lemaire's vocabulary certainly comes nowhere near the richness of Billy McMillan, the very first coach of the Devils, or near the studiousness of Herb Brooks, the man Lemaire replaced who used words like "synergy" when talking hockey.


Dana S. Albert, Andrew Kaplan
Dana Suzanne Albert, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Albert of Bedford, N.Y., was married last evening to Andrew David Kaplan, the son of Rona Kaplan of Longwood, Fla., and Harold J. Kaplan of Heathrow, Fla.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Fenway Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride, 28, was until recently an account manager at One World Entertainment Inc., which sells advertising time in syndicated shows for MTV Networks in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.


Verdict: 2 Games for Harper, Vexation for Knicks
Derek Harper, the Knicks' starting point guard, was suspended by the National Basketball Association for two games today, dealing New York a serious blow in the midst of its playoff series against the Chicago Bulls.
New York leads, 2-1, in the four-of-seven-game series, but Harper will miss both Sunday afternoon's Game 4 at Chicago Stadium, and Wednesday night's Game 5 at Madison Square Garden.
He was suspended for fighting with Jo Jo English of the Bulls during Chicago's 104-102 victory Friday night.
English was suspended for one game, but since he is the Bulls' third-string shooting guard, his absence will not hamper Chicago nearly as much as Harper's absence will have an impact on New York.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Coping With Co-op Gadflies
To the Editor:
Your "Coping With Co-op Gadflies" on April 17 leaves unsaid the other side of that story, the propensity for all groups to become coherent by rejecting outside participation.
Unfortunately, it leaves people with ideas and energy and a desire to improve a co-op or condo at a loss.


Orienting Board Novices
FOLLOWING the long tradition of spring elections, hundreds of men and women will soon begin their first terms of office on the board of a condominium or co-op.
While it's possible to accomplish a great deal, membership can swiftly become a minefield for the novice who blunders into the position totally untrained, which many do.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, a picture on pages 44 and 45 of The Times Magazine today, with an article about Attorney General Janet Reno, appears in mirror image.
Ms.
Reno actually stood at the right.


Ms. MacKenzie, Mr. Benchley
Amanda MacKenzie, a daughter of Judge Kenneth C. and Barbara MacKenzie of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Clayton Brownell Benchley, the son of Winifred and Peter Benchley of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bernard's Church in Bernardsville, N.J.
The bride, 25, was until recently an associate publicist at Ballantine Books in New York.
She expects to begin studying this fall at the London Art Works, a certificate program in fine and decorative arts.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the presiding judge of the chancery division of the New Jersey Superior Court in Morristown.
Her mother is a broker at Weichert Realtors, in Morristown.


Russia's New Dictatorship of Crime
WITHIN days of the murder of one member of Parliament in a gangland hit, another legislator kills a mobster in a shootout.
Two days later, the deputy head of the Interior Ministry's Criminal Investigation Department, Maj.
Gen.
Igor Shilov, and his son, a Police Academy cadet, are charged with corruption and possession of a large quantity of weapons.


Evening Hours; A Museum Celebrates 10 Years
A party for the Museum for African Art, SoHo, May 4.


Battle Over Patriotism Curriculum
Like other generations who went through the public schools in this small town an hour's drive northwest of Orlando, students at Tavares Middle School are taught to take pride in American citizenship and heritage.
The school's athletic teams are even nicknamed the Patriots, and the school colors are red, white and blue.
But the fundamentalist Christians who dominate the Lake County school board say that is not enough.
As part of a policy approved this week by a board vote of 3 to 2, teachers will be required to teach the county's 22,526 students that American culture, values and political institutions are inherently "superior to other foreign or historic cultures."


Trying to Get God's Attention
A SILENCE OPENS Poems.
By Amy Clampitt. 96 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
THE GREAT FIRES Poems 1982-1992.
By Jack Gilbert. 90 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
EARTHLY MEASURES Poems.
By Edward Hirsch. 93 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Mired in the Superfund List; L.I. Site Reflects Problems Delaying Toxic-Waste Cleanup
George Oppenheimer, a 29-year-old student of restaurant management, took a break from bicycling to lay back in an abandoned field by Glen Cove Creek.
He did not realize he was lying in a radioactive dump.
"I had no idea," he said, springing up in a single, alarmed bound.
Behind him were the steel and concrete frames of unfinished condominiums and the debris of industry now stilled.
"There weren't any signs."


South Africa Sanctions Didn't Undo Apartheid
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis notes in "Help From Outside," his May 6 column celebrating the role of sanctions in the victory over apartheid, the important part Sir Robin Renwick, now British Ambassador in Washington, played in encouraging President F. W. de Klerk to release Nelson Mandela and facilitating negotiations.


Giants Stadium Sprouts New Look For Soccer Tourney
THE goalposts are down.
Nowhere in sight are the end zones, the 50-yard line or the track that encircles the stadium where the Giants and the Jets play football.
Giants Stadium has been transformed into a wall-to-wall grass carpet.
A real grass carpet.
Twice a day its soil temperature is checked with a digital thermometer.
Proof that the grass continues to thrive came last week when it was mowed for the first time.
Cut in two directions, the surface took on a plush checkerboard pattern.
This is believed to be the first time that turf grass is being grown over a synthetic field in an open stadium.


One Neighborhood, Two Lives -- A special report.; A Death on Staten Island: 2 Paths Cross on Familiar Ground
On the evening of April 29, when Ernest Sayon died in the hands of the police, it was a case of two men who came from the same place and circumstance, but then chose opposing lives, meeting, with tragic consequences.
One was Mr.
Sayon himself, the 22-year-old son of Liberian immigrants, who grew up on the ground floor of one of the six-story brick buildings that make up the federally subsidized Park Hill apartment complex.


CROSSING LAKE MESSINGER
John Tierney apparently does not hold himself to any rigorous standard of factual accuracy.
Tierney has never met or interviewed me, and virtually every reference he makes to me in his column "Crossing Lake Messinger" (The Big City, April 24) is wrong.
While the caricature of me as a disconnected, cocktail liberal and the borough of Manhattan as some sort of elitist enclave may serve to help him slay some of the ideological demons that possess him, it bears little resemblance to reality.
In direct contrast to Tierney's particular and peculiar assumptions, in my years in government I have helped thousands of constituents to get potholes filled and sidewalks fixed.
I have proposed changes in our tax system to promote simplicity and equity and, with the Queens Borough President, produced a plan for restructuring the Board of Education to move dollars and accountability to the local level.


The View From: Bristol; Of Jumpers, Standers and Prancers in the Carousel Museum
WHEN Louise Lauretano DeMars took over as executive director of the New England Carousel Museum in Bristol in 1990, she was told it attracted about 30,000 visitors a year.
With admission at $3.25 a head, that meant revenue would fall almost $30,000 short of the $126,000 a year she estimated was necessary to keep the museum running.
It got worse.
"I wasn't in this chair 10 minutes when I realized that traffic number was incorrect," Mrs.
DeMars said.
So she called for the records, entombed in Tupperware containers, started counting and came up with just 12,000 visitors.
The accountant told her the museum would be down the tubes in three months.
"But here we are," she said.
"Still just one step ahead of the sheriffs, but we're making it."


Stacy Cor and Dan Polner
STACY COR and Dan Polner's entire courtship lasted about as long as it takes most people to get to the second date.
As a friend of theirs put it, "They ended up at Fortunoff's on the 11th day."
They met on July 2, 1993, when seated next to each other on an American Airlines flight from New York to Los Angeles.
Ms.
Cor, 26, a flight attendant for American based on the West Coast, was in uniform but flying as a passenger.
She didn't have a very good first impression of Mr.
Polner, 30, an investment banker at Legg Mason Wood Walker Inc. in New York.


30 New High Schools Report First-Year Success
It is a small triumph of the Coalition School for Social Change, one of 30 experimental high schools begun in New York City last fall, that Shenelle Nolan has been swinging her bookbag under her desk and sitting down for her first-period math class on time in recent weeks.
Last fall, Shenelle was perpetually tardy.
But for months, her teachers have been pressing her to rise earlier and spend less time buying candy in a corner bodega on her 10-block walk to school through East Harlem.
They got her family's cooperation as well.


Traffic Alert
Ninth Avenue will be closed today between 37th Street and 57th Street, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., for the Ninth Avenue Food Festival.
Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 77th Street and 96th Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Amsterdam Avenue Festival.


In America; Call To Arms
In his speech last week on violence in America, Senator Bill Bradley told a story about a woman who was beaten on a regular basis by her husband.
The couple had two children, a 2-year-old girl and a 4-year-old boy.
During an attack witnessed by the little girl, the husband gripped his wife by the throat and began strangling her.
The woman survived and sought refuge with the children in a shelter for battered women.


Tips for Making the Most of Spring Ingredients
SPRING in the Northeast may bring warmer weather, but before the end of May it offers relatively little to entice the cook.
The artichokes, strawberries and even the fresh herbs that enhance springtime menus are rarely from local farms.
Never mind.
The season still calls for assembling menus that are lighter, featuring ingredients that suggest the season.


Anne E. Ferguson, David T. Foster
Anne Elizabeth Ferguson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Craig M. Ferguson of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Thorndike Foster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald Foster 3d of Manchester, Mass.
Bishop Douglas E. Theuner of New Hampshire performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Foster, 27, is an assistant vice president at the General Reinsurance Corporation in Boston.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is the owner of C. W. Excess and of Craig M. Ferguson &amp; Associates, insurance brokerages in Stamford, Conn.


West Point Band Offers Americana and Classics Today in Rye
TWO years ago the United States Military Academy Band came down from West Point to begin a series of free concerts underwritten by the Pulvermann Foundation, which makes family entertainment available at a time, and in a place, that should attract younger listeners to fine music along with members of the older generation, many of whom live on fixed incomes.
Such distinguished artists and ensembles as the bass Jerome Hines, the pianist Agustin Anievas, Solid Brass and the New Orchestra of Westchester Theater Ensemble have appeared at Pulvermann concerts, but today at 3 P.M., the West Pointers will be back where it all started, at the Rye High School.
The young violinist Chee-Yun, an Avery Fisher Career Grant Award winner, will be the guest soloist in works by Lalo, Massenet and Rimsky-Korsakov, while the band itself, under the direction of Lieut.
Col.
Frank G. Dubuy, concentrates more on Americana, including a suite from Bernstein's "Candide," Persichetti's "Divertimento for Band" and a Sousa march or three.
No tickets are required, but arrival soon after the doors open at 2:30 is recommended.
Another free concert at 3 P.M. today closes the season for the Yonkers Philharmonic at Saunders High School and presents an even younger violin soloist.
Although she has already won two competitions and is a veteran of the Mostly Mozart Series at Alice Tully Hall, JoAnna Farrer is only 10.
The prodigy makes her county debut with the Haydn Violin Concerto in C, the music director, Jerome Sala, bracketing that charming work with three Mendelssohn pieces and, in its world premiere, William Zinn's "Symphony in Ragtime." The composer describes his symphony as "a fully developed work in four movements, based on original themes with added bits of cliches thrown in to tease the listener with a touch of the familiar."


Luggage Thieves
To the Editor: After spending 10 days in France, my husband and I were on our way to de Gaulle airport in Paris via the Gare du Nord.
We arrived at the train station at 8 A.M. on a Sunday, when there were very few people around.
My husband went off to find a luggage cart and I stayed with our bags.
A neat-looking young man approached me and asked for information concerning the trains.
I gave my usual response: I did did not speak French.
Too late I realized the man was distracting me while an accomplice removed three of my carry-on bags.
There were no policemen around.
I shouted after the men but was not able to run after them without leaving my remaining bags unattended.
As soon as my husband returned, we filed a police report and learned that we were the third victims since 7 A.M.


Echoes of Alchemy and a Potpourri From Private Collections
THE attraction at Nardin Galleries in Somers is an anthology of paintings and works on paper; at the Schoolhouse Galleries in Croton Falls, it is a solo exhibition of relief assemblages and paintings.
Where the acquisition of art is concerned, the mere fact of possession is not enough.
Collectors are human: they need the reassurance of publicity as much as artists do, but it can be a mixed blessing.
Hence, in compiling a show from the private collections that she has helped build during her 22 years as a dealer, Concetta Nardin does not name names.
But she does name the exhibition -- "Collections: An Insider's Perspective."


Michele Peck, Michael Litt
Michele Alena Peck, a vice president of Morris Anderson Investment Advisers in Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Carl Litt, a vice president of Morgan Stanley in New York.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Litt, 28, received a bachelor's degree and an M.B.A. from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald L. Peck of Carlisle, Pa.


Maple Leafs End Sharks' Cup Dream
At the abrupt end to their remarkable playoff run, the San Jose Sharks said they would not look back.
That will not be easy this summer, not after tonight, when third-period goals by Mark Osborne and Doug Gilmour gave the Toronto Maple Leafs control of a 4-2 Game 7 victory over the Sharks after Wendel Clark's two scores allowed the Leafs to withstand San Jose's early territorial advantage.
The Leafs, who were outshot, 32-21, won the final two games of the Western conference semifinal series.
They reached a conference final for the second consecutive year.
Toronto will meet the Vancouver Canucks in a series that will begin here Monday night.
San Jose, which ousted West champion Detroit in the first round, was prevented from becoming the fourth team to reach the Stanley Cup semifinals after finishing eighth in its conference.
Last Goal Announced Late
San Jose scored with four seconds to play on a bizarre goal, credited to Shark center Todd Elik, that was not announced until after the players shook hands and left the ice.


At Home On Etna's Fiery Slopes
THE SKY IS clearing as my husband, Tonino, and I leave Palermo, and by the time we reach the center of the island, the clouds have gone and Mount Etna comes into view, basking in the sun and dominating the horizon.
On either side of the highway the green fields are marching toward spring: wheat is growing, the hedgerows and pastures are bright with the orange and yellow of calendula and Cape sorrel, and the almond trees are still in flower.
In contrast to this colorful carpet, Etna's lower flanks seem lifeless: the grayish-brown of wooded areas, still without leaves, is barely distinguishable at a distance from the purple-gray of the lava flows; above them, dark stands of larches, and then the glistening blanket of snow that will gradually recede as spring spirals slowly up the mountain's slopes.


Streetscapes/Tudor City Parks; The Changing Centerpiece of a 'City Within a City'
FRED FRENCH called it a "city within a city," the Tudor City apartment complex he built in the late 20's between 40th and 43d Streets on a bluff just west of First Avenue.
As a centerpiece he created two small parks, a sparkling pair of green patches in crowded midtown.
After a brush with demolition in the 80's, the parks were saved as part of a co-op conversion beginning in 1987 and are now being made over by the nonprofit group that owns them.


Madame Bovary
To the Editor: Reading Robert Eisner's "Lure of Literature" (March 27) brought to mind memories my pilgrimages (three so far) to the setting of Gustave Flaubert's "Madame Bovary." In the opening chapter of Part Two, Flaubert descries the small town of Yonville, home of Charles and Emma Bovary.
Yonville is in "a bastard region whose speech is without accentuation as its scenery is without character." There is little to do there, and less to see -- hence Emma's fatal ennui.
Further on, the reader learns that there is only one street in the town, and it leads eventually to the cemetery.
A few years ago I made my first visit to the village of Ry, the basis for Yonville, in the Seine-Maritime department, just east of Rouen.
Flaubert explains that the town is eight leagues, or about 24 miles, from Rouen, just off the road to Beauvais.
Using a magnifying glass on a Michelin map of Normandy I was able to spot a speck, the hamlet of Ry.


Electric Panic Creates Bargains For The Brave
IT has been the worst spell in memory for what were supposed to be the safest stocks around.
In the past two weeks, the average electric utility stock has fallen 10 percent, bringing the losses in the past eight months to more than 30 percent.
To put that performance in perspective, if the Dow Jones industrials had done as badly as the Dow utilities since last fall, the Dow would now be about 2,540.
There would be talk about recession and national crises, and no doubt Congress would be busy looking for villains to blame for the fall, with possible candidates including hedge funds and derivatives.


Hands Off Haiti, Say Dominicans
With the United States pressing new efforts to isolate Haiti's military junta, the leading candidates in the Dominican presidential elections scheduled for Monday are strongly opposed to any foreign intervention next door.
They are also critical of the international embargo against Haiti.
The Dominican President, Joaquin Balaguer, has long been scornful in any case of international efforts to force Haiti's army to abandon power and allow the return from exile of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Bangkok's Grand Hotels, Struggling, Cut Rates
THE luxurious new Grand Pacific Hotel in Bangkok is a fitting architectural symbol of the crisis in the hotel industry here.
The hotel is shaped like a boat, and the entryway is dotted with translucent plastic sculptures that resemble icicles.
The effect -- which appears to be intentional -- is of a cruise ship slamming into an iceberg.
The Grand Pacific is struggling to find enough guests to fill its 389 rooms.
Like most of Bangkok's new luxury hotels, it has fallen victim to the glut of rooms created by a construction boom in the Thai capital.


A Novelty Comes Wrapped in Romance
HECTOR BERLIOZ'S newly rediscovered "Messe Solennelle" argues for the powers of innocence.
Naivete can inhibit, but here it has empowered.
How else can we explain the ability of a young Frenchman in 1824 -- 20 years old, with barely a year of conservatory training and before that a provincial childhood far from Paris -- to imagine a work like this?
Perhaps knowing less, one dares more, leaps more light-footedly into times of change.
Romance surrounds the new (indeed, the first ever) recording of Berlioz's "Messe Solennelle" by John Eliot Gardiner, the Monteverdi Choir and the Orchestre Revolutionnaire et Romantique (Philips 442 137-2; CD).
After performances of uneven quality in Paris in 1825 and 1827, Berlioz dismissed the piece, while occasionally stripping it for parts useful in later works.
Among them were the "Symphonie Fantastique," "Benvenuto Cellini" and the Requiem.


(Upper) Broadway Blues? Cross the Street.


A Little P.C. Might Help
To the Editor:
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry when reading the capsule reviews in your new guide to children's movies  [ "From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina," April 17 ] .
Janet Maslin commented on the negative portrayal of Icelanders, not exactly your most maligned group, in "D2: The Mighty Ducks," but the reviewer of "Thumbelina," Patricia S. McCormick, gave not one word of warning about the prejudicial treatment of Latin Americans.
The arch villains in this story are toads, all of whom the movie portrays as Latinos.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE By T. Coraghessan Boyle.
Penguin, $10.95.
For the characters in this novel, the road begins in 1907 in Battle Creek, Mich., where they are guests at the sanitarium of Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg, the inventor of cornflakes and exponent of rigorous and purgative cures.
The author's "prose is a marvel, enjoyable from beginning to end," Jane Smiley said here last year.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire By David Remnick.
Vintage, $14.
Winner of the 1994 Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction and named one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The Times Book Review, this account captures the period from 1988 to 1991, when the Soviet Union -- and Communism itself -- was collapsing.
Mr.
Remnick gives detailed portraits of the people involved, from Soviet leaders and party functionaries to ordinary workers.
Last year our reviewer, John Lloyd, said, " 'Lenin's Tomb' is an extraordinary confluence of observation, hard work, knowledge and reflection; a better book by a journalist on the withdrawing roar of the Soviet Union is hard to imagine."


After a Death, a Theater Lives
When Howard Otway, the founder of Theater 80 St.
Marks, the city's longest-running revival movie house, died of emphysema last month at 72, some patrons thought the East Village theater had gone, too.
"People saw Howard's obituary and called or sent flowers saying, 'So sorry you're closed,' " said his widow, Florence Otway.
When the word got out that Mrs.
Otway was continuing to put together daily programs with the usual vintage Hollywood and foreign films, the devotees came back in force.


Intrepid Idea for Floating Heliport
The city's oldest heliport, on the Hudson River at the foot of West 30th Street, has long been outmoded.
Helicopters often can't park at the cramped site.
Now there is a novel plan to replace it with a surplus Navy vessel, the helicopter carrier Guadalcanal, which has below-deck parking.
Aviation experts say it would be the nation's only floating heliport for civilian flights.


Taking 5 From Clint Eastwood Movies
WHEN THE JAZZ SAXOphonist and composer Lennie Niehaus read the script for "Lush Life," he knew he had to be involved.
"Lush Life," which will be broadcast on Showtime on Friday at 9 P.M., is about two moderately talented jazz musicians who cat around and make a living by playing whatever music they have to.
They live for jazz, but pay the rent by performing at weddings, bar mitzvahs, parties and only occasionally in jazz clubs.
Mr.
Niehaus got the job, and the film with its radiant jazz score, might as well be his story, with one exception.
Mr.
Niehaus is actually quite talented.
Now 64, he is one of the more important figures to come out of the thriving Los Angeles jazz scene of the 1950's, which included Chet Baker, Art Pepper and Hampton Hawes.
Then along came rock-and-roll and did in his career.


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
Parts of Dawidoff's article had me taking my hard-earned money out of my left pocket and other parts had me stuffing it back into the right.


Bosnians Have Right To Arms Assistance
To the Editor:
In "Don't Arm Bosnia" (Op-Ed, May 5), Claiborne Pell, Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman, and Lee Hamilton, House Foreign Affairs Committee chairman, are mistaken on the law.


Having a Cool Car Is Becoming More Costly
AS the weather grows warmer, more drivers will be rolling up their windows and turning on their air-conditioners.
Some will be disappointed when nothing but accelerated warm air flows from the vents.
In the past, repairing an auto air-conditioner was often easy.
A technician would pump in new refrigerant to replace any that leaked away in the winter, and check for leaks.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about students studying culinary arts misidentified a participant in the center photo.
He was Robert Nicholsen, not Dan Morton.


Let's Go Get Stocious
To the Editor:
"For once I feel totally at ease with Sam, stocious and glorious." That line is from John Montague's essay "A Few Drinks and a Hymn: My Farewell to Samuel Beckett" (April 17).


May 8-14: 3 Executions; Still More Tinkering With the Machinery of Death
Last week was a remarkable one for the death penalty in the United States, where lawmakers are looking for still more ways to apply it (even as South Africa's new leaders, in contrast, have vowed to discard capital punishment as a remnant of a barbaric past).
In Illinois Tuesday, John Wayne Gacy, who killed 33 young boys, succumbed to an injection of three chemicals but -- in the latest of a series of unsettling glitches at executions -- two of the chemicals gelled in his I.V. and delayed the carrying out of the sentence for several minutes.
In Arkansas, two more murderers were executed on Wednesday, the first time two people have gone to state-sponsored deaths on the same day since the Supreme Court restored the death penalty in 1976.


Mitchell Kreuch and Alison Pollard
Alison Rose Pollard, a daughter of Rosemary Pollard of San Marino, Calif., and Desmond Pollard of Marina Del Rey, Calif., was married yesterday to Mitchell Kemp Kreuch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul C. Kreuch Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Joan Osgood performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Kreuch, 29, is an account manager at Disney Adventures Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.


Where There's Fidel
COZYING up to Fidel Castro is a dicey business.
Just ask Magda Montiel Davis, the Cuban-American lawyer who went to Havana last month with other exiles and returned to Miami a pariah because she planted a kiss on the Cuban President's cheek and called him a "great teacher." Or Mike Espy, the Agriculture Secretary, who caused consternation in the American delegation to South Africa last week for allowing himself to be photographed standing next to Mr.
Castro.
But playing with the fire of Fidel is just what you want to do if you're a cigar magazine.
In its summer issue, Cigar Aficionado irks Castro foes with an interview with the bearded one, heralded by ads in The New York Times and other publications featuring the Communist cover guy.
Marvin R. Shanken, the editor and publisher, said the magazine has gotten "three or four" letters so far criticizing it for "bad judgment" in giving Mr.
Castro celebrity treatment, but he expects the issue to sell out its 175,000 copies.


SUNDAY, May 15, 1994; How Not to Buy a A Fake Coach Handbag
Rule 1 for shopping on the street in New York: Never buy anything in a box.
Those early-release "Jurassic Park" videos are unwatchable.
On the other hand, many items are available for inspection, like the Coach bags offered on Canal Street for $30 or $35 instead of $70 or $140.
How can you tell if they are real?
Coach executives recently examined two Canal Street "Coach" bags and pointed out their flaws.
Here are the key points:


Lauren Sbrollini, Vincent Macaluso 3d
Lauren Gale Sbrollini, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Sbrollini of Suffern, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Vincent Francis Macaluso 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Macaluso Jr. of Douglaston, Queens.
The Rev.
Jon J. O'Brien, a dean of students at Georgetown University, performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.


A Side Deal and a Wizard's Undoing
MARK S. FERBER loved kaleidoscopes.
He owned 64 and claimed their dizzying patterns and unrelated parts were a metaphor for his work -- putting together complicated municipal finance deals.
They adorned his office and, as he twisted their cylinders, he could alter his vision of the city far below, especially Boston Harbor.
Cleaning up the polluted harbor had become the nation's biggest public works project and, by the late 1980's, created a bounty of fees for Wall Street.
As a partner at prestigious Lazard Freres &amp; Company, Mr.
Ferber was the lead financial strategist on the $6 billion project -- carrying on in the tradition of urban financial wizardry forged by Lazard's superstar, Felix G. Rohatyn.
For anyone wanting to do municipal finance business here, Mr.
Ferber was the one to see with the political connections and the brainpower to get the job done.
So great were Mr.
Ferber's skills that even Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's biggest broker, wanted, and got, him.


Melissa Cates, Roger Claman
Melissa Beth Cates, the daughter of Jane Cates of New York and Gilbert Cates of Los Angeles, is to be married today to Roger Lloyd Claman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Claman of Somers, Conn.
Rabbi Judith Lewis is to perform the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 35, is the senior lawyer for business affairs at Nickelodeon, the cable channel, in New York.
She graduated from the Claremont Colleges and received her law degree from the University of San Diego.
Her father, a television and motion picture director and producer, is dean of the School of Film, Theater and Television at the University of California at Los Angeles.
He is also the producer of the Academy Awards.


Your Father's So Dumb . . .
Alfred Wright, a 19-year-old whose manhood was at stake on Longwood Avenue in the South Bronx, looked fairly calm as another teen-ager called him Chicken Head and compared his mother to Shamu the whale.
He fingered the gold chain around his thin neck while listening to a detailed complaint about his sister's sexual abilities.
Then he slowly took the toothpick out of his mouth; the jeering crowd of young men quieted as he pointed at his accuser.


Neighborhood Wrestles With Repair Work


Unlocked Wards Don't Belong in Anyone's Yard
To the Editor:
In "Nimby Groups Can't Legally Bar Mentally Ill"(letter, May 3), Katina Zachmanoglou claims that community residents who are trying to prevent New York State and New York City from dumping still more mentally ill, chemically addicted patients in residential neighborhoods use "strongarm tactics" in violation of the Federal Fair Housing Act.


Keenan Questions Rangers' Effort
After an unexpected joy ride through the first two rounds of the Stanley Cup playoffs, a trip that required just nine games, the Rangers suddenly faced more than a double-overtime defeat to the Devils last night.
They were facing the criticism of their coach, Mike Keenan, who questioned their level of intensity and their defensive effort.
In happier Ranger times, Keenan spoke of how he loved the importance of being aware of all the variables in a game and a series.
Last night, his words made it clear that the coach's outlook was going to be a factor in the minds of his players.


Americans Perceive Schools Differently
To the Editor:
You report May 5 that only 41 percent of the school day in the United States is spent on academic subjects.
No surprise.
Years ago, I asked my undergraduates how long it would have taken them to go through high school if they had an effective incentive and could proceed at their own pace.
The consensus was a year and a half to two and a half years.


Erwin A. Glikes, 56, Publisher Of Intellectual Nonfiction, Dies
Erwin A. Glikes, a leading publisher of nonfiction books for a quarter-century, whose authors included some of the most prestigious figures in American intellectual life, died on Friday night.
He was 56 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack while on his way to his weekend home in upstate New York, said his wife, Carol Janeway.


Cuban-Americans Open a Dialogue With Cuba; In Tourism's Wake
To the Editor:
A two-week news-gathering tour of Cuba last month left us deeply ashamed of the deprivations our country's punitive trade embargo is imposing on an innocent people.


Darwin Saw the Whale in the Black Bear
To the Editor:
"How the Whale Lost Its Legs and Returned to the Sea" (Science Times, May 3) maligns Charles Darwin for not understanding how evolution could bring about whales from land mammals.
Quite the contrary.


Critic's Notebook; French Decadence and American Wit
On Saturday night, the rooftop garden opposite the Palais des Festivals offered a perfect Cannes overview.
The landmarks included the hills, the hotels and the manicured gardens that embrace a grand harbor, but the cinematic map was much more interesting.
And a lot more varied, when it comes to the movie-mad topography that suddenly shapes this town.
Just below, as the strains of "In the Mood" supposedly invoked an air of vintage Americana, the cast of Alan Rudolph's "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" paraded up the red-carpeted steps of the Palais.
Crowds of onlookers shouted their approval, although there was no telling whether this indicated the slightest interest in Dorothy Parker or the Algonquin Round Table.
Parker's poems have never gone out of print in English, but apparently they haven't been translated into French.


Tribal Fighting Flares Again Around the Rwandan Capital
Rebel forces in Rwanda are poised to begin new attacks against Government troops, diplomats said today.
"They seem to be advancing from several areas," one African diplomat said after a day of artillery duels and small-arms fire around Kigali, capital of the small central African state.


Christopher Will Visit Jericho This Week
In a gesture to Palestinians, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that he would travel to Jericho this week, making him the first senior American official to visit the newly autonomous Palestinian area.
Recognizing that a visit to Jericho might unnerve some Israelis who oppose a Palestinian state, officials traveling with Mr.
Christopher were quick to deny today that the visit in any way indicated that Washington was altering its longstanding opposition to a Palestinian state.


Driver Killed as Tanker Overturns on Ramp to Brooklyn-Queens Expressway


Anderson Exploration Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rebels in Kashmir And Indian Army Ready for Long Fight
In the Himalayan foothills of Kashmir, the commander of a Pakistani-backed guerrilla force fighting to wrench the Muslim-majority state of Jammu and Kashmir out of Hindu-dominated India dismounted from his horse and gestured across the landscape of snow-capped mountains, blossoming orchards and plunging rivers.
"This is our land -- we enjoy 100 percent support of the people," Syeed Salahuddin, commander of a force known as the Hizbul Mujahedeen, or Fighters for the Party of God, said as he greeted reporters who hiked into the Kashmir hinterland to meet him.


Davies Steamrolls Through the Back Nine to Victory
The smiling Briton with the broad shoulders is on a streak.
Laura Davies matched the best back nine of the McDonald's L.P.G.A.
Championship today, and it lifted her to her second major title, a three-stroke victory over Alice Ritzman at the DuPont Country Club.
Davies shot a three-under 68 today, finishing at five-under 279.
She started the back nine one under and took control with four birdies in a five-hole span, leaving several early contenders behind.
On the 14th and 15th holes, she dropped 20-foot putts.


Bridge
A man who made a considerable mark on bridge in its early years was George Sturgis Coffin of Belmont, Mass., who died in March at the age of 90.
He was a writer and publisher of some 200 books on bridge and other card games, as well as fungi, on which he was an authority.
He contributed greatly to the theory of endgames, and was a stickler for exactitude in bridge terminology and other areas.
It pained him when no-trump was spelled with a hyphen, as in this column, or as two words, as in England.
Thanks in part to his efforts, "notrump" is now commonly used.
He also insisted that the North position in a duplicate game should correspond to geographic North, and upset some directors by rearranging their table cards.


ABC Rail Products Corp.(ABCR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Van Drivers Pursue Rape Charges Against Officer
In April of 1993, an African-born livery van driver from Rockaway Beach accused a male police officer of raping him at gunpoint.
Four acquaintances of the driver told the police they witnessed the incident, but the case was not presented to a grand jury for a decision on whether the officer should be tried.
A few months later, four more men -- all black, all immigrants from Africa or the Caribbean and all connected with the furtive, unlicensed van trade in the Rockaway area -- accused the officer, Reggie Rivera, of sodomizing them as well.


It's Back to Business: Krone Books Mounts
Nine months after her right ankle was shattered in a violent spill, and about one month earlier than expected, Julie Krone is plotting her grand return to the races next week at Belmont Park.
The 30-year-old sprite from Michigan has been exercising horses for the last month, but has not been in a race since last Aug. 30 at Saratoga, when she was thrown and kicked in a collision.


Parking Rules
Because of the first and second days of Shabuoth, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.


La-Z-Boy Chair Puts Account in Review
The La-Z-Boy Chair Company said it had placed in review its national advertising account, which has been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., for the last 13 years.
In the past, the account has billed an estimated $6 million to $8 million, but the company said it planned to increase spending in 1995 to $10 million to $12 million.


Big Insurers In Struggle Over Ratings
A triple-A rating is a valuable commodity in the insurance world, valuable enough that some New York insurers that have it are trying to keep the coveted rating to themselves.
The New York Life Insurance Company and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, both rated AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, have so far managed to prevent a vote on a New York State Senate bill that would allow companies that specialize in insuring municipal bonds to also insure the investment contracts that insurers sell to pension funds.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about criticism of the Smithsonian Institution's record of hiring and promoting Hispanic staff members misspelled the given name of the president of the National Council of La Raza.
He is Raul Yzaguirre.


Goals Collide in Cable TV Rate Plan
As the newest Federal effort to reduce cable television prices nominally takes effect this week, Government regulators are struggling to navigate between two rather contradictory goals: bringing lower prices to consumers and encouraging a cornucopia of new electronic services.
Most consumers will not see any change on their bills until July, because so great is the uncertainty about the new rules that the Federal Communications Commission has given cable companies two months to figure out the regulations and reset their prices.


Corrections
An article on May 5 about Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts misidentified the boarding school he attended.
It was the Middlesex School, not Middlesex Academy.


Patents
ELEANOR SHERMAN was a radiologic technologist working at Yonkers General Hospital, where the patient pool was at high risk for AIDS and hepatitis, when she began to worry about whether such infectious diseases could be transmitted from one patient to the next through mammography equipment.
"A common symptom of breast cancer is a bloody nipple discharge," Ms.
Sherman said.
"I looked around and thought, 'What can I disinfect my equipment with?' The answer was, nothing."


John Swainson, 68, Michigan Governor And Perjured Judge
John B. Swainson, who was Governor of Michigan and then a Justice of the Michigan Supreme Court until he was convicted of perjury and resigned, died on Friday at his home in Manchester, Mich.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son John Stephen.


Payoff Inquiry Now Targeting More Buildings
Cash came stuffed in envelopes and paper bags and attache cases.
It was handed over in restaurants, at holiday parties, in real estate offices and on the street.
There were checks, too, and gift certificates and life insurance policies and free construction work.
Whatever the form, millions of dollars changed hands as managers of many Manhattan condominiums and cooperative apartment buildings routinely took payoffs from plumbing and painting companies, roofers, waterproofers and other contractors and suppliers as the price of doing business in the buildings, law enforcement officials say.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Pay the Price for Harper's Punch
THIS is no World Wrestling Federation morality play, as scripted by wrestling's giant-sized fan, Horace Grant.
This is not the good guys and the bad guys.
This is the Knicks, suddenly extremely vulnerable.
When the brawlers went back to work yesterday, the Knicks paid the price for Derek Harper's having thrown a highly visible punch at Jo Jo English Friday night.
The Knicks opened with a 12-0 lead and then seemed to remember their starting point guard had been suspended for two games, and after that the Bulls performed such a one-sided home-court 95-83 romp that you could have thought it was a standard plot.


My Thanh An Journal; G.I. Settles in Vietnam, at Peace With Old Foes
Sgt. 1st Class John Foggin of the United States Army spent five hard years fighting the Vietcong, but he has buried the past and found a home among his former enemies in this remote hamlet in the Mekong Delta.
Hidden in a rural palm grove across a river south of the market town of Ben Tre is an oasis of modest luxury where Mr.
Foggin and his Vietnamese wife, Lan, plan to spend the rest of their days earning a living as cafe owners.


Pippen Stands Up And Stars
In the Bulls' locker room, within 15 minutes of the end of their second straight defeat of the Knicks in Chicago Stadium, Scottie Pippen's cubicle was empty.
There were seven bare hangers on a hook, two gleaming hooks on the wooden sides and one red folding chair which, normally, would have contained that same Pippen.
While he was nonexistent after today's game, he was a formidable presence for most of the 48 minutes of the game, scoring the Bulls' first 8 points and leading all scorers with 25 points with 8 rebounds, 6 assists and 2 steals in the Bulls' 95-83 victory to even the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series at 2-2.


Edisto Resources Corp.(EDS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Megafoods Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Reviews/Ballet Theater; The McKerrow and Hill Chemistry
"Manon" is not the most persuasive of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's many ballets.
But it has remained reasonably popular over the 20 years since its premiere.
American Ballet Theater's presentation of the ballet on Friday night and Saturday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House suggested both why "Manon" does not really work and why it has survived.
The ballet is drawn, fairly faithfully, from the Massenet opera and the 18th-century tale by Abbe Prevost that inspired it.
Manon is a young woman of apparently untried virtue, who is led into a life of sin by Lescaut, whom the ballet identifies as her brother.
Everyone wants Manon, including the wealthy and suave Monsieur G. M. and the impoverished student Des Grieux.
She is available to the highest bidder.


Reporter's Notebook; For Palestinians Now, a Smoother Road to Jericho
It did not take long for the start of Palestinian self-rule to stand reality on its head for the people of Jericho and the Gaza Strip.
Taisir Jarhoud, a young banana grower here, noticed it this weekend when he got into his car and left Auja for Jericho, five miles south.
For the first time in the Israeli occupation, which began in 1967, six years before he was born, Mr.
Jarhoud discovered at an army checkpoint that Palestinians had certain advantages over Israelis.


Avery Has A Stroll on Easy Street At Shea
In sports there is always the talk of momentum swings from team to team, but never a mention about shifts in the comfort level.
This afternoon at Shea Stadium, one could feel the shift in comfort level right off the bat.
It was seismic.
In the first inning, it went straight from zero to unbearable for Mets pitcher Eric Hillman and from bountiful to cushiony for Braves pitcher Steve Avery.
It happened when Braves first baseman Fred McGriff smashed a two-run homer over the fence in center field and catcher Javier Lopez followed with a monstrous solo home run that went in the same direction, but fell farther away by several feet.
Lopez hit another homer in the ninth inning, a two-run shot that completed the scoring in the Braves' 6-1 victory.


Dividend Meetings


Overconfidence Goes Long Way On Russian's Road to Victory
You are leading the 12-day Tour DuPont by 35 seconds going into the final day, and that day's race is a 16.6-mile, mostly flat time trial.
Because you are the best time trialist among the 92 surviving riders, you should surely win the tour or have a good excuse why you did not.
Vyacheslav Yekimov needed no excuses.
For days, he had all but said he could not be beaten, and today he proved it.
The 28-year-old Russian won the time trial and easily won America's longest (1,050-mile), richest ($200,000 in prize money) and most important bicycle race.


CHRONICLE
When it comes to weddings, SYDNEY BIDDLE BARROWS is very traditional -- especially when it's her own.
Ms.
Barrows, the former head of an exclusive call-girl service, married DARNAY HOFFMAN, a legal historian and television producer, in a formal church wedding at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan's Morningside Heights Saturday.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Violent Crimes With Pistols Rise 21% in Year
Violent crimes involving handguns increased more than 21 percent from 1991 to 1992, approaching a total of one million, according to a Justice Department report released today.
The increase comes at a time when violent crime over all is declining, which means that a growing percentage of violent crimes involves handguns.
The department's Bureau of Justice Statistics found that handguns had been used in 931,000 murders, rapes, robberies and assaults in 1992, compared with 772,000 in 1991.
The annual average for the years 1987 to 1991 was 667,000.


Spring Cleaning in Manhattan


Plan for Siting Social Services Stirs Dispute
A proposal by New York City's top planning official to encourage placement of homeless shelters, drug clinics and other social service operations in sections zoned for light manufacturing could complicate efforts to redevelop these areas, officials and analysts said yesterday.
Although the chairman of the City Planning Commission, Joseph B. Rose, did not say which neighborhoods would be best suited for social service centers, many of the areas zoned for manufacturing are concentrated along the Harlem River waterfront in the South Bronx and waterfront sections of Brooklyn and Queens.
Community leaders warned that placement of too many social service operations in these areas could upset the delicate balance in otherwise commercially viable areas.


Review/Dance; Wolflike Flower? Dark Vision of Spain
Christine Bastin, a young French choreographer, formed her experimental dance company in 1986, and works such as her 1991 "Grace" have received a good press in France.
This was also the piece that the French Institute had originally announced for the Compagnie Christine Bastin's local debut on Friday night at Gould Hall.
The illness of a performer, however, led to the substitution of another work, "Gueule de Loup," which was commissioned by the 1992 Lyons Dance Biennial.


2 Boys, a Debt, a Gun, a Victim: The Face of Violence
It was a wave of the hand from a 10-year-old boy with a Botticelli face and Dennis the Menace bangs that brought Elizabeth Alvarez to her death on a humid afternoon last August.
The boy, Jacob Gonzales, wheeled around a bank parking lot on the banana seat of a pink bicycle he had stolen and looked for a robbery victim.
His accomplice, Damien Dorris, a 14-year-old drug dealer who owed the neighborhood kingpins $430, lay in wait near the automated teller machine.


It's in Anthony's Hands. It's Scary.
All those hours Greg Anthony has worked on his jump shot, all those bounce passes from the Knicks' assistant coach, Jeff Van Gundy, weren't quite helping him now.
This was not the quiet practice gymnasium, it was a condemned basketball madhouse known as Chicago Stadium.
It was a long way, Anthony was coming to understand, from Purchase to the playoffs.
It wasn't all Anthony's fault, but it also wasn't much his day.
Derek Harper was in league custody for his sins of Friday night, so Anthony was given the ball yesterday for a burdensome 42 minutes and he wasn't able to do a thing with it.
He took 13 shots, most of them with the Bulls practically begging him to try, and he made a grand total of 2.
With Anthony at the helm, the Knicks committed 24 turnovers that cost them 24 points.
They are not good enough to overcome that.


Make Haiti's Thugs Tremble
Haiti's military rulers continue to thumb their noses at the United States and the rest of the world.
Since the ouster of President Jean-Bertrande Aristide in September 1991, the international community has consistently tried to pressure the junta to step aside, but nothing has worked -- not diplomacy, not tighter sanctions, not a partial naval embargo.
By tolerating their defiance and unrelenting brutality, we have empowered Haiti's military thugs.
As a result, our credibility as a world leader is at stake.
Haiti's military leaders must now be put on notice that we're prepared to take all steps necessary to restore democracy and prove to all renegade elements that we mean what we say.
We need to pursue an aggressive diplomatic course, to escalate sanctions and to impose a total naval blockade if necessary.
But if those don't work, we must be willing to seek international approval to use military force.


Spy Memoir Lacks Any Real Evidence
To the Editor:
Jerrold and Leona Schecter call scientists and historians like myself who have challenged their book, "Special Tasks," "naive at best and dishonest at worst" (letter, May 6).


Philip Morris On Offensive In California
For the last five years, California has been the national leader in the fight against smoking, using a combination of restrictions, taxes and advertising campaigns to reduce cigarette consumption by almost 30 percent.
Now, with smoking higher than ever on the nation's health agenda and other states beginning to look to California as the model for ways to combat it, the country's largest tobacco company, Philip Morris, has begun an all-out counterattack intended to slow and then roll back the nationwide drive toward more stringent smoking laws.


Brodeur Goes Distance And the Effort Pays Off
After failing to finish any of his four regular-season starts against the Rangers, and watching his team lose every one of them, Martin Brodeur came though in double overtime last night and this morning, when it counted most for the Devils.
The 22-year-old rookie goaltender made saves on 35 shots, including 9 in the first overtime and 3 in the second extra session, to help the Devils to a 4-3 triumph over the Rangers at Madison Square Garden.


New York Can't Afford To Lose Mostly Mozart
To the Editor:
A May 4 news article warns that New York City might soon see the end of a remarkable musical tradition.
For 27 years Lincoln Center has been host to the Mostly Mozart Festival, one of the most popular presentations of classical music anywhere.
As you note, the festival, "with its informal character and moderate ticket prices has become a pioneering example of successful musical programming." People come, enjoy the music and return year after year.


LSB Industries Inc.(LSB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reviews/Ballet Theater; Sensuous Ananiashvili, With a Bold Heathcote
The new cast presented by American Ballet Theater on Saturday night for Sir Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon" at the Metropolitan Opera House was testimony to international cooperation.
Nina Ananiashvili, the Georgian ballerina who made her name with the Bolshoi Ballet, a Russian company, has been dancing other MacMillan works with the Royal Ballet in London.
But this was the first time she had performed the title role of "Manon."
Steven Heathcote, a guest from the Australian Ballet, who appeared opposite her as Des Grieux, had danced his role at home but never with Ballet Theater.
Another debut came from Christine Dunham, a regular principal with Ballet Theater, as the mistress of Lescaut, Manon's brother.
Lescaut himself was brilliantly danced, as last year, by Robert Wallace.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  It's Final: Unser Jr.
Stays on the Pole  Al Unser Jr. spent a restless night with his TV tuned to The Weather Channel.
"I was hoping for more rain, or more hot weather, or wind," said Unser, whose wishes came true yesterday as warm, humid and windy weather kept his teammate and chief rival, Emerson Fittipaldi, from knocking him off the pole for the 78th Indianapolis 500.
"The difference is the weather," said Unser, whose four-lap, 10-mile average of 228.011 miles an hour on Saturday held up for his first Indy pole.
Fittipaldi came up short at 227.303 yesterday, good for the outside of the front row for the May 29 race.
Fittipaldi, the two-time and defending Indy winner, and the 1969 winner Mario Andretti were among seven drivers who made qualifying attempts yesterday during an extension of the first of four days of time trials, made necessary because of rain on Saturday.
Each of the entries that drew for a position in the first-day qualifying order was guaranteed one shot at the pole when track activity resumed Sunday.
Fittipaldi had been favored to beat Unser, his Marlboro Team Penske teammate, for the coveted pole, worth more than $130,000 in cash and prizes.
Raul Boesel of Brazil, driving one of the five Dick Simon-owned cars that made successful attempts on the first day, wound up between Unser and Fittipaldi at 227.618.
By the end of yesterday's session, 30 of the 33 positions were filled, with additional qualifications scheduled next Saturday and Sunday.
Once the field is full, faster cars can bump out the slowest qualifiers until the end of the time trials. (AP) Schumacher Cruises: Michael Schumacher, driving a Benetton-Ford, won his fourth consecutive race of the season at the Monaco Grand Prix, an event without serious accidents.
Starting from the pole position in Monte Carlo, Schumacher led throughout and finished more than 35 seconds ahead of Martin Brundle.
Gerhard Berger was third.
The first two spots on Monaco's starting grid were left open in honor of Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger, two Formula One drivers killed two weeks ago. (AP) GOLF  Lancaster Rises From the Playoff Pack  Neal Lancaster won the largest sudden-death playoff in the history of the PGA Tour yesterday, beating five others for the title in the storm-shortened GTE Byron Nelson Classic in Dallas.
Lancaster won for the first time in his five years on the tour when he sank a 4-foot birdie putt on the first extra hole at the TPC at Las Colinas.
He beat David Ogrin, David Edwards, the Japanese rookie Yoshi Mizumaki, Tom Byrum and Mark Carnevale, all having completed one round on each of two rain-soaked courses for totals of nine-under-par 132. (AP) Trevino the Finisher: Lee Trevino finally beat the back-nine blues at the PaineWebber Invitational.
For two days, Trevino had labored over the final nine holes at the TPC at Piper Glen in Charlotte, N.C., and managed even par.
In yesterday's final round, he got two birdies on the back side and finished at four-under-par 68 for a three-day total of 13-under-par 203 and a one-shot victory over Jim Colbert and Jimmy Powell. (AP) TENNIS Graf (Who Else?) Wins German Open  Top-ranked Steffi Graf won her eighth German Open title, defeating Brenda Schultz, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4, yesterday in Berlin.
Graf, who has reached the final of this tournament 10 times, warded off a set point at 5-6 in the tie breaker and then whipped a pair of passing shots to win the set. (AP) ROWING  Brown Oarsmen Turn Back All Comers  The oarsmen from Brown found an old broom and waved it on the dock yesterday to symbolize the sweep they accomplished at the Eastern Sprints regatta on Lake Quinsigmand in Worcester, Mass.
The keenest competiton was for second place as the three Bruin heavyweight crews -- freshman, second varsity, and varsity -- left the others in their wake.
All three remained unbeaten in capturing the first regatta of college crew's triple crown.
SOCCER  U.S.
Finds a Team It Can Beat: Armenia  Frank Klopas, showing no signs of the knee problem that plagued him the past two years, scored in the 64th minute yesterday to give the United States a 1-0 victory over Armenia in Fullerton, Calif.
Klopas, who had surgery last July to repair ligament damage in his right knee, has scored four goals in his last five games. (AP) RUNNING  Canadian Woman Wins the Chinmoy  Antana Locs of Montreal won the Sri Chinmoy 7-Day Race, covering 518 miles in the around-the-clock race on Randalls Island.
Donald Winkley, 56, of Corpus Christi, Tex., was fourth over all and led the men's division with 470 miles.
Five of the top 10 finishers in the May 7-15 race were women.
Eight women and 17 men took part. (AP)


Fairchild Corp.(FA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Yankees' Winning Itinerary Earns a 10
Play, win, play it down, repeat.
Duplicate this arduous routine for 10 straight days while averting disasters and humbling opponents with skills and thrills.
Wake up each morning for the last week to find yourself entrenched in first place.
This has been the itinerary for the streaking, surging, successful Yankees lately.
And on the 11th day, the Yankees will finally rest.
They will rest after destroying the Brewers, 12-1, at County Stadium today to balloon their winning streak to 10 games, and the rest of the American League was probably elated that New York does not play on Monday.
But any elation should be tempered because Manager Buck Showalter was busy compiling the next itinerary and it starts in Minnesota with Jimmy Key on Tuesday.


No Headline
Yesterday's adolescent fist fight is today's adolescent shootout.
Yesterday's black eye and injured pride is today's gaping exit wound with massive injuries.
It's casting a pall of fear over the lives of American children. -- DR.
JAY WINSTEN of the Harvard School of Public Health.  [ A15:1. ]


In a Flood of Praise, Discouraging Words
Judge Stephen G. Breyer, President Clinton's choice to join the Supreme Court, arrived in Washington yesterday amid bipartisan acclaim.
Both Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, and Senator George S. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, said Judge Breyer would easily be confirmed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Fresh ideas and sparse attendance at the 76th annual meeting of the industry's trade group.
THE 76th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies ended here Saturday on an upbeat note amid signs the industry's long nightmare might also be ending.
It was also clear that some leaders have fresh ideas for such challenges as mastering the emerging new media and increasing employment of minorities.
Too bad, then, that turnout was so sparse at the closing general session.
Speakers including Gerald M. Levin, the chairman, president and chief executive of Time Warner Inc.; Allen Rosenshine, the chairman and chief executive of BBDO Worldwide, and Roy Bostock, the chairman and chief executive of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles and the 1993-94 chairman of the Four A's, as the association is known, all had intriguing things to say.
Attendance at the meeting, which began Wednesday, was already low, at around 400 -- of whom only an estimated 150 were agency executives.
But it sagged noticeably on the last day, and Mr.
Bostock, the final speaker, addressed perhaps 100 people.
"After three years of tumult and change, questioning our very value," he said, "I'm happy to say the industry is coming back."
One indication, he said, is the "resurgence" in market share that name-brand products are achieving against cheaper private-label rivals when "product quality and strong brand advertising are coupled with value pricing" -- in other words, when marketers, including two of his clients, Procter &amp; Gamble and Burger King, lower prices on brands shoppers prefer.
More "dramatic evidence" of improvement, Mr.
Bostock said, is that so-called spot television time is sold out from April through June "for the first time in six or seven years" in local markets like Atlanta, Washington and Las Vegas, Nev.
Mr.
Bostock's optimism manifested itself tangibly after the meeting ended.
He spent $1,400 to charter a private airplane at the Greenbrier Valley Airport after mechanical difficulties forced a three-hour delay in the return flight to New York City of a Delta Air Lines jet the Four A's had chartered for those attending.
Mr.
Rosenshine, whose agency handles the Delta account, gave no indication he heard the jokes about his client's previous slogan, "Delta is ready when you are." In his speech, he compared the new media technologies -- a recurring subject at the meeting -- to "a party we'd all better start dressing for" or it "will go on without us."
"The party as we know it is indeed over," Mr.
Rosenshine said, because "our clients basically and fundamentally no longer accept on faith the value of conventional advertising placed in conventional media." Still, he added, "there are other parties around town we can get in on."
Mr.
Levin said that while "lots of advertisers share this enthusiasm" that Time Warner has for parties -- er, new technologies like interactive television -- "their agencies don't always."
"At best, there's often a lack of urgency," he added.
"At worst, there's the suspicion this will only take another slice out of an already shrinking advertising pie."
"Those of you who jump in sooner will have the chance to participate in the creation of this medium and with the ability to shape and determine its content," Mr.
Levin said.
"If you stand by and wait, it may be very difficult to play a substantial role."
Jay Chiat, the chairman and chief executive of Chiat/Day, posed a provocative question about advertising and emerging technologies: "Will it be allowed?"
Consumers might need to be paid to watch ads, he added, or "might put up with advertising" only if it was "of enough interest."
"This is so critical to our collective and individual futures," he said at a luncheon on Friday.
He proposed that "each agency select the best and brightest media person" to work to "create a kind of knowledge fund" about new technologies to be shared by all Four A's members.
Mr.
Chiat also issued a challenge on another issue: "the lack of color at this gathering and in the agency industry in general." He said Chiat/ Day would start a fund by contributing $100,000 over the next four years for programs to encourage members of minorities to enter the industry.
Mr.
Chiat recommended that the top 20 agencies make similar donations, raising $2 million; that the next 50 largest each contribute $50,000, for another $2.5 million, and that the remaining Four A's members donate $10,000 each, for another $3 million.
Bruce Lev, a partner and creative services director with Levlane Advertising in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., immediately pledged that he would be "the first small agency to participate." Mr.
Chiat also received support from O. Burtch Drake, the president and chief executive of the Four A's, who said he would seek to expand participation in the association's minority advertising internship program.
Indeed, there were no black, Hispanic or Asian-American agency executives at the meeting.


New Line of Laptops Offered by Apple Today
Aiming to regain the high ground in the hotly contested laptop computer market, Apple Computer Inc. on Monday will introduce six models in its Powerbook line of portable Macintoshes.
The new computers are available immediately, at suggested retail prices ranging from $2,269 to $5,539.
A hit laptop is crucial to Apple if it is to regain market share lost to the Compaq Computer Corporation and I.B.M., both of which have been quicker to introduce more powerful machines with higher-resolution screens.
Recent studies by Dataquest, a market research company based in San Jose, Calif., show Compaq edging ahead of Apple in laptop and overall personal computer sales.


Officer, 24, Kills Himself After a Traffic Accident
An off-duty rookie police officer involved in a traffic accident Saturday night got out of his car and, while fellow officers from another precinct filled out the accident report, shot and killed himself, the police said yesterday.
The death of the officer, Stephen Griffin, 24, was the fourth suicide by a New York City police officer this year.
As investigators sought underlying reasons, the death appeared to speak to the complicated pressures that can add to the challenges of police life: the sudden violent death of colleagues, pressure on personal relationships and fear of losing the job, among others.


Canandaigua Wine Gives Job to Trone
The Canandaigua Wine Company has selected Trone Advertising in Greensboro, N.C., to handle its wine brands' media business and develop all creative work for leading labels, including Paul Masson wines and brandy, Cook's champagne and Wild Irish Rose.
The account, with billings estimated to exceed $6 million, was previously handled on a project basis by various agencies.
Trone, which has handled projects for the Cook's brand, was awarded the account on Friday after a two-and-a-half-month review that also included Jay Inc. in Rochester, Eric Mower &amp; Associates in Syracuse and Hutchins/Young &amp; Rubicam in Rochester along with Young &amp; Rubicam's New York office.


Other Kickback Cases
Apartment-dwellers have not been the only victims of property management corruption in Manhattan, investigators say.
Earlier this year, Federal agents arrested a former commercial building manager and an assistant manager for Four New York Plaza in lower Manhattan on charges of bilking the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company of more than $1 million in kickbacks through false and inflated bills.
According to a new indictment filed for a trial planned for early June, the defendants, Robert W. Crawford Jr. -- identified as The King, a nickname the Government said he used in his dealings as manager -- and Anthony F. Mayo, his assistant at the management company Cross &amp; Brown, used dummy corporations to overbill the building for fuel oil and sheet metal, among other schemes, between 1984 and 1990.
The two defendants, who have pleaded not guilty, face up to 20 years imprisonment and millions of dollars in fines if convicted.


Only Bills For Auction This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.10 percent, and the rate on a six-month bill was 4.66 percent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the death of Wardell R. Lazard, chairman of W. R. Lazard &amp; Company, misidentified an investment firm for which that company acted as middleman in dealings with New York City's job development authority.
It was J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, not Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Conductors Prize Awarded
Robert Spano, the music director of the Oberlin Conservatory Opera Theater, is the winner of the 1994 Seaver/National Endowment for the Arts Conductors Award, a $75,000 prize administered by the Juilliard School.
The prize is given every three years to an American conductor in the early stages of a careers, with the winner selected by an advisory council.
Mr.
Spano, 33, was an assistant conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra from 1990 to 1992 and made his professional debut in Boston in 1991.
He has also conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra, the Chicago Symphony and the Opera Theater of St.
Louis, as well as orchestras in Europe and Asia.
He studied at Oberlin College and at the Curtis Institute of Music.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
In Latin America's worst banking crisis of the free-market 1990's, a series of bank failures have left half of Venezuela's banks in state hands.
Taxpayers face a $6.1 billion bailout bill as the Government props up nine of the banks, including Banco Latino, the nation's second-largest.
More banks may fail as inspectors unravel a five-year-long banking spree of deregulated interest rates and minimal Government supervision.  [ Page A1. ]


Canadian Fracmaster reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rothmans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Resurrecting an American Tragedy, BBC Series Lays Watergate Bare
During the dark days when Richard M. Nixon's White House was being slowly and inexorably crushed by the growing weight of Watergate, it was fashionable among some in Europe to ridicule America's preoccupation with the scandal.
Fred Emery, who at the time was the Washington bureau chief for The Times of London, recently recalled having to persuade his editor, William Rees-Mogg, not to refer to the American journalists as a "lynch mob," because the editor regarded their pursuit of Nixon as unseemly.
So it is curious, in a way, that it is the British -- specifically, the British Broadcasting Corporation -- who are now first in line to remember and mark the approaching 20th anniversary of Nixon's resignation, with a voluminous five-part documentary series on Watergate.
Running for an hour each Sunday night through June 5, the broadcasts on BBC2, the network's second national channel, use snippets from the White House tape recordings, pieces of archival film and fresh interviews with nearly all of the principal players -- but not the former President himself -- to reconstruct what the documentary describes as the "greatest political scandal in American history."


Failure of High-Flying Banks Shakes Venezuelan Economy
In Latin America's worst banking crisis of the free-market 1990's, a string of failures since January has left half of Venezuela's banking industry in the hands of the Government.
Venezuelan taxpayers face a $6.1 billion bailout bill, as the Government props up nine banks, including Banco Latino, the nation's second largest.
More banks may fail as inspectors unravel a five-year-long banking spree generated by deregulated interest rates and minimal Government supervision.
This often resulted in banks offering rates for deposits that were far higher than were justified by loan demand.


T2 Medical Inc.(TSQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; Bulls and bears bet on how much a mortgage servicer is worth.
THE LOMAS FINANCIAL CORPORATION says it has found bidders willing to pay good money for one of its most dubious assets.
But that is unlikely to quiet the virulent debate on how much the company is worth.
Lomas, which is based in Dallas and whose main business is servicing mortgage loans, said in March that it had hired Salomon Brothers to shop it around.
That produced a brief spurt in the stock's price, but it quickly slid back in the face of heavy short-selling encouraged by two analysts who said the company was vastly overvalued.


Stony Brook Chief Tells of Road Ahead
Calling the turmoil of the Vietnam era superficial compared with the world of today, the departing president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook told the 2,600 undergraduates and 1,700 graduates in the 1994 graduating class that the road ahead for them would be more difficult than the one he had followed.
"The continuity of education and career that many of my classmates and I experienced is rare today," said the president, John Marburger.
The future today, he said, is a field "for which no curriculum seems adequate."


A Thoroughfare for Wildlife, Paved in Green; Park That Replaced a Parkway on Staten Island Is 30 Years Old, and Growing
Carlton Beil allows as how he has never heard a mockingbird imitate a wood duck, though generations of Staten Islanders are sure for some reason that he has.
But he eagerly volunteers that a wood frog in mating season can sound like a duck with a sore throat.
Mr.
Beil, 86, talks of turtles and American chestnut trees and finding his first rare fossil.
Children gaze at him with awe as he lights a fire the Indian way.
He is a naturalist, a teacher, a student.


An Inquiry Broadens at Prudential
Federal prosecutors are investigating whether senior executives of the Prudential Insurance Company of America systematically defrauded large institutional investors in some of the company's real estate funds of as much as $50 million, people with knowledge of the inquiry said on Friday.
The inquiry stems from the larger scandal at the company's brokerage subsidiary, Prudential Securities, which involves charges of fraud in the sales of limited partnerships.
This latest area of inquiry signals a broadening of the investigation, with prosecutors for the first time examining potential wrongdoing at the parent company unrelated to the activities at the brokerage subsidiary.


Extricate Foreign Aid From the Mire
The Clinton Administration has proposed a long-overdue revamping of the legal framework for foreign aid that begins to address today's needs.
But the legislation is mired in a backlog of bills in the Senate.
It will take a firm push from President Clinton and George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, to enact it this year.
The current law governing foreign aid dates back to 1961, when the crisis over Berlin was threatening to heat up the cold war.
Much of the aid was then directed at shoring up outmoded military alliances, often with unsavory regimes.


Outsider Smooths Chrysler's Ride
Things were supposed to get a little ugly when Robert J. Eaton came here two years ago to run the Chrysler Corporation.
Mr.
Eaton, an engineer and executive from General Motors, had never set foot inside Chrysler's headquarters here, or inside a Chrysler plant anywhere.
He barely knew Chrysler's leading executives, including the man who had wanted his job, Robert A. Lutz.
Mr.
Lutz, the president, was the favorite candidate for chairman among many of Chrysler's executives, dealers and institutional investors.


Corrections
The Real Estate column on Wednesday, about plans for a development site in Philadelphia, misidentified the agency that reduced the price on the land.
It was the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, not the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Custody Approved For Florida Girl, 15, Who Was Swapped
A judge has approved a settlement that gives custody of Kimberly Mays, the girl who was switched at birth, to her biological parents.
Judge Stephen Dakan of State Circuit Court issued an order on Friday that officially granted parental rights to the biological parents, Ernest and Regina Twigg, while preserving the rights of Robert Mays, who reared 15-year-old Kimberly.


Fitzgerald Awarded Vlasic Assignment
The Fitzgerald Companies has been awarded the first regional marketing assignment by the Campbell Soup Company for its Vlasic pickles brand.
Billings on the assignment, which includes advertising, promotional marketing programs and public relations in the Southeast, were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Waiting for Yanks: The (No Longer) Woebegone Twins
Twins 5, Orioles 2
Minnesota's Kevin Tapani has a history of erratic pitching in the first six weeks of the season.
The Twins are hoping his victory yesterday in the Metrodome pushes him in the right direction.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; ABC's ownership of big slices of its fall lineup is raising eyebrows in Hollywood studios.
ABC fired the first shots in the annual onslaught of new prime-time television lineups last week -- and the shots hit home among many studio executives in Hollywood.
It wasn't that ABC was going for a bold new trend in programming.
Far from it.
The "family" network, as ABC has consciously styled itself, added six programs for the fall, and all but one center on family life.
ABC now crowds more families onto its property than Disney World.


Beaten Becker Concedes: Sampras Does Wear Cape
On Saturday, on the eve of their Italian Open final, Boris Becker said he did not think Pete Sampras was superman.
Today, Becker had to reconsider.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Industrial Production . . .
April  Capacity Utilization . . .
April  Tuesday  Housing Starts and Permits . . .
April  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Balance of Trade March  Friday  None


METRO DIGEST
GAPS IN GERIATRIC CARE CAUSE ALARM
While the number of older Americans is rising quickly -- particularly those over 85 and in the frailest health -- experts say the number of doctors trained to meet their needs is in critically short supply and that this shortage is seriously endangering the health and quality of the lives of the elderly.
A reluctance by doctors to confront aging and death, poor reimbursement for medical services and a dearth of qualified academic leaders and role models all conspire to make geriatrics an unpopular field at a time of growing necessity.
So Dr.
Sean Morrison, a specialist in geriatric medicine, is an anomaly.
Through a fellowship program that links the Mount Sinai Medical Center with the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan, Dr.
Morrison has spent the past year treating elderly patients in the nursing home, in their doctors' offices and in the apartments they are desperately trying to remain in despite the encroaching years and infirmities.
A1.


Accounts
*
Financial Security Assurance, New York, to Jerry &amp; Ketchum, New York, to handle the bond insurer's account, previously at Brouillard Communications, New York.
Western International Media, New York, continues to handle the broadcast media portion of the account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
G.
Heileman Brewing Co., Rosemont, Ill., to W. B. Doner &amp; Company, Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., to handle new-product development.
Doner, which at one time handled Heileman accounts including Colt .45 Malt Liquor, was awarded the assignment without a review.
Billings have not been determined.


Double Overtime Winds Up Devils' Time
The Rangers-Devils series began with a big bang last night, and the visitors from New Jersey concluded a grueling, gripping game by upsetting the favored home team.
They did it when Stephane Richer scored on a spectacular rush, in double overtime, giving them a 4-3 victory at Madison Square Garden.
He scored shortly after midnight, at 15 minutes and 23 seconds of the second sudden-death extra period, by seizing an opportunity that began with Ranger defenseman Jeff Beukeboom trapped deep in the Devils end of the ice.


Crucial Senate Panel Remains Uncommitted on Health Plan
Although its chairman insists it will eventually back a health care bill that promises universal insurance, the pivotal Senate Finance Committee is probably further from taking a position than any of the other Congressional committees working on the topic.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the committee, and its other members expect the committee to play the central role in shaping a bill.
They point to their own knowledge about health, the fact that the margin of 11 Democrats to 9 Republicans mirrors the Senate itself and, not least, their jurisdictional authority over taxes, Medicare and Medicaid.


Driver Killed In Explosion Of Gas Truck
A gasoline tanker truck tipped over and exploded yesterday on the busy interchange between the Brooklyn-Queens and Long Island Expressways in Queens, killing the driver in an inferno so intense that it melted pavement and a light pole.
The explosion also injured four people who tried to help the truck driver escape before his load caught fire.
Flames shot high into a hazy sky, and a column of thick black smoke that was visible for miles contributed to traffic jams that snarled both highways for hours.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BANKS FAIL IN VENEZUELA
In Latin America's worst banking crisis of the free-market 1990's, a string of bank failures has left half of Venezuela's banking sector in the hands of the state.
A1


Police Mistakes Cited in Death Of Boston Man
Two investigations of a police raid that led to the death of a 75-year-old minister found that a bad tip, bad police work, a lack of supervision and inadequate regulations governing confidential informers had all contributed to the death.
The investigations, whose results were released last week, were conducted by the Boston Police Department and the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office.


CHRONICLE
There are not many people for whom BARBARA COOK would sing a song these days, but HAL PRINCE is an exception.
The Broadway producer and director will be honored at the Theater Development Fund's 25th anniversary celebration Sunday in Shubert Alley and at the Broadhurst Theater.
Ms.
Cook is to perform along with Carol Burnett, Len Cariou, Liza Minnelli and Chita Rivera, among others.


INSIDE
Ex-Officer Shoots 4 People
An ex-policeman upset about a vandalized garden hose shot four people, two fatally, before killing himself in Rome, N.Y., officials said.
Page B5.
Caution on North Korea
The United States will wait for nuclear inspection reports before deciding on North Korean sanctions.
Page A3.
Christopher to Visit Jericho
Officials said that despite the trip, the United States continues to opppose a Palestinian state.
Page A8. 15 Minutes Plus
In Pittsburgh, thousands attend a marathon of events for the Warhol Museum opening.
The Arts, page C13.
Knicks and Rangers Lose
The Bulls beat the Knicks, 95-83, to tie their playoff series at two apiece.
In hockey, the Devils beat the Rangers, 4-3, in double overtime in Game 1 of their playoff.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Sir Alfred Beit, 91, Philanthropist And Art Collector
Sir Alfred Beit, a wealthy but unlucky British baronet whose art collection was twice sacked by criminals, died on Thursday in Dublin, the British newspaper The Independent reported.
He was 91 and lived southwest of Dublin, in County Wicklow.
Sir Alfred's collection was chiefly amassed by his father, Sir Otto Beit, who was a mining magnate in South Africa.


Immigration
Immigration in this region jumped in the 1990's after a series of visa programs aimed at countries "adversely affected" by the stricter immigration controls enacted in 1965.
As these new immigrants use familial ties to sponsor people, legal immigration should continue to rise, experts predict.
The latest immigration sweepstakes is the Diversity Immigrant Visa Lottery.
It will make 55,000 permanent resident visas available annually to people from countries with low rates of immigration to the U.S. such as Japan and most of Western Europe.
As a nation's rate rises or falls, it can be removed from or added to the list of eligible countries.
New York City planners expect more people from eastern Europe and Africa as a result of the new program.
The mail-in period for the first "DV-1" visas is June 1 to June 30.


Sports of The Times; Two Worms Inside the Big Apple
THE young-timer had been waiting for the old-timer to stop by for a beer.
"The Big Apple's never had it this good," the young-timer said.
"I know the Bulls tied the series, but the Knicks are going all the way, and if the Rangers don't win the Stanley Cup, the Devils will. The Yankees are in first place. The Mets are respectable again. The Islanders and the Nets made the playoffs. Imagine if the Jets join the Giants in the playoffs."


Essay; Clinton at His Best
The President of the United States called all six of his speechwriters into the Oval Office last week.
To overcome a pervasive sense of cynicism about how little government can accomplish, he wanted to speak to America's larger concerns.
He told them that a President had to do more than propose or push specific legislation; he had to convey hope and confidence.
Clinton wanted to "reach the people who don't believe the system is working for them anymore" by exhorting Americans to restore their sense of community and to reassume more personal responsibility.


Cuban-Americans Open a Dialogue With Cuba
To the Editor:
Having just returned from "The Nation and the Emigration" conference in Havana, I see efforts being made to belittle its importance as the first meeting since December 1978 between officials of the Cuban Government and Cubans living abroad.


U.S. Delays Taking Steps Over A-Plant
The Clinton Administration expressed concern today over North Korea's announcement that it had begun extracting nuclear fuel from its largest reactor before international inspectors arrived, but Washington delayed any decision on seeking economic sanctions until the inspectors report their findings.
Administration officials have repeatedly warned North Korea that any effort to harvest the fuel, which the Pentagon says could provide enough material for four or five nuclear bombs, would result in a call to the United Nations to issue sanctions.


Opel Confirms Detectives' Use
The General Motors Corporation's Adam Opel A.G. unit said today that it had hired detectives to tail workers at Volkswagen A.G. because of fears that the VW staff had stolen trade secrets.
Opel's statement followed a report in the news magazine Der Spiegel, which said Opel had had VW's purchasing chief, Jose Ignacio Lopez, and other workers followed, and that VW had responded by arranging for the Opel detectives to be watched.


Adler Boschetto Gets Jimlar Shoe Account
The Jimlar Corporation, a shoe manufacturer in Great Neck, L.I., has named Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated to exceed $2 million.
The account was previously handled by Lotas Minard Patton McIver in New York, until that agency resigned when it was awarded the creative portion of U.S.
Shoe's Easy Spirit women's shoe account.


Historic Battalion Honors the Memory of Martin Luther King


A City Budget Checklist
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget policy for New York City is basically sound: cut spending, raise city employees' productivity and start reducing taxes.
But by exempting the Police and Fire Departments from cuts, he forces disproportionate cuts on other agencies.
Some are dead wrong.
Here are four:
Youth services: City-sponsored programs steer thousands of today's young people -- potentially, tomorrow's adult work force -- away from lives of drift and drugs.
In addition to sports and summer jobs, there are programs to help dropouts and runaways, vital drug prevention programs and other outreach efforts.
The Mayor's budget fails to pinpoint the impacts of his cuts, but they are pervasive.
And dreadfully shortsighted.


Burnett Client Wins an Award
As executives of the Leo Burnett Company rooted for their hometown Chicago Bulls to pull off a "four-peat" in the National Basketball Association playoffs, their agency achieved a "three-peat" at the A+ Awards ceremony at the 76th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
For the third straight year, a Burnett client won the A+ Advertiser Award for consistently outstanding campaigns over a five-year period.
The McDonald's Corporation was selected from finalists that also included the American units of two overseas marketers, Ikea and Michelin.
The two previous Burnett clients that won were Hallmark Cards Inc. in 1993 and United Airlines in 1992.


Lifeblood of Reader's Digest Is 40-Year-Old Data Base
In an obscure corner of the sprawling Reader's Digest Association headquarters here, a small elevator operated by special key cards descends four floors below ground.
The doors slide open silently to huge gray silos and banks of flickering television monitors, home to one of the largest private consumer data bases in the world.
Seven days a week, 24 hours a day, the files in these looming storage tanks are updated with information about people who subscribe to Reader's Digest magazines, books, compact disks, cassettes and videos.
At a time when growing numbers of publishing companies are racing to develop data bases to market their products better, Reader's Digest is years ahead.
The files, started 40 years ago in much simpler form, now hold information on an astounding 100 million households worldwide.


Self-Limiting Terms in Congress
It is virtually certain that more than half the members of the House in the Congress that convenes next January will have served four years or less, because so many incumbents are calling it quits.
So far this year, close to 50 have announced they will not seek re-election in November, and more withdrawals are expected; even larger numbers left in 1990 and 1992.
Nine senators have also declared their departure this year.
Some drop out because they smell defeat, others are leaving to seek another office, and still others have had their fill of politics -- the grinding pace of getting anything done, the constant call of fund-raising and, withal, the public contempt.
Whatever the explanation, the exodus demonstrates that the political system can generate its own turnover without arbitrary term limits.


Lawyers Protest in Egypt
Thousands of Egyptian lawyers paralyzed the courts today with a one-day strike, angered by the Government's failure to punish the police officers they say tortured an Islamic militant lawyer to death.
The Egyptian Government has denied responsibility for the death of the lawyer, Abdel Harith Madani, on April 27, saying he died of asthma and lung failure.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., Cambridge, Mass., an initial public offering of 1.85 million units, each representing one common share and one warrant.
D.
Blech.


Gaps in Geriatric Medicine Alarm Health Professionals
At a time when the population of the United States is growing older, the need for doctors properly trained in the problems and the process of aging is urgent.
And so it might seem that Sean Morrison had entered a competitive field when he decided a few years ago, in the middle of his medical training, to specialize in geriatric medicine.
Through a fellowship program that links the Mount Sinai Medical Center with the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan, Dr.
Morrison has spent the past year treating elderly patients in the nursing home, in their doctors' offices and in the apartments they are desperately trying to remain in despite the encroaching years and infirmities.


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Men's Wearhouse Inc.(SUIT) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Both Verbally and Musically, A Tribute to Avery Fisher
Avery Fisher, the musical philanthropist who died on Feb. 26 at the age of 87, was honored on Friday afternoon at the hall that bears his name.
Tributes came in the form of both words and music, with several musicians who knew Mr.
Fisher playing excerpts from his favorite chamber works.
At the same time, it was announced that this year's Avery Fisher Prize, the major award in the Avery Fisher Artist Program, would go to the pianist Garrick Ohlsson.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, memorialized Mr.
Fisher first, saying that "he never lost his awe or reverence for music and musicians." Joseph W. Polisi, the president of Juilliard, spoke of his involvement with young musicians, noting that he had given his 1692 Stradivarius to the school a couple of years before his death.
Martin E. Segal, the chairman emeritus of Lincoln Center, recalled Mr.
Fisher's achievements as head of Fisher Electronics, which led the way in high-fidelity stereo equipment after World War II.


The Prado Loses Another Director
The Prado Museum was thrown into disarray this weekend after the resignation of its third director in barely three years.
At his post exactly 200 days, Francisco Calvo Serraller complained that he had been publicly criticized by Spain's Culture Minister, Carmen Alborch.
Mr.
Calvo Serraller was admonished for allowing a magazine, Nuevo Estilo, to photograph designer chairs at the Prado in Las Meninas gallery, where the Velazquez masterpiece of the same name hangs.
Mr.
Calvo Serraller's wife works at Nuevo Estilo, and a local newspaper accused him of conflict of interest.


Yonkers Mayor Ignites Debate on Rising School Violence
At 7:45 on an early spring morning, the 1,600 students at Roosevelt High School were startled by the sudden appearance of this city's Mayor, Terence M. Zaleski.
It was not a friendly visit.
The Mayor, accompanied by a cadre of police officers armed with portable metal detectors, stormed onto the school grounds in what he said was an attempt to restore order, one day after a student had been stabbed in a school hallway.
But like many others there, Liz Smith, the co-president of the senior class at Roosevelt, saw the Mayor's unannounced visit as unnecessary and self-serving.


Canadian Natural reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bulls Even Score to Put Pressure Squarely on Knicks' Shoulders
It was the Knicks' poorest performance of the playoffs, and it left them in a precarious position.
Dominated after the first six minutes, the Knicks were whipped by the Bulls tonight, 95-83, at Chicago Stadium, leaving their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series tied at two victories apiece.


Abroad at Home; Brown V. Board
Forty years ago tomorrow the Supreme Court started this country on an extraordinary undertaking: to undo 300 years of legally enforced racism.
That was the effect of Brown v.
Board of Education, decided on May 17, 1954.
There is a certain skepticism now about the Brown decision.
After all, it is said, race remains the American dilemma.
Blacks as a group still suffer enormous disadvantages.
What difference did it make?


Turner Broadcasting System Inc.(TBS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In a Sea of Praise, Discouraging Words
Judge Stephen G. Breyer arrived in Washington today to the kind of bipartisan acclaim that was one of President Clinton's main reasons for nominating him to the Supreme Court.
But while both Democratic and Republican Senate leaders were praising the Boston judge, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat and longtime veteran of the Judiciary Committee, was expressing reservations about him, saying that he viewed Judge Breyer as someone who consistently favored corporate interests and a weakening of Government regulations.


Fighting Flares in Rwanda's Gruesome War


15 Minutes and Then Some At the New Warhol Museum
In the words of the poet W. H. Auden, Andy Warhol "became his admirers" this weekend in Pittsburgh, where thousands of friends and fans from all over the world descended on Warhol's hometown.
The occasion was the opening of the $12 million Andy Warhol Museum, the biggest single-artist museum in the United States.
And just about everyone who came had something to say.
"I was looking forward to a reunion of old hippies, but the people here look amazingly respectable," said Holly Solomon, the SoHo art dealer.
"So many of the old Warholers are still alive." Fran Lebowitz, the writer who worked at Interview, the artist's magazine, from 1970 to 1982, said she was seeing people she hadn't seen in years.


CHRONICLE
For as long as AIDS walks have been held to raise funds in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, Michael Callen started the proceedings by singing "Love Don't Need a Reason."
On Sunday, when 28,000 participants are expected to gather in Central Park for the ninth annual AIDS Walk New York to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis, MARSHA MELAMET and HOLLY NEAR will sing the song in his stead.
Mr.
Callen died on Dec. 27, 12 years after doctors determined that he had AIDS.


In Yemen's Civil War, South Fights On, Gloomily
Maj.
Masih Homadi peered from the crags of jagged black volcanic rocks where his troops had just taken cover and tried to steady his nerves for another assault.
As his soldiers, many in plastic sandals and motley uniforms, slammed clips into their AK-47 assault rifles, mortar blasts exploded in the valley below the mountain village of Marqula, and the deep-throated rattle of heavy machine guns echoed across the ravines.


Survival and Succession in Britain
For months, the biggest question in British politics has been whether Prime Minister John Major will survive as leader of the Conservative Party, which has been racked by squabbling over its plummeting popularity and by rifts over European policy.
Now, with the death last Thursday of its leader, John Smith, the opposition Labor Party is facing a potentially divisive debate of its own.
During the next few weeks, the party must negotiate the politically perilous task of choosing a new leader.


CENSUS OFFICIALS PLAN BIG CHANGES IN GATHERING DATA
Facing soaring costs and evidence that the 1990 census was in some ways the least accurate in decades, the Census Bureau is planning wholesale changes in how it will collect data in the year 2000 and beyond.
One change that is expected to be adopted, census officials say, is the use of sophisticated estimates based on surveys to supplement the actual counting -- a volatile issue that was the center of a furious partisan battle in the last census.


Ex-Police Officer Kills 2 Teen-Agers and Himself
Angry that someone had slashed his garden hose, a dismissed police officer in Rome, N.Y., strode out onto his driveway with a handgun concealed in a sweatshirt Saturday night and shot three teen-aged boys, two fatally as they rode by on bicycles.
He also wounded an adult neighbor, then shot and killed himself.
The shootings stunned Rome, a blue-collar community of 45,000 residents, 35 miles east of Syracuse in Oneida County, where serious crime is relatively rare and a troubled local economy and a new Oneida Indian casino are usually the important news.


Survivors of Pipeline Explosion Renew Marriage Vows


World Economies


Books of The Times; Colored to Negro To Black: a Journey
Colored People  By Henry Louis Gates Jr.
216 pages. Alfred A. Knopf $22.
Like many successful Americans, Henry Louis Gates Jr. -- the chairman of the Afro-American studies department at Harvard University -- has traveled a great distance to eminence.
And in his joyfully exuberant memoir, "Colored People," he goes a long way back to recall his childhood in Piedmont, W.Va., which, as he writes in the opening sentence of his book, sits on the side of a hill in the Allegheny Mountains, "slathered along the ridge of 'Old Baldie' mountain like butter on the jagged side of a Parker House roll."


At 20, Kicking Up a Storm for the U.S. Team
The soccer-impaired will find it easiest to think of Claudio Reyna in these terms: He is the guy who won the three national titles at Virginia that Ralph Sampson never could.
Reyna is nowhere near 7 feet, but more of the handy take-home size of 5-10, and his sport is soccer, not basketball, which means he wafts across the sporting landscape as invisible as radon.


Review/Theater; Adam, Eve and Snake. That Bunch.
Gazing around the waterfront bar with the tropical motif, Moe, the proprietor, proclaims, "This is my metaphysical workshop." It's not, though.
It's really the metaphysical workshop of the California playwright Marlane Meyer.
With "Moe's Lucky Seven" (which is both the name of the bar and her play), she has written a late-20th-century update on the story of Adam, Eve and the snake, here a bartender called Drake.
And her script abounds in philosophical musings about men, women, the forces that draw them together and the yearnings that drive them apart.


For Braves, Talent and Luck Have Yet to Mesh
The Atlanta Braves, with their Fab Four of Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine, Steve Avery and John Smoltz, have the best rotation in baseball.
The Braves have one of the most potent offenses in the league, topped by a hitter with one of the more beautiful power strokes in the game in Fred McGriff.


Second Incomes Vital, Authors Say
In contrast to the glamorous few who earn huge advances and take in enormous royalty checks, most established fiction and nonfiction writers and playwrights are not close to being able to support themselves from their writing, according to a recent survey.
The survey found that for basic living expenses, writers are usually forced to rely on their spouses, on second jobs or on other sources of income, like retirement funds.
Often, this outside income gives established authors higher-than-average household incomes.
At the same time, the survey said, many authors have inadequate health insurance policies.


Ranger Lesson Today: It's Anatomy of Defeat
Mike Keenan knows exactly why his Rangers lost the opening game in their third-round Stanley Cup playoff series against the Devils.
His big defenseman came off the ice at the wrong time, allowing the Devils' big guys to score the tying goal in the final minute of regulation time.
That same defenseman got caught too far up the ice in the second overtime as the winning goal scored.


METRO DIGEST
YOUNG, IMPRESSIONABLE AND ACCUSED
The most shocking thing about them is their ordinariness.
Like so many young teen-agers, they are insecure, materialistic, impressionable and not always in command of their anger and aggressiveness.
But what sets these few apart from other young teen-agers is that the state has called them killers.
In New York City, 28 children 13 to 15 years old were indicted last year in adult courts for murder.
A1.


Corrections
An article yesterday about an investigation into payoffs to Manhattan condominium and cooperative building managers misstated the ownership of the management company at 7 Park Avenue, where an accounting report documented practices that violated the co-op board's rules.
The management company, the Argo Corporation, is not part of Helmsley-Spear, though a Helmsley company was involved in the conversion of the building to co-ops and Helmsley-Spear still has representatives on the building's board.


Mattingly Brings More Than His Bat and Glove to Yanks
Inning after inning, Don Mattingly prowls the Yankee dugout like a subdued drill sergeant.
He will congratulate the pitcher after a spotless inning, he will implore the first batter to get on base to open the new inning, he will talk about grabbing opportunities and continuing to perform with zest.
It is the off-the-field Mattingly that fans rarely see.
Maybe Mattingly is taking his job as team captain more seriously this season.
Maybe he wants to erase the tepid approach he observed in three games earlier this season.
Maybe with 14 players over 30 years old and at least four prominent players who can become free agents after the 1994 season, Mattingly realizes it is time for this unit to achieve glory.
Now or never.


Dow Advances 11.82 in Subdued Trading
Wall Street sweated out the Federal Reserve Board's policy-setting meeting today by doing little yesterday in restrained trading.
The exception was the Nasdaq composite index, now in its third day of decline in a row and its fifth out of the last eight sessions.
The Nasdaq composite index fell 5.01 points, to 711.91.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 11.82 points, to 3,671.50.


Filene's Basement Corp.(BSMT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Go for Gin Gets Going in Mud at Pimlico  in preparing for Saturday's Preakness Stakes, the Kentucky Derby winner, Go for Gin, had an impressive workout yesterday on a muddy track at Pimlico in Baltimore.
Nick Zito, Go for Gin's trainer, was pleased.
"That's just what we wanted -- perfect," said Zito.
"The good thing is how strong he was at the end." The 3-year-old colt covered five-eighths of a mile in 1 minute 22/5 seconds.
Go for Gin did the final two furlongs in 12 flat and 114/5 seconds under the exercise rider Jose Cuevas.
Zito said he will stick to the routine of daily gallops for Go for Gin, which has been the horse's normal training schedule since arriving last week.
There was a Preakness withdrawal yesterday, when Cot Campbell, the Dogwood Stable managing partner, said that Smilin Singin Sam, the 10th-place finisher in the Kentucky Derby, would not run.
At least 11 horses are expected for the Preakness, with the Maryland-trained Looming as a possible 12th.
Looming and stablemate Concern, winner of the Arkansas Derby, were other horses that worked out at Pimlico yesterday.
They ran a mile in company in 1:41. (AP)


Supreme Court Will Resolve Ellis I. Dispute
Ellis Island is such a powerful American icon that the new Supreme Court nominee, Judge Stephen G. Breyer, noted during a brief speech in the White House Rose Garden today that his grandfather had arrived in the United States from Poland through the island in 1900.
The current justices, too, evidently find Ellis Island worthy of their attention: just hours earlier, they agreed to resolve a long-running dispute between New York and New Jersey over which state has jurisdiction over the 27.5-acre island -- most of it landfill -- that sits between the two states in Upper New York Bay.
Political Jurisdiction in Question
The Court, without comment, issued an order permitting New Jersey to proceed with its lawsuit, which the state filed against New York last year directly in the Supreme Court.
Under the Constitution, the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction over lawsuits between states, and sits not as an appellate court but as a trial court when it accepts such suits for decision.
In nearly all cases, the Justices refer the matter to a special master for hearings and recommendations, a step the Justices will probably take later this year.


Sports of The Times; What Pippen Really Owes The Fans
WHEN Scottie Pippen was asked to attend the post-game news conference for the coaches and significant players Sunday night, his old repondez s'il vous plait was, "I'm not talkin'. I just talked to 20,000 people."
He did and he didn't.
Of course, his 25 points, and handfuls of rebounds, assists and steals were integral to his team's 95-83 victory over the Knicks that tied their playoff series at two games each.
And, yes, he received hearty ovations from the home crowd of 18,676 in Chicago Stadium and, yes, his teammates voiced support for their mutinous colleague, and, yes, the coach levied no fine or suspension and administered no punitive action of any sort.


EOTT Energy Partners L.P.  (EOT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Patterns
Bra Wars
The competitive tone among makers of cleavage-enhancing bras is beginning to resemble the Ali-Liston verbal sparring.
Latest boxer to mouth off before stepping into the ring: Maidenform, which introduced its first push-up in 1922 but put out a press kit today for a "plunge push-up bra."


Sage Technologies (SASZ) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Suissa/Miller Wins Jenny Craig Account
Jenny Craig Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Suissa/Miller of Santa Monica, Calif., to handle the creative portion of its $45 million account, which had last been handled on a project basis by Lotas Minard Patton McIver of New York.


Jacobson Stores (JCBS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


SOCCER
Early Arrivals
The 23 countries coming to the United States for the World Cup have informed the American organizers of their arrival dates in preparation of the monthlong tournament.
Nineteen of the 24 nations participating in the tournament will report to their designated training sites as much as 20 days sooner than required.


Clinton Has Called for Dioxin Task Force
To the Editor:
An Environmental Protection Agency report calls fetal damage, not cancer, the primary threat from dioxin (front page, May 11).
Clearly, this class of toxic compounds poses devastating threats to human health and wildlife survival.
The E.P.A. report shows:


Italians Trying to Remove the Stain of Fascism
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi formally distanced himself today from Italy's wartime dictatorship, and his neo-Fascist coalition partners were forced into an embarrassing disavowal of efforts to rehabilitate the memory of Mussolini.
The developments came as Mr.
Berlusconi prepared for a vote of parliamentary confidence that will permit his week-old Government to begin enacting free-market policies that are supposed to free Italy from its corruption-stained past.


City Said to Be Planning to Use School Aid for the Budget Deficit
The Giuliani administration intends to use as much as half of the $250 million that the city expects to receive in increased state education aid to help close New York City's budget gap, Leonard Hellenbrand, the Board of Education's budget director, said yesterday.
Mr.
Hellenbrand said that City Hall's decision to retain $120 million of the anticipated $250 million in increased state school financing to narrow the city's budget shortfall would undercut the board's efforts in the future to persuade state lawmakers to increase state aid to city schools.


Family and Friends Mourn 2 Youths Killed in a Crash in New Jersey


Gail Dunbar, Executive Recruiter, 35
Gail Dunbar, an executive recruiter, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital, where she was taken last Tuesday after being found unconscious in her Manhattan apartment.
She was 35.
The cause was arrhythmia, said her father, Ernest Dunbar, a West Side resident.


On My Mind; America The Best
The United States is the best country in the world.
In America, you are free to become anything you want.
The only person who can stop you is you.
You can say what you want, pray as you want, or don't want.
The police will never bother you unless you break the law.
So don't break it.
In America, if you want to work you can make a living.
Only America gives you all these things.
God blesses the golden land.
I knew that was all true when I was a small boy.
My parents told me so straight out, at home.
They compared it with Europe and America won, in every way except maybe the fruit was a little fresher there.


Tele-Communications Inc.(TCOMA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


O'Sullivan
The share price of O'Sullivan Industries Holdings, a hot initial public offering in January, plunged yesterday after the company said it expected profits for its fourth quarter, which ends on June 30, to be far below the level a year earlier.
O'Sullivan makes furniture for home and office use, including units for housing electronics components.


Arms Supplier Fights for Evidence in U.S. Case
A decade ago, an executive with a California military supplier told the Central Intelligence Agency that he suspected a Chilean arms manufacturer had bought several tons of a potent explosive ingredient from his company for military purposes, not for mining as the Chileans contended.
The explosive, called zirconium, was on a list of items that had to have Government approval if they were to be exported from the United States for military purposes.
The C.I.A. was alarmed enough to distribute a secret report describing the warning to the top levels of the Government, including the White House, the Commerce and State Departments and the National Security Agency, according to a copy of the report, which remains classified.


Welcome to Washington


Lewis's Autumn Challenger: McCall
The World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, LENNOX LEWIS, will hold his mandatory title defense against OLIVER McCALL in late September in Lewis's hometown of London or in the United States.
Lewis's manager, FRANK MALONEY, believes there is a "strong possibility" the fight will be in England.
Maloney and Lewis's United States promoter, DAN DUVA, negotiated for 12 hours last weekend with DON KING, who holds promotional rights to McCall, on control of the bout.
"Negotiations with King were very hard, but at least we've been able to get Lennox his wish and gain control of the promotion," Maloney said.


Federal Job Cuts: Not in My Back Office
Congress, by a gaudy 391-to-17 vote, passed a law in March mandating that the executive branch cut 272,900 positions by 1999.
That was a tough display of deficit reduction.
A month later, in a remarkable display of hypocrisy, the House, by a 282-to-118 margin, passed a bill sponsored by Sonny Montgomery of Mississippi to exempt the Veterans Health Administration from those personnel cuts.
President Clinton opposes the Montgomery bill.
He notes that the Veterans Health Administration accounts for 212,000 full-time employees -- more than 15 percent of Federal civilian employment.
To insulate that many Government employees from the mandated cuts would force the Administration to make irresponsible cuts everywhere else -- from Head Start to the F.B.I.


Market Place; Some education companies may go to the head of the class.
FINANCIAL support for improved learning techniques is accelerating, with the Federal Government committing more than $7 billion this year through financing in Chapter 1 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
Total expenditures for public education through high school surpassed $240 billion in 1992, according to the Department of Education.
Per pupil spending has increased by almost 40 percent in constant dollars during the last 10 years.


U.S. SENDING BACK HAITIAN REFUGEES DESPITE NEW PLAN
In the eight days since President Clinton announced a change in American policy on returning Haitian refugees, the United States has sent 618 fleeing Haitians back to Port-au-Prince without providing hearings to assess their claims of persecution.
The direct return of the Haitians, including 341 who were sent ashore in Haiti this morning, is in keeping with the policy that Mr.
Clinton said he would change.
The total returned to Haiti since Mr.
Clinton's announcement has already nearly matched the number sent back so far this year.


Toro Co.(TTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


RU-486 -- Here at Last
Two days after he became President of the United States, Bill Clinton ordered a review of whether RU-486, a French abortifacient banned from import by the Bush Administration and possibly useful in the treatment of certain cancers and other diseases, should be made available in the United States.
Yesterday the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna Shalala, announced that Roussel-Uclaf, its manufacturer, had donated its U.S. patent rights for mifespristone (RU-486) to the Population Council, a nonprofit contraceptive research group.
The "gift" is testimony both to Roussel's considerable wariness about the wrath of anti-abortionists -- and to the Clinton Administration's considerable powers of persuasion.
Roussel-Uclaf agreed over a year ago to license RU-486, which has been used safely by thousands of European women, to the Population Council.
But the company, fearful that America's anti-abortionists might organize boycotts of its other pharmaceuticals, dragged its feet over signing a contract.
Thus American women were denied not only a drug that can make abortion the wholly private decision it should be, but one that holds great potential for the treatment of endometriosis, fibroid tumors and breast cancer.


Review/Dance; An Afternoon of Strife
H.
T.
Chen depicted strife in the two productions offered by Chen and Dancers on Sunday afternoon in the Annex Theater of La Mama (74A East Fourth Street, Lower East Side).
Whereas one expressed conflict through choreographic patterns, the other was based on a historical incident.
Dancers restlessly advanced and retreated in "Opening the Gate," a work to a score by Bradley Kaus, which received its premiere last year.
They appeared to battle mighty unseen forces, and their movements steadily intensified until they triumphed over whatever obstacles Mr.
Chen imagined were before them.


Genes Tell Story of Why Some Get Cancer While Others Don't
RESEARCHERS are finding ways to answer a question that haunts every cancer patient: Why me?
The explanation, they say, can be found deep within the cells of the body in biological factors called markers.
Like the smoking gun in a crime novel, markers are physical evidence of the foul interplay between cancer-causing agents in the environment and a person's genes.


No Headline
"The very same ideas that prompted the judicial revolution and circumscribed the authority of local communities to set standards for decorum and civility in the streets and public schools also made it far more difficult for a criminal justice system to hold people responsible for the consequences of their harmful acts." -- JUSTICE CLARENCE THOMAS.  [ A14:5. ]





Treasuries Close Higher Awaiting Action by Fed
Prices of Treasury securities finished higher yesterday as traders and investors awaited the outcome of today's meeting of the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee.
The Fed is expected to raise its short-term interest rate target for the fourth time this year soon.
But market analysts are split over whether the increase in the target for the Federal funds rate, which is now 3.75 percent, will be a quarter of a percentage point or a half of a percentage point.
And some argue that the Fed may wait a little longer and not act today.


Q&amp;A
Backfire
Q.  What is backfire?
A.
In guns, backfire is an explosion toward the the breech rather than the muzzle of a firearm.
In automobiles, there are at least two kinds of backfire, depending on where the explosion occurs.


First Ladies Past and Present Meet the Future


On a Street Enchanted By History
IT isn't that Kenneth Hasbrouck minds the visitors.
No, no, no.
Quite the contrary.
But Huguenot Street is so old.
It must be handled del-i-cate-ly.
"When people come in their cars," he said, "this way, that way and this way, the vibrations could shake foundations."


Planning Commission Approves La Guardia Runway Extension
The City Planning Commission has approved an extension of La Guardia Airport's main runway into Flushing Bay, which commission members hope will add an extra margin of safety for jets using the airport.
The commission approved the proposal yesterday despite concerns from residents of the area and environmentalists who have argued that the landfill required for the extension would further reduce water circulation in the bay and add to its foul odors.


Review/Theater; McLuhan's Old Message, As the Medium Mutates
Oh, Marshall, if you could only see how it all turned out.
In "The Medium," a Saratoga International Theater Institute production at the New York Theater Workshop, the ever-prolific director Anne Bogart has resurrected Marshall McLuhan to examine how the communications theorist's prophecies have and have not been fulfilled.


Forced, U.S. Sells Gold Land for Trifle
Acting under a mining law it hopes Congress may soon change, the Clinton Administration today reluctantly granted a Canadian-based company the right to mine Nevada gold worth billions of dollars without ever paying royalties.
But it did so only under a direct order from a Federal judge.
The company, American Barrick Resources, paid the Federal Government just $9,765 to take title to about 1,949 acres of publicly owned land at its Goldstrike mines in Elko, Nev.
The mines hold 30 million ounces of gold.


Rules on Lawyers' Campaign Contributions
Candidates for district attorney and state attorney general should not directly solicit contributions from lawyers or law firms, the City Bar Association of Manhattan said today.
It said the candidates should avoid even learning which lawyers have contributed to their campaigns.
The opinion has no force of law but rather describes the conduct the association feels should be followed by its members.
Still, the statement seemed likely to influence the races, particularly the Democratic primary for attorney general, the first contested Democratic race in years.
Law firms are a major source of money, and lawyers have a special interest in who becomes the state's attorney general.


Courthouse Proposal Leaves Brooklyn Post Office Unscathed
The last time the Federal courts had a proposal to expand in Brooklyn it was sentenced to death by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
The proposal, which called for building a tower as high as 415 feet above a landmark post office dating to the 1890's, roused such local resistance that Senator Moynihan used his clout to scuttle it, sending the planners back to the drawing board.


Reports on Homeless Shelters Usually Accomplish Very Little
To the Editor:
New York City's mayors have released reports on the homeless shelter system with great fanfare, capitalizing on the public attention, and promptly forgetting about them.


Telxon Corp.(TLXN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Is No-Frills Moon Mission a Real Breakthrough?; Something of a Retreat
To the Editor:
The cut-rate Clementine moon mission has been an outstanding success and attracted much justly deserved attention.
But the scientific community would be disingenuous if it implied that this interesting project's approach can be applied to most or even many important research problems.


Dominican Republic's Grand Old Man Goes for Another Term


United Airlines' Pilots Seek Changes in Buyout Accord
The pilots' union at United Airlines said yesterday that it wanted to renegotiate how it could increase its stake in the airline once the $5 billion deal is approved by shareholders this summer.
The decision by the Air Line Pilots Association raises new questions about the bid by United's pilots and machinists to trade $5 billion in concessions over about six years for majority control of UAL Corporation, United's parent.


Nixon and F.D.R.
To the Editor:
William Safire states in "Nixon on 1996" (column, May 12): "to a man who won four out of five national races, matching F.D.R.'s record, the focus" -- of Mr.
Safire's interview with Richard M. Nixon a few months before his death -- "had to be on the national ticket in 1996."


International Family Entertainment Inc.(FAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fog Thickens on Climate And Origin of Humans
IN one of evolution's fateful transitions, especially from the human perspective, some tree-dwelling creatures split off from the main line of apes sometime before five million years ago.
They dropped out of the trees and learned to forage over an ever-widening range.
Since they were not built to walk on all fours, but needed an efficient way to get around on the ground, they pulled themselves up from their knuckle-dragging stoop and, once standing upright, began walking about on two legs.
Upright walking, bipedality, was a definitive characteristic of the earliest hominids, the group of apelike animals that included ancestors of modern humans.
How bipedality came about remains one of the mysteries of human evolution, though many theories have been proposed.


CHRONICLE
DAVID AMRAM , the composer and musician, believes that it is about time to revise the image of the Beat Generation as shiftless, drug-using wanderers.
"To an extent, we were surrounded by drugs and alcohol, and while that was part of many people's lives, most of us were simply trying to be artists," said Mr.
Amram, an integral member of the beat movement in the late 1950's.


Sunrise Energy Services Inc.(SES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Anderson Unable To Shake Past Tense
The message in the mirror has not changed.
It continues to greet Glenn Anderson's first look each day, just as it did when the mornings were in Edmonton and five springtimes ended with a Stanley Cup.
"You've got to see your goal every day," he said today.
"Every morning when you wake up, you've got to see what you're striving for. You've got to have a picture of it in your mind, and really concentrate on it."


Castle Energy Corp.(CECX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Nutrition Cos.  (GNIC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Big League Money Can't Buy Happiness
Ask any baseball fan if he (or she) would play third base for a major league team for a $500,000 salary plus $2,500 a game or second base for a $1.5 million salary plus $10,000 a game beyond the 90th game, and that fan couldn't answer yes quickly and emphatically enough.
Most fans, in fact, would tell you they would play for nothing.
Of course, none of them have the ability to play major league baseball, but that doesn't stop them from wondering how anyone who does could be unhappy playing any position for $500,000 or $1.5 million or any salary major leaguers earn these days.


Israeli Troops in Gaza Fold Their Tents Quietly
At first, the Israeli Army said its forces would walk out with heads held high.
But in reality the Israelis are slipping out of the Gaza Strip each night under the cover of darkness, determined to end their 27-year occupation as quietly as they can.
The pattern has become familiar for the roughly 800,000 Gazans, who are party to a nascent exercise in Palestinian self-rule with the residents of tiny Jericho on the West Bank.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a report in the Benefits column in Styles of The Times on Sunday about a fund-raising concert to be held on Thursday at 8 P.M. to aid the Stay'n Out rehabilitation program, for drug-addicted inmates in New York State prisons, omitted the location.
It is Carnegie Hall's Weill Recital Hall.
The report also omitted the name of a comedian who will introduce the featured performer, Jamie Knight, a 9-year-old jazz singer.
The comedian is Jane Stroll.


The Toll in Rwanda: Estimates at Best
Although estimates of the death toll in the tribal strife that has engulfed Rwanda since early April have ranged as high as 500,000, the United Nations, the State Department and agencies involved in the relief effort concede that there are no accurate figures.
Chaos within the country has made the task of counting the dead all but impossible, and as a result news reports, including those in The New York Times, have included death-toll estimates ranging from the tens of thousands to half a million.
Some relief agencies note that they have no personnel within Rwanda and that their resources are devoted to helping the living rather than totaling the dead.


Knicks Ready to Make a Stand in Game 5
Trying to recover from their horrendous weekend in Chicago, the Knicks held a vigorous practice today and attempted to regroup before it was too late.
While all the Knicks insisted that they were confident, Charles Oakley, the team's co-captain and a locker room leader, admitted he has not liked the team's overall effort at certain times during the playoffs.
It was clear the Knicks have reached a crossroads in their season.


Settlers and Soldiers Wound 10 Arabs in Hebron Clashes
Israeli settlers and soldiers shot and wounded at least 10 Palestinians today in Hebron in the most serious clashes there since an international observer force entered the West Bank town eight days ago.
The incident was a first test for the force, which is unarmed and has no police powers but is supposed to monitor the safety of Palestinians in the town where a Jewish settler massacred 29 Muslims at prayer on Feb. 25.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about five Queens men who have accused a police officer of rape misstated one accuser's occupation.
Only four of the men were working as van drivers; one is a mechanic who was test-driving a van at the time of the incident.


German Police Arrest Suspect In Rioting Against Foreigners
Facing sharp criticism from politicians and human-rights advocates, the police in the eastern German town of Magdeburg brought charges today against a suspected ringleader of a riot against foreigners there last week.
Magdeburg's chief prosecutor, Rudolf Jaspers, said the suspect was 19 years old and was believed to be the leader of a local neo-Nazi group that counts about 80 members.
He is being charged with "an especially serious case of disturbing the peace," Mr.
Jaspers said.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Soda Industry Tries to Avert A School Ban
Lobbyists for the soft-drink industry told a Senate committee today that Congress should not restrict the sale of Coca-Cola and similar beverages in schools because the soft drinks had a place in a well-balanced diet.
"To suggest that there are good foods and bad foods -- we reject that entirely," said Drew M. Davis, vice president of the National Soft Drink Association.
"You have no evidence that the consumption of soft drinks is in any way harmful."


White House Welcomes Court Nominee
As Judge Stephen G. Breyer, the Supreme Court nominee, arrived in the Rose Garden for the formal announcement ceremony, even his most loyal supporters were surprised to hear the White House announcer introduce him this afternoon as "Justice" Breyer.
The consternation of White House officials, who were startled at the premature use of the title, faded quickly as they began to bask in the notion that Judge Breyer's confirmation is being treated as virtually a foregone conclusion.


Executive Changes
GENCORP, Fairlawn, Ohio, a maker of aerospace, automotive and polymer products, appointed John B. Yasinsky president and chief executive.
R.
J.
REYNOLDS TOBACCO CO., Winston-Salem, N.C., named Andrew J. Schindler, its executive vice president of operations, to the new position of president and chief operating officer for the United States.


Company Admits It Faked Tests on Missile-System Part
The Long Island manufacturer of a missile system component has admitted falsifying test results it provided the Government before the system's deployment, law-enforcement officials said today.
The component, known as the Launcher Electronic Unit, was used in Operation Desert Storm, a Government official said, and was replaced after the missiles failed to fire.


Review/Dance; A Guest Joins the City Ballet for 'Symphony in C'
George Balanchine was always ready to make the exception that proved the rule.
Setting out to build the New York City Ballet as a coherent ensemble, he supposedly played down stars and guest artists.
Yet he often invited dancers he fancied or required for spot appearances.
Peter Martins, the company's present director, has continued this tradition.
Margaret Illmann of the National Ballet of Canada made a regal entry into "Symphony in C" on Sunday night in the last of her three performances with the company.
And Mikhail Baryshnikov is to dance again on May 27 and at the matinee of May 29 at the New York State Theater.


A Regional Power Looks to World Stage
The Saudi Arabian soccer team's monthlong training camp on the Cote d'Azur had come to an end, and the Saudi ambassador to France rose in the banquet hall of the five-star, beach-front hotel and wished the players plenty of World Cup luck in Arabic.
Jorge Solari, like so many of his predecessors, could not understand a word.


The Male of the Species: Why Is He Needed?
WOMEN may not find this surprising, but one of the most persistent and frustrating problems in evolutionary biology is the male.
Specifically, where did he come from, and why doesn't he just go away?
After many years of rubbing their chins so hard they are practically scraping bone, scientists say they still cannot explain to their satisfaction why the great majority of species on earth reproduce sexually.
It would be so much neater and more sensible if females were to do the whole reproductive business solo, either by making simple clonal copies of their eggs -- as do some lizards and fish, for example -- or by manufacturing in-house the sperm needed to fertilize the eggs, as do some worms and snails.


Youthful, Impressionable And Accused of Murder
The most shocking thing about them is their ordinariness.
Like so many young teen-agers, they are insecure, materialistic, impressionable, not always in command of their anger and aggressiveness.
They often come from broken homes, and in many cases their mothers are hard-working women trying to build safe and comfortable futures for their children.
They get in arguments that seem the petty stuff of coming of age -- a taunting bully, an insulting boyfriend, a stolen puppy.
They want the things that will make them popular: Nikes, mountain bikes, presents for girls.


Valspar Corp.(VAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Homeless Plan Needs More Work
The Giuliani administration's proposed new homeless policy makes a good start toward fixing a system that is functioning poorly.
But the proposal needs fixing, too; it is so vague or ambiguous about so many of its prescriptions for change that it might best be considered a preliminary outline.
The most welcome news about the proposal is that, for the first time, New York City would emphasize social services for the homeless rather than simply providing shelter.
It would also make ample use of nonprofit organizations rather than government to run facilities and provide services.


Multimedia Programs Aren't Just For Work
MULTIMEDIA adds videos and sound, animation and still pictures to dull business programs and presentations.
They may still be dull, but now they nudge the audience awake.
The Wordperfect Corporation's name is associated with its word-processing program, a leading product for getting work done but not meant to be much fun.
Recently, I've been using Wordperfect 3.0 for the Macintosh.
With it, you can write, of course, and check spelling and grammar, do equations, make graphics, format a newsletter, insert into a document a movie that can be played on the screen, and. . . .


No Free Lunch in the Senate
The Senate's approval last week of a strong measure that would ban most gifts to members of Congress was a big step toward ending corruptive perks like fancy meals and resort vacations.
These and other favors have long been dished out by lobbyists and other special interests as a way to buy influence on Capitol Hill.
But getting the House to go along with the Senate's restrictions will be tough.
Just how tough was brought home by the comments of two former House members -- Vin Weber of Minnesota, a Republican, and Tom Downey of New York, a Democrat.
Appearing on National Public Radio's "Morning Edition" on the day after the Senate vote, the two ex-lawmakers were still defending the legislators' right to supplement their publicly paid salaries with lobbyist-financed perks.


Pacific Bell Narrows Review to 3 Agencies
Pacific Bell said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $30 million account to three agencies from six.
The account had been handled by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding San Francisco until last month, when the agency and the company decided to part ways over potential conflicts presented by the relationship between a sibling Foote, Cone agency, FCB/Leber Katz Partners of New York, and an important client, AT&amp; T.


U.N. Backs Troops for Rwanda But Terms Bar Any Action Soon
The United States forced the United Nations Monday to scale down its plans and put off sending 5,500 African troops to Rwanda in an effort to end the violence there.
In a setback for Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, United Nations officials acknowledged that his original rescue plan was overly ambitious.
The Security Council agreed instead to a two-phased plan that sharply reduces the immediate troop request, an action that was greeted with anger and frustration by some nations and human rights groups.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal National Mortgage Association is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 7.86 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in five years.


Russian Rockets Finding Eager Customers in West
In a nation brimming with advanced technology but sorely lacking in business acumen, one of the old Soviet Union's most impressive legacies, its space program, is shaping up to be one of the new Russia's rare economic success stories.
Unquestioned in their technological prowess, Russia's rocket and satellite makers and other space-oriented enterprises have also displayed a surprisingly deft capitalist touch in forging ties with Western partners and finding new markets for their products around the world.


Stowaways, Seeking Liberty, Are Caught in Limbo of Law
They were so desperate to reach the United States that they had themselves sealed into huge metal cargo containers, where they tossed about for more than a week as they were borne across the Atlantic by a 43,000-ton freighter named the Innovation.
But when the 20 or so Romanian stowaways landed in Boston harbor last month, their ordeal was not over.
Shackled by the shipping company, they were banished to a hotel near Newark International Airport to await proceedings on their requests for asylum.
And that is where most of them remained today -- still in chains because of an anomaly in Federal law that forces private transportation companies into the expensive and unwanted role of jailers, largely free of restrictions on how they treat their prisoners.


UConn's Wolters Named to U.S. Team
Connecticut freshman center KARA WOLTERS has been named to the United States national team that will compete in the women's world championships in Australia next month.
At 6 feet 7 inches, Wolters is the tallest player on the 12-member team.
Wolters, 18, also is the second-youngest player ever selected to the national team.
NANCY LIEBERMAN was 17 when she was chosen in 1975.
The world championships will be held June 2-12. (AP)


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Accounts
*
Chipcom Corp., Southborough, Mass., to Leonard Monahan Inc., Providence, R.I., formerly Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, to handle its account, previously at Spiessl Kitchen Vosik, Boston.
Billings were not disclosed.


Justice Thomas Assails Victim Mentality
Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court said today in a speech that the disorder and rampant crime in America's cities were results, in part, of what he called the "judicial rights revolution" that ended up treating blacks and poor people as victims of their situations rather than holding them responsible for their actions.
In his first speech on the issue of morality and justice since he joined the Court more than two years ago, Justice Thomas said well-intentioned judges and government officials had moved many American blacks from a position of slavery to one of crippling dependency.


Bike to Work Week Promotes a New Challenge


Killings by Ex-Police Officer Leave Town Wondering Why
Joseph Merola did not get along especially well with his neighbors in this blue-collar city dotted with small wood frame homes, arguing with them over the late-night howling of his bassett hound, Murray, and the long black garden hose he would inexplicably leave running in his driveway for days at a time.
But for all his frictions, no one in this sleepy community 35 miles east of Syracuse expected what happened on Saturday night.
Stepping out his back door at 9:23, Mr.
Merola, a 34-year-old former police officer, unwrapped a licensed semiautomatic weapon from a gray sweatshirt and opened fire, killing two youths -- ages 14 and 15 -- and wounding a 17-year-old youth and a 43-year-old woman.
He then brought the gun to his head and killed himself.


Public Radio Won't Use Commentary by Inmate
Reversing itself, National Public Radio has decided not to broadcast commentaries from a prison inmate who was convicted of killing a Philadelphia police officer.
The brief commentaries on prison life by the inmate, Mumia Abu-Jamal, had been scheduled to begin last night on the NPR program "All Things Considered."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Sent Mark Kiefer, pitcher, to New Orleans of the American Association.
Recalled Troy O'Leary, outfielder, from New Orleans.


Ward Scores 20 in His Pro Debut
Heisman Trophy winner CHARLIE WARD had 20 points and 7 assists in his professional basketball debut yesterday, helping the Jacksonville Hooters beat the Memphis Fire by 112-100 at Jacksonville, Fla.
Ward, the Florida State quarterback who was passed over in the National Football League draft last month, hit 7 of 13 shots in 37 minutes of action.
He had two 3-pointers.


Tucker Foundation Awards Music Grants
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation has awarded its 1994 Career Grants of $6,500 each to Marie Plette, a soprano; Kim Josephson and Earle Patriarco, baritones, and Steven Condy, a bass-baritone.
In addition, four Robert M. Jacobson Study Grants of $5,000 each are to go to Christine Goerke, a soprano; Laura Tucker (no relation to Richard Tucker), a mezzo-soprano; Richard Clement, a tenor, and John Packard, a baritone.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Music; Barenboim's Two Concerts Get Two Marks
Elliott Carter's Partita, which was given its New York premiere by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon, opens with a pained and painful exclamation that seems to predict an extended expressionist outburst.
And certainly, for many listeners, Mr.
Carter's music can seem at first hearing to be splintered, fragmented, agonized.
But Mr.
Carter has his own distinctive musical style, a kind of intellectual impressionism.
His sonic landscapes evoke not moonlit lakes but the uncharted regions of the inner life.
He puts his finger on the pulse of consciousness: the quicksilver transformations of ideas and feelings, the unremitting obsessions and the unexpected fantasies that lead to illumination.
And when listened to in that context, Partita is a festive, celebratory romp, a senior composer's relaxed, almost playful celebration of mental sensation.


Fragmenting Space Debris Could Put Satellites at Risk
CHAIN reactions are rather commonplace on earth.
They occur in chemical plants when a single excited molecule prompts its neighbors into a cascade of combination to create plastics.
In nuclear reactors, they occur whenever a speeding subatomic particle slams into a heavy atom and splits it apart, releasing more particles that repeat and amplify the process in bursts of energy.
By definition, chain reactions are spectacles of intensification, at times spreading like wildfire through dry grass.
Now, experts say, a dangerous new kind of chain reaction is getting under way in space, where it threatens to limit or end certain aspects of mankind's endeavors beyond the planet.
For instance, it could put billions of dollars worth of advanced communication and weather satellites at risk of destruction.


Sentenced in Firebombing
Jesus Corporan, convicted of firebombing a fire engine in Washington Heights last July 9, was sentenced yesterday to 12 to 24 years in prison.
Three firefighters were burned when the firebomb was tossed into the cab of their truck.
Mr.
Corporan, 21, was arrested in the Dominican Republic a month after the incident.


TV's Late-Night Landscape Blurs
Jay Leno brought the "Tonight" show to New York from Los Angeles last night for the first time in 21 years, and one week after David Letterman took his late-night program to Los Angeles from New York.
Is this a turf war?
No, Mr.
Leno said, just more of the late-night-television silliness that has characterized the nine months of competition between NBC and CBS, raised to slightly new heights by the periodic crucible known as the ratings sweep month.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  RWANDA PEACEKEEPERS ON HOLD  The United States forced the United Nations to postpone sending 5,000 peacekeepers to Rwanda, and U.N. officials acknowledged that the plan was too ambitious.
A1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
3.84
3.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.22
4.10
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.66
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.27
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.49
6.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.32
8.41
7.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.51
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the death of Wardell R. Lazard, the chairman of W. R. Lazard &amp; Company, included an erroneous reference to Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Morgan Stanley was not among the firms that used W. R. Lazard as a middleman in dealings with the New York Job Development Authority.
A correction on that subject in this space yesterday misstated the relationship of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company with the Job Development Authority.
Although J. P. Morgan has conducted business with the authority, it says it has not used W. R. Lazard as a middleman in these dealings.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BON-TON STORES INC., York, Pa., a department store owner, agreed to buy Adam, Meldrum &amp; Anderson Co., Buffalo, a 10-store chain, for approximately $2.1 million in cash and the assumption of about $21.4 million in debt and $15 million of other liabilities.
GLOBAL PAGING INFRASTRUCTURE, Schaumburg, Ill., a division of Motorola Inc., has received three major contracts for paging systems in China, for Zhejiang, Liaoning and Hubei provinces, worth more than $15 million.


Music in Review
New York Chamber Ensemble  New York Society  for Ethical Culture
The New York Chamber Ensemble under Stephen Rogers Radcliffe offered a sizable helping of the 20th century on Saturday night, with a dab of Mozart on the top.
The latter was the F-major Serenade, four contredanses from his 17th year that offer the brilliant fluency and general innocuousness common to Mozart juvenalia.


Donna Karan Considers Private Placement to Raise Funds
Perhaps still smarting from the intense scrutiny and criticism it received when its considered selling shares to the public last fall, the Donna Karan Corporation is considering turning to institutional investors for help in financing its operations.
One possibility is a private placement aimed at insurance companies and other institutional investors.
"We're looking at all kinds of opportunities now, and that's one option of many we're considering," Stephan Weiss, the vice chairman and co-chief executive of the company, said.
Disclosure Requirements
He said the company had not ruled out a public offering to finance its expansion but declined to comment further, noting that the company is private and does not usually discuss its business.


ACCORD OPENS WAY FOR ABORTION PILL IN U.S. IN 2 YEARS
After sustained political pressure from the Clinton Administration, the French manufacturer of the controversial abortion pill RU-486 today announced an agreement that is expected to pave the way for the pill to be available to American women by 1996.
The agreement calls for the manufacturer, Roussel Uclaf, to turn over the pill's patent rights and all technology, free, to the Population Council, a nonprofit contraceptive research organization in New York.
The council plans to find an American company to produce the pill, which can be used within seven weeks of conception to end a pregnancy; the group will also conduct clinical trials with 2,000 American women this fall.


Capriati Is Arrested In Drug Charge
Jennifer Capriati, the tennis star whose teen-age rites of passage continue to take a downward turn, was arrested on a charge of marijuana possession yesterday morning at a Coral Gables, Fla., hotel room.
The 18-year-old Capriati, absent from the tennis circuit since a first-round loss at the 1993 United States Open, was released into the custody of her attorney, John Ross.
This was Capriati's second brush with the law in the last six months.
In December she was issued a citation for shoplifting after she was charged with removing several inexpensive silver rings from a vendor's kiosk inside the Tampa Bay Mall during a shopping excursion.
Private Reprimand
Charged as a juvenile for that offense, Capriati, who was 17 at the time and had never been arrested, received a private reprimand in a Family Court hearing.
Yesterday's charge will mandate a court appearance, but since it is also a misdemeanor, it is highly unlikely that, if found guilty, she will receive more than probation and an admonition to attend counseling, according to the police.


Is No-Frills Moon Mission a Real Breakthrough?
To the Editor:
The apparent success of Clementine, the no-frills lunar mission developed by the military as a technology demonstration, will doubtless revolutionize the way the National Aeronautics and Space Administration operates its future space missions.
Clementine has shown that a streamlined management approach, plus state-of-the-art technology, can lead to capable, lightweight spacecraft with short development schedules and low operating expenses.


By Design; Off the Court
Tennis togs are moving from the court to the sidewalk this summer, as young women on the trail of micro-miniskirts discover that pleated tennis skirts are short enough and snappy enough to fill the bill.
One fashionable New Yorker dresses up her authentic tennis skirt with a Chanel jacket and pearls.
A sportier approach would be to wear the skirt with a cotton sweater or a shrunken T-shirt.


No One to Protect Her; Homeless Girl Is Abducted and Killed in Bridgeport, and the Finger-Pointing Begins
They remembered Erica Corbett yesterday as a bright little girl who cared deeply for her three young siblings and tried to cope in a world most children cannot imagine: a world of abandoned buildings to call home, of days without school and nights in a district overrun with drug dealers and thugs and prostitutes.
She was only 10 years old, that delicate age of awakening when trust and tenderness can be everything, when judgment and responsibility are not to be expected and it is hard to glimpse deceit behind the stranger's dark smile or the corrupt generous offer.


Such A Deal!


Scotland Yard Lets Officers Carry Pistols
Scotland Yard today rewrote the rules that have traditionally barred London's bobbies from openly carrying guns, and for the first time will send a few dozen specially trained police officers into the streets this summer, wearing sidearms in hip holsters.
The change in policy -- prompted by a growing number of violent assaults on police officers -- will go unnoticed by most residents and visitors to the British capital.
All but a handful of London's uniformed bobbies will continue to walk their beats and ride patrols cars without weapons, as they have done since the London police force was established more than a century ago.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Frito-Lay seeks to ride the boom in pretzels with the first national TV campaign for an old brand.
CHOMP!
Chomp!
That crunching noise you hear across America is the sound of pretzels, as a product that was once primarily a regional favorite makes its way into the mainstream.
Interestingly, the boom in pretzels, which are still most popular in the Northeast, was not initially a result of elaborate marketing efforts or flashy advertising campaigns.
Rather, it began in the last five years as consumers rediscovered pretzels, which, because they are baked, not fried, have a much lower fat content than other, better-selling salty snacks like potato chips.


Observer; Never Be a Nonpareil
Somebody should be kind and say something cruel about Judge Stephen Breyer.
His nomination for the Supreme Court has produced such a blizzard of praise that he must wake in the graveyard stillnesses of 3 A.M. wondering who is out to ruin him.
Tributes pour in from every province.
Across the political spectrum from Orrin Hatch to Bob Dole to Edward Kennedy, he is hailed as the choicest of all possible choices.
Editorials, columnists and academics blast him with merciless praise.


Mets' Saberhagen Maneuver Adds Up to Another Defeat
Bret Saberhagen was supposed to be the security blanket.
It wasn't supposed to matter that Manager Dallas Green chose to use Eric Hillman on Sunday, Saberhagen's regular day in the rotation.
The reasons for that decision -- mainly, that the Braves had trouble against left-handers -- were a nonissue last night at Shea Stadium, even though the Hillman move did not work out.
The point was, the Mets would get a victory in their first game against the Marlins.
Saberhagen would make sure of that.
Except that it didn't work out that way.
Oh, Saberhagen was not affected by the extra day of rest.
He just got stranded by his Mets' teammates, who left him to provide both the pitching and the offense at Shea Stadium last night.


Ellis Island, Gateway to a State That Starts With 'New'
The area code on the telephones on Ellis Island is 212, not 201.
But the electricity that lights the Great Hall and the water that tourists drink come from New Jersey.
Mail to Ellis Island is routed through New York, but Federal Express and United Parcel Service deliveries go through New Jersey.
The National Park Service office on the island subscribes to three newspapers: one from New York and two from New Jersey.


NBC Forges a Mexican TV Alliance
In a move aimed at reaping some of the expected rewards of the North American Free Trade Agreement, NBC entered an alliance today with Mexico's newly privatized television broadcasting company, agreeing to provide technical assistance and programming in exchange for a future stake in the company and access to what is considered one of the fastest-growing markets in the world.
Under the terms of an agreement announced today in Mexico, NBC has a three-year option to acquire 10 percent to 20 percent of the Mexican company, Television Azteca, which had been owned by the Government until it was sold to investors last July.
Officials from NBC who asked not to be identified said the option would not be exercised for at least a year.


Puritan-Bennett Corp.(PBEN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Presley Cos. (PDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


'Passion' and 'Beast' Square Off in Tonys; 'Angels' Cited Again
"Passion," Stephen Sondheim's brooding operettalike musical about the nature of love, emerged as the leading Tony Award candidate yesterday, receiving 10 nominations for Broadway's highest honors, including best musical of the year.
"Beauty and the Beast," the Disney Company's stage adaptation of its popular animated film, was also nominated for best musical and received nine nominations.
Given the paucity of new musicals this season on Broadway -- only five were eligible for nominations -- the success of these two shows was widely anticipated.


Great American Management &amp; Investments Inc.(GAMI,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Dance; Meredith Monk Reflects On the Ages of Mankind
Over the course of "Volcano Songs," Meredith Monk celebrates the mysteries of life, aging, death, rebirth, creation and transformation.
These are mighty topics, each worth an epic.
Yet on Wednesday night at Performance Space 122, this new solo lasted less than an hour.
Because Ms.
Monk is equally gifted as composer, singer, dancer and choreographer, her multimedia piece was rich in significance.
When the audience entered the building, it was ushered into a room on the first floor to contemplate what the program notes called "Shrine Installation." This proved to be a set of screens on which were projected video images of plants, staring faces and bubbling lava.
Then, in the second-floor theater, Ms.
Monk made it easy to believe that the whole world is a divine volcano eternally erupting with forms of life.


For Devils, It's Just One Game And a Half
The stakes were higher for the Devils, and so their mood was predictably upbeat today after they won Sunday night's opener against the Rangers.
More than a victory, even one in overtime, it gave New Jersey credibility and erased the stigma of losing all six games to New York in the regular season.
But the sense that the hardest work was yet to come was evident everywhere at the Devils' practice as they got ready for Game 2 of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.


When Medical Reliability Adds Political Sensitivity
RU-486 is generally regarded by physicians as an effective method of inducing abortion and simple enough to be used in almost any doctor's office.
That makes it a medical technology with a major political meaning.
The drug, whose trade name is Mifepristone, works by interrupting the body's normal preparations for pregnancy once conception has taken place.
These preparations are mediated by the hormone progesterone, which prevents premature contractions and bleeding so that the uterus can build up a place for the embryo to grow.


Brooke Group Ltd.(BGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Judge Rules Vassar Was Biased Against Married Woman Teacher
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that Vassar College discriminated against an assistant biology professor by denying her tenure partly because she was married with children.
The ruling by Judge Constance Baker Motley of the United States District Court in Manhattan was expected to open the door to similar suits by women in the academic world, legal and academic experts said.
Educational institutions have long discriminated against women and minorities in matters of promotion and pay, the experts said.
That the case involved Vassar, once a premier women's college, was also striking.


CHRONICLE
MARGARET THATCHER and JOHN MAJOR, it turns out, share more than a penchant for being Prime Minister of Britain.
They are related, albeit ever so distantly.
That fact was revealed in The Independent on Sunday.
PAUL PENN-SIMKINS, a genealogist who studied their respective family trees, told the newspaper that Lady Thatcher and Mr.
Major are fifth cousins, once removed.
They are descended from Charles Crust, an English laborer, and his wife, Elizabeth Taylor, who were married in 1695 and lived in a town called West Keal.
As recently as the mid-1800's, the two leaders' ancestors lived almost next door to one another in Boston, in eastern England.


Eye of New CBS Boss Focuses In on Rivals
The axis of the sports world has rotated away from CBS.
Dave Kenin, the new president of CBS Sports, knows it.
Over the weekend, when CBS's biggest deal was the Tour DuPont cycling race, the National Basketball Association playoffs were the focus on NBC, TNT and the MSG Network.
Meanwhile, MSG compellingly aired the Devils' 4-3 overtime victory over the Rangers in Game 1 of their National Hockey League playoff series.


Hudson General Corp.(HGC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jump Into Europe Leaves Delta With Some Aches
Three years after Delta Air Lines stormed into the trans-Atlantic and European air market with the purchase of the European operations of the bankrupt Pan American World Airways, the Atlanta-based carrier says it may finally be heading toward success in Europe.
At the same time, Delta acknowledges that it is struggling to compete profitably against cutthroat American rivals and heavily subsidized European airlines, both across the Atlantic and within Europe itself.
"Our financial improvement over the North Atlantic is really impressive," said Robert W. Coggin, Delta's senior vice president for marketing, "but it is not where we want it to be."


Music in Review
Hunter College Choir, New Haven Chorale  Hunter College Auditorium
Musical culture as a whole tends to separate the sacred from the profane, and to reserve distinct musical languages, gestures and coloration for each.
But real life is less clear-cut, and the three Polish composers whose works Paul F. Mueller conducted on Saturday evening have all explored the ways in which sacred and secular forces either mingle freely or invade each other's turf.


Chess
The Jones Murphy Jr.-American Chess Foundation International Tournament, which took place at the Manhattan Chess Club, 353 West 46th Street, March 18-27, ended in success for Alexander Wojtkiewicz.
The 31-year-old Polish grandmaster scored 7-2 to take the $800 first prize in the 10-player invitational event.
Maurice Ashley, a Brooklyn international master, was awarded the $600 second prize for his 6 1/2-2 1/2 tally.
There is also a possibility that he may get credit for a norm toward the grandmaster title: Technically, the norm for this competition required 7 points, but in similar cases over the years the International Chess Federation has validated close misses on the part of players like Ashley, who is currently performing consistently well.
Ashley had gained his first norm in October in a Marshall Chess Club tourney.
Three norms are required.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
Country
Points
Wojtkiewicz
Poland
7
Ashley
U.S.A.
6 1/2
Ehlvest
Estonia
6
Fedorowicz
U.S.A.
5 1/2
Waitzkin
U.S.A.
4 1/2
Solomons
South Africa
4
Levitt
England
4
Soltis
U.S.A.
3 1/2
Umezinwa
Nigeria
2 1/2
Rogers,N.
U.S.A.
1 1/2
In Round 6, Wojtkiewicz demonstrated logical counterattacking play in the center in winning from the Brooklyn international master Joshua Waitzkin.
The fianchetto with 6 g3 and 7 Bg2 is a quiet, positional method of dealing with the Najdorf Variation of the Sicilian Defense: the white KB reinforces the e4 pawn and is intended to squelch a black counterattack in the center with a later . . . d5.
By developing with 6 . . . e6, 7 . . .
Bd7 and 8 . . .
Nc6, thus postponing . . .
O-O, Black prevents his king from becoming an early target for attack on the kingside.
The plan in playing 9 Nce2 is to prepare for a Maroczy bind with a follow-up c4.
However, after 9 . . .
Rc8, a result of 10 c4 Nd4 11 Qd4 b5 12 cb ab would have been to dissolve the fetter and free the black queenside.
Perhaps Waitzkin should have played 18 g5 to elicit 18 . . .
Ne8 and thus diminish Black's influence in the center.
His kingside might then have become a little loose, but that was a risk he might have taken.
Wojtkiewicz prepared logically for the key counterattack, 19 . . . d5!, which negated whatever merit the white position was supposed to have.
On 20 ed Bd5 21 Bd5 Rd5, Black would have been ready to attack the weak, backward c2 pawn.
Moreover, 20 g5 could have been rebuffed by 20 . . .
Qe5 Bd6 22 Qc3 b4 23 Qe3 Nd5 24 Qe4?
Nc3.
Waitzkin chose 20 e5, but after 20 . . .
Ne4, Wojtkiewicz enjoyed excellent piece play and a powerful initiative.
Waitzkin avoided 21 Ne4 because 21 . . . de 22 Qe3 h6 23 Qe2 Bg5 24 Rcd1 Rd1 25 Rd1 e3! 26 Bc6 Qc6 27 fe (27 c3 Qe4 is also unpleasant for Black) Qc2 28 Rd2 Qb1 29 Kg2 Qa2 would have cost him a pawn.
It is not clear why, after 25 c4, Wojtkiewicz did not charge in with 25 . . .
Rd3.
Of course, his 25 . . . bc 26 Rc3 Bg5 27 Rc8 Rc8 28 Nf4 Rc2 29 Bd4 (29 Rb1 Re2! 30 Qg3 Bf4 31 Qf4 Bd3 32 Qc1 Qb6 is annihilating) Ra2 was powerful.
Waitzkin could not play 30 Qe4 because 30 . . .
Qe4 31 Re4 Bc6 would have won a piece.
On 31 . . .
Qb4, Waitzkin could have defended by 32 Qc3, although Wojtkiewicz could have gotten a winning end game with 32 . . .
Qc3 33 Bc3 Ra3 34 Rb1 Bd3 35 Bb4 Ra2 36 Re1 Rb2.
After 33 h4, Wojtkiewicz scored the decisive breakthrough with 33 . . . e3!
After 34 fe Bc6! 35 e4 Bd2 36 Re2 Bc3 37 Ra2 Bd4!, Waitzkin either had to lose his rook by 38 Kh2 Qa2 or his queen, by 38 Rf2 Qg3, so he gave up.
An incorrect telephone number was given last week for information about and tickets for the Active Chess Grand Prix tournament at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan at the end of June.
The correct number is 1-800-388-KING (1-800-388-5464).


Justices Strike Down Local Laws Restricting the Shipping of Trash
In a decision that threatens an increasingly popular approach to waste disposal, the Supreme Court ruled today that local governments cannot require all trash within their borders to be sent to a designated plant for sorting, recycling or treatment.
More than half the states have authorized their local governments to adopt this approach, in which a municipality prohibits the shipping of any solid waste that has not passed through the chosen plant.


E.P.A. Studies How to Clean Up the Wakes of Motorboats
IT is a beautiful day on the lake.
As a two-cycle outboard motor surges, a powerboat and tethered skier leap forward to race atop the water in a scene that for many Americans is synonymous with summer.
In the wake, silent and unheeded, a film of unburned gasoline and lubricating oil, perhaps as much as one-third of all the fuel that passes through the motor, spreads out on the surface of the lake.
The fact that recreational powerboats are spraying gas and oil into the water is not in dispute.
But at the heart of a recently joined debate between the powerboat industry and environmentalists are two questions: How much pollution is created by recreational motorboats each year?
And what, if any, harm is done to the environment?


Boosting Chemotherapy May Prove Ineffective
FOR years, many cancer experts have strongly felt that the more chemotherapy they can give a patient, the better will be the chances for controlling the cancer.
And many have acted on that hunch, ratcheting up chemotherapy doses to the most a patient can tolerate.
Although the side effects are greater with higher doses, these patients and doctors have felt that the nausea and the risks of infection are worthwhile in combating the cancer.


INSIDE
The Trashing of Space
So many spent rocket stages and other pieces of debris are orbiting the Earth that they put satellites at risk, experts say.
Science Times, page C1.
A Gold Mine of Protest
With a great display of reluctance, the Government sold a gold mine worth $10 billion for $5 an acre, as required by an 1872 law.
Page A12.
Fight for a Piece of History
The Supreme Court agreed to resolve a dispute between New York and New Jersey over which state has jurisdiction over Ellis Island.
Page B1.
The Mystery of Sex
Evolutionary biologists cannot fully explain why the vast majority of species reproduce sexually, and a new study deepens the mystery.
Page C1.
Sondheim Versus Disney
"Passion" and "Beauty and the Beast" lead the Tony Award nominations for new musicals.
Page C17.


Street's Father Guilty of Beating Wife
ROLAND STREET, father of the Olympic downhill silver medalist PICABO STREET, faces up to six months in jail and a maximum fine of $1,000 after pleading guilty yesterday to beating his wife in a domestic dispute.
Authorities in Blaine County, Idaho, said Street, 54, was arrested on May 9 for misdemeanor battery.
He appeared before a magistrate judge in Hailey, Idaho, yesterday and pleaded guilty.
The judge set sentencing for June 6, released Street without bond and ordered him to stay away from his wife.


Review/Fashion; In Fur Coats for Fall, a Lighter Touch
As the fall fur shows began yesterday in New York, furriers were smiling.
After being pummeled by a worldwide recession and by the protests of animal-rights advocates for a number of years, they are now breathing easier.
Fur sales improved last year, up 20 to 30 percent at some SC.3houses over the previous year.
Arnold Scaasi opened the week of shows with a well-planned, luxurious collection for Mohl, his fifth for that house.
And Kaitery-Global Fur decided to have a show for the first time "because we're coming off a good season, our best ever," said Jimmy Kaitery, vice president of the company, which was started by his father 45 years ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A California military supplier will argue in court that it cannot be charged with violating export laws for selling explosives to Chile because the U.S.
Government knew the material would be used to produce cluster bombs for Iraq.  [ Page D1. ]


Books of The Times; An Expatriate Continues His Return to the Past
A Way in the World  A Novel  By V. S. Naipaul  380 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
V.
S.
Naipaul once remarked, "All my work is really one; I'm really writing one big book," and his latest work, "A Way in the World," brings home the truth of this remark with startling clarity and force.
Although the volume is inexplicably labeled a novel, it's actually an elliptical spiritual autobiography, a book that recapitulates the themes of exile, homelessness, neocolonial ambition and third-world despair that have animated Mr.
Naipaul's fiction and nonfiction throughout a career of nearly 40 years.


No Headline


Younkers Inc.(YONK,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


Carola Goya, 88, an Authority On Spanish Dance Forms, Dies
Carola Goya, an American-born Spanish dancer and a virtuoso castanet player, died early Sunday morning at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88.
The cause was apparently a heart attack in her sleep, said her niece, Victoria B. Smith of Kent, Conn.


Defecting From Cuba Easier
It is getting easier for Cuban athletes to defect these days because many Cuban teams now travel without security personnel, one of five recent defectors said today.
"They might be running out of security guys to send; they defect, too," said Josvani Negret, 26, a 6-foot-3-inch, 285-pound member of the Cuban wrestling team until he defected here Friday.


Music in Review
Alan Feinberg  Pianist Metropolitan Museum of Art
There were a little talk, a little music and a good amount of American Impressionism at Alan Feinberg's brief lecture and piano recital on Friday night.
There were indeed impressions of hermit thrushes, salamanders, white peacocks, deep woods, fountains, night winds and the like.
Yet the deepest impression here was made by Europe itself.


Moten Opts for Staying at Syracuse
All-Big East guard LAWRENCE MOTEN will forgo the N.B.A. draft this year and remain at Syracuse for his senior season.
Moten made his decision Saturday, one day after his self-imposed deadline and one day before the N.B.A.'s cutoff date for underclassmen to declare their intentions.
"It was very agonizing," the 6-foot-5-inch junior said.
"I went over a lot of things with my family. We had a lot of stuff to consider and talk about."
The N.B.A. draft is June 29.
Analysts said Moten would probably have been chosen after the 20th pick, possibly slipping into the second round.


Anzio Journal; Where Crosses Stand Guard, a Swastika Intrudes
If the American troops who stormed ashore here 50 years ago were to repeat the operation today, they might be surprised, or enraged, to find that one emblem of those years has endured, albeit in small doses -- the swastika.
Consider, for instance, Paradiso del Mare, a sugar-loaf architectural confection with terraces and now-headless statues.
It rises from the beaches where, on Jan. 22, 1944, 36,000 Allied troops plowed through minefields and barbed wire as part of the campaign in south-central Italy that led to the liberation of Rome four months later, on June 4.


Clippers Dismiss Weiss After Just a Year
BOB WEISS, who signed a three-year contract only last July, was fired yesterday after one year as coach of the turmoil-filled Los Angeles Clippers.
"We know that we are at a crucial point, and that we must move decisively and aggressively forward to define our future," General Manager ELGIN BAYLOR said in a statement.


Addiction Center Sees Medicare Imperiled By Rising Bill for Smoking and Drinking
Smoking, excessive drinking and illicit drug use will cost Medicare one trillion dollars for hospital care over the next 20 years, and smoking will cause most of it, Joseph A. Califano Jr., head of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, said today.
Mr.
Califano issued a report by the center showing that at least $20 billion out of $87 billion being spent by Medicare for inpatient hospital care this year is due to such substance abuse, and that about $16 billion of that goes for conditions attributable to smoking.


Raychem's Data Unit May Be Sold
The Raychem Corporation, a manufacturer of high-performance products that protect electrical and telecommunications signals, said yesterday that it was reviewing its options, including the possible sale of its data transmission subsidiary, the Raynet Corporation.
Despite an investment of $400 million to $500 million, Raynet, which sells fiber optic voice, video and data distribution systems, has steadily lost money for Raychem since the subsidiary was formed in 1987.


To Azinger, Cancer Becomes a Blessing
Through it all, Paul Azinger never said "Why me?" Not when he found out for certain that the searing pain in his right shoulder was cancer.
Not when he was so sick from chemotherapy that he couldn't stand up.
Not when he woke up and found tufts of hair on his pillow.
Not even in the dark moments when he wondered whether he would be alive for the 1994 P.G.A.
Championship, much less defending his title in it.


Interim Services Inc.(INTM,NMS) reports earnings for Year to Mar 25


Officials Keep a Hand In Business
Several senior members of the Giuliani administration have continued to hold substantial outside business interests after joining the government, and at least two officials have continued to help manage their companies in their spare time, according to financial disclosure reports released by the City Conflicts of Interest Board yesterday.
The City Charter does not prohibit officials from holding an interest in real estate or a private company as long as the company does not do business with the city, officials of the conflicts board said.


Mead to Sell Its Data Base Unit
At a time when communications and entertainment giants are eager to enter the electronic information business, the largest provider of on-line information services plans to drop out to concentrate on making paper.
The Mead Corporation said yesterday that it would sell its Mead Data Central unit, which provides computer access to data bases that include Lexis, used by lawyers and legal scholars, and Nexis, which contains articles from a long list of newspapers, magazines and other periodicals.


CHRONICLE
There's simply no time for jet lag in QUINCY JONES'S life just now.
Consider his schedule: Since May 7, he has been in Washington, Johannesburg (where he was a representative of the United States at the inauguration of Nelson Mandela), Washington again, Atlanta and New York.
And today he is in Stockholm, receiving the 1994 Polar Music Prize from the Stig Anderson Music Fund of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music.
"This has been called the Nobel Prize of music," Mr.
Jones, the composer, producer and arranger, said yesterday.
"Tomorrow we will be with the King and Queen of Sweden for a banquet at the royal palace, and it's a very high honor."


Review/Television; Ideas on American Ideals
"Declarations: Essays on American Ideals" is a pop Chautauqua for the video age.
Described by its propagators as "first-person television," this three-hour series is composed of mini-essays on free speech, equality and the pursuit of happiness, accompanied by all manner of images meant to complement or enhance what is being said, or possibly to distract from it.
A press release announces that the series was created by "15 independent producers teamed with 14 individual thinkers and a group of New York City ninth-graders."
Behind the project is the Independent Television Service, created by Congress and financed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, with the mission of increasing the diversity of programming on public television.
That is accomplished in "Declarations" by offering the condensed thoughts of people who have never made it onto the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" (along with a few who have).
Viewers can judge whether they have been chosen for the originality or force of their ideas or because they make a multi-ethnic assemblage of varied opinions.


Derailment Injures 97 And Kills 1
Amtrak's Silver Meteor passenger train, bound from New York to Florida, derailed here early today after hitting a cargo container jutting out from a passing freight, officials said.
The Amtrak engineer was killed and nearly 100 passengers were injured.
Jerry R. Davis, executive vice president and chief operations officer of CSX Transportation, which operated the freight train, said, "Apparently a trailer was loose and sitting cockeyed on the car and got sideswiped by the Amtrak train."


Arden Group (ARDNA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Hadco Corp.(HDCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Rock; Despondent Sentiment With Aggression Added
Trent Reznor smiled just once during Nine Inch Nails's set at Webster Hall on Friday night.
He had just sung "Doesn't it make you feel better?," phrased like a line from a Beatles song.
There was silence while Mr.
Reznor grinned, and then "March of the Pigs" resumed, a pounding, punching-bag beat behind Mr.
Reznor's shouts: "I want to break it up; I want to smash it up!"
Nine Inch Nails finds comfort in destructive rage.
Mr.
Reznor's songs are the confessions of a long-suffering sociopath, miserable and lonesome and furious, set to music that hammers hard.
In an act of synthesis both calculated and inspired, he has taken the sentiments of mope-rock, which is intensely self-absorbed and despondent, and connected them to aggression, uniting two extremes of adolescent tumult and transgressing some taboos along the way.
While everyone and everything gets on his character's nerves, he can't bear to be alone; while he may be hypersensitive, he'll still attack nearly anyone who approaches him.
And sometimes, to his confusion, he finds himself falling in love.


McWhorter Technologies Inc.(MWT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Apple Sets Standard With Its New Lineup Of Powerful Notebooks
APPLE COMPUTER INC. is back on track with its new Powerbook portable computers, which were introduced yesterday.
The new Powerbooks are innovative and powerful machines that could help Apple recapture the lead it once had in the notebook computer category.
Unfortunately, Apple's new Powerbooks may have also recaptured the lead in prices, with the high-end models topping out at more than $6,000.
And Apple's biggest rival in high-end portable computers, the I.B.M.
PC Company, is expected to introduce its own batch of innovative new Thinkpads today.
Some of the new I.B.M. models will also cross the $6,000 threshold.


Carter Drives In Four As Blue Jays Halt Slide
Blue Jays 7, Tigers 2
Joe Carter drove in four runs and the Toronto Blue Jays ended their five-game losing streak, defeating the Detroit Tigers, 7-2, last night at the Skydome.


Christopher Takes Syrian Response to Rabin
Indirect peace negotiations between Israel and Syria gathered momentum today as Secretary of State Warren Christopher brought Syria's response to an Israeli peace plan to Jerusalem after having pressed Damascus to flesh out additional details.
Eager to avoid any misunderstandings in the fragile negotiations, Mr.
Christopher delayed his flight from Damascus to Israel by six hours today so he could get Syria's Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, to clarify parts of the Syrian counterproposal.


Mario Einaudi, An Educator And Writer, 90
Mario Einaudi, who spent most of his life explaining Europe to Americans and America to Europeans, died on Sunday in the house in which he was born in Piedmont, Italy.
He was 90.
For most of the last 30 years he had divided his time between Italy and Ithaca, N.Y.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Ross Stores Inc.(ROST,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


Egypt Is Accused of Torture In Death of a Militant Lawyer
A prominent Muslim militant lawyer who died in police custody last month was badly tortured, say medical officials and employees at the morgue where his body was taken.
The assertions contradicted Government statements that the lawyer, Abdel Harith Madani, 30, was not tortured by police officers and died of natural causes.
Employees at the Zeinhum morgue who saw the body described several puncture wounds surrounded by large blue bruises.


New Drug Era Begins as Tagamet Patent Ends
In a watershed development in the pharmaceutical price wars, the patent that protected Tagamet, the widely prescribed ulcer treatment, expires today, opening the market for generic versions that are expected to save consumers hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
A patient paying about $83 at a drugstore for a month's supply of 400-milligram Tagamet pills, the most widely used dosage, may soon be able to buy a generic version through a managed health care health plan for as little as $8 to $10 a month, analysts said.
About half of all prescriptions are bought through managed care plans and the number is expected to grow to 80 percent during the next few years.
Lucrative Market in Decline
Many industry experts said the shift to low-priced generic versions would eventually pull the plug on the American market, estimated at $4 billion a year, for prescription drugs like Tagamet that treat ulcers and other gastrointestinal problems.


Overpopulation Adds To Rwanda's Woes
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the grisly disaster in Rwanda has been excellent, but one of the most fundamental long-term causes has not been stressed -- overpopulation.


Singapore Acted Appropriately in Caning Case
To the Editor:
"Singapore Justice on Trial" (editorial, May 5) states that Michael Fay "is the victim of a tainted prosecution," and that "there are enough signs of police misconduct to warrant setting aside a penalty."


Genetic Mutations Tied To Father in Most Cases
WHEN it comes to parceling out blame for birth defects and genetic disorders, women have historically shouldered most of the burden, particularly older mothers who supposedly risked their offspring's well-being by letting their eggs sit around growing progressively more stale and chromosomally unstable.
By contrast, men have been seen as eternally fertile, able to father healthy children well into their dotage.


Fed Faces Decision Today on Rate Rise
An unusual pattern of growth has emerged in the American economy in the last few years that poses a predicament for the Federal Reserve as its top officials gather here on Tuesday to decide whether to continue raising short-term interest rates.
For the first time since the late 1940's, the economy is growing strongly despite a sustained drop in purchasing by Federal, state and local governments.
The private sector is the only engine of growth in this recovery, unlike every other recovery in the last four decades, in which government spending accounted for at least part of the expansion.


A Benign Bundesbank?; Germany's Rate Arbiter, and Europe's Too, Lowers Interest as the Economy Recovers
Has the Bundesbank, the monetary lion that has had all Europe cowering before German tight-money policies, rolled over and started purring like a pussycat?
After the German central bank lowered both its key interest rates by half a percentage point last week, some financial analysts here are beginning to think just that.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve raised the discount rate and the Federal funds rate half a percentage point, the sharpest increases in more than five years.
But it also signaled that further increases were unlikely to follow soon.
The Fed sought to brake economic expansion before it feeds inflation and to shore up the dollar.  [ Page A1. ]


Police Need More Rotation Among Precincts
To the Editor:
An article about police corruption May 9, growing out of the arrests of officers in New York City's 30th Precinct, made me say, "No wonder there is corruption in the Police Department!" For example, many of the officers arrested have spent all or most of their careers in the 30th.


Motta Returns as Mavericks' Coach
DICK MOTTA, the original coach of the Dallas Mavericks, returned to the job yesterday, hoping to restore respectability to the National Basketball Association's worst team.
The Mavericks chose Motta, 62, as the successor to QUINN BUCKNER, who was dismissed two weeks ago after a 13-69 record in his only season.
The club's owner, DON CARTER, also elevated the scouting director, KEITH GRANT, to director of player personnel.
Grant will assume duties previously held by RICK SUND, whom Carter discharged last month as vice president and director of basketball operations.


Most of Clintons' Wealth Held by Mrs. Clinton, Disclosure Form Shows
The White House made public financial disclosure forms today that showed that most of the wealth of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, is in the name of Mrs.
Clinton.
Making public their statement for 1993, the Clintons estimated their net worth at $633,015 to $1,620,000, which would make them the least affluent occupants of the White House in 15 years.
The rules do not require Government officials to report their worth precisely, but only to identify their assets in ranges, and the Clintons have declined to provide more specific figures.


Yanks' Streak Crumbles At Metrodome
Blame it on a blister, the bullpen and bumbling outfield play.
Blame it all on the Yankees.
The wondrous winning streak that continued for 10 games with beautiful and blemished victories finally ended tonight against the Twins.
Blame it on them, too.
While Manager Buck Showalter refused to blame anyone, the Yankees do not like to lose any games and especially do not like to lose in this manner.
The Twins erupted for three runs off three relievers in the eighth inning as they expertly exploited the Metrodome and opposing outfielders in sneaking to a 5-4 victory over the Yankees tonight and preventing them from fashioning an 11-game winning streak for the first time in nine years.


HEWLETT-PACKARD CO. (HWP,N)
Buoyed by strong demand for personal computers and growth in ink-jet printers, the Hewlett-Packard Company reported yesterday that its earnings rose 18 percent in its fiscal second quarter, to $408 million, or $1.56 a share.
The gains came on a 23 percent increase in revenue, to $6.25 billion.
Although Hewlett-Packard's financial results exceeded Wall Street analysts' estimates, the company's shares closed down $1.625, at $76.625.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about the Foster Wheeler Energy Corporation misstated the number of contracts that the company received to build two coal-fired steam generators in the Hubei province of China.
It was one contract, not two.


Crucial Freeway Link, Damaged in Quake, Reopens Early
A section of Interstate 5 in far-north Los Angeles reopened today, four months after the Jan. 17 Northridge earthquake and not a moment too soon for tens of thousands of commuters and truck drivers who have suffered through lengthy delays and detours.
"This is going to put the area, Los Angeles specifically, back on the fast lane for recovery," Gov.
Pete Wilson said in a ceremony this afternoon in which he removed small barricades on the southbound side of the freeway at Gavin Canyon.
"California is showing the world that they can shake us, but there's no way that they can break us."


Theater in Review
Hollywood Hustle  SoHo Repertory Theater 46 Walker Street TriBeCa  Written and performed by Jeremiah Bosgang; directed by Rob Greenberg; lighting by Rick Martin; stage manager, Tim Staley.
Presented by Soho Repertory Theater, Julian Webber, artistic director; Marlene Swartz, founding artistic director.


Executive Changes
COLOROCS CORP., Atlanta, a distributor of color printed paper production equipment, named Albert R. Tetrault president and chief executive.
FRITO-LAY INC., Plano, Tex., named Sean F. Orr senior vice president of finance and chief financial officer.


Voices Rise For Sake Of Youths
THE point, Webnesh Hylton made emphatically clear, is that the City Hall grown-ups looking to trim the budget by cutting back on Youth Services have their priorities wrong.
"They may think that what's at stake is just after-school Ping-Pong, but that's wrong," said the 20-year-old student at the New School for Social Research.
"What's at stake is the destiny of youth and the destiny of the city."


Global Village? Just Check The Menu
Where are we eating tonight?
A French bistro?
That little Thai place?
A trattoria?
A sushi bar?
The larger the group, the longer the debate.
Selecting a restaurant has become a time-honored ritual.
But increasingly, the need to decide is disappearing.
A growing number of restaurants around the country are serving the best-loved tastes from as many as a dozen countries.


Two Players Are Suspended
Sergei Fedorov, a finalist in the balloting for the Hart Trophy as the most valuable player in the National Hockey League, will be under suspension when next season opens.
Fedorov, a star center for the Detroit Red Wings, will sit out the first four games of the regular season, the league announced yesterday, because he cross-checked and punched Jay More of San Jose in a playoff game on April 30.


Paul A. Murtaugh; Marketing Consultant, 72
Paul A. Murtaugh, a writer and marketing consultant in New York, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
Mr.
Murtaugh, who lived in Manhattan and Amagansett, L.I., was 72.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Suzanne.


CBS's Fall Lineup: Comedies, Drama and a Nod to the Young
CBS announced a fall lineup of programs yesterday that included three new comedies, four new dramas and a modest effort to pull in some younger, urban viewers.
For three years CBS has won the prime-time ratings race largely with shows that appealed to older viewers.
This has limited the network's ability to sell the shows to advertisers, many of whom still prefer to reach viewers who are 18 to 49 years old.
CBS executives also said they needed to move beyond the network's strength with viewers in rural areas.


Next From Microsoft, Movies on Demand
Making its long-anticipated entry into the emerging multimedia marketplace, the Microsoft Corporation introduced its new software for delivering movies on demand yesterday.
Microsoft said the technology, called Tiger, could provide media-on-demand for services ranging from one small computer supplying movies to hotel guests to a more powerful machine satisfying the needs of several hundred corporate users, to large systems supplying tens of thousands of movie titles to hundreds of thousands of cable-television customers.
The company, based in Redmond, Wash., said Tiger would first be deployed in a video-on-demand field trial to be jointly run with Tele-Communications Inc. in the Seattle area later this year.
Numerous Applications Seen
Movies on demand is just the first likely application of Tiger technology, Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's senior vice president of advanced technology, said yesterday.
"Regardless of where it originates, more and more information is being digitized; as it becomes digitized you need a repository and that's what Tiger is all about," he said.


Rangers Surmount a Pair of Penalty Whistles
Two whistles, and the Rangers were facing a crisis.
Their happy cruise through the Stanley Cup playoffs already having reached an abrupt halt, the Rangers had been displaying the assertiveness and attentiveness they need to cope with the Devils.
They had established a forceful early edge in a game they needed to tie the Eastern Conference final series.
They were winning more face-offs.
They were creating more opportunities and taking more shots.
Still, with a 1-0 lead a little more than halfway through the second period, the Rangers remained vulnerable.
If the nervous sellout crowd at Madison Square Garden needed any reminder of how small that lead was, there was the sight of Mike Richter's one-on-one glove save on a shot from Devil forward Bill Guerin.
Immediately, Richter's save was followed by the first of two whistles that created the crisis.


Corrections
A review of new fur styles yesterday on the Fashion page misspelled the name of a furrier.
He is Jerry Sorbara, not Sorbaya.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TEACHERS UNION SUPPORTS OVERHAUL
For the first time, the powerful teachers union has thrown its support behind a plan to overhaul the community school boards, some of which have been plagued for years by corruption and patronage.
The proposal would change the way the boards are elected and strip them of the authority to hire principals and other school administrators.
B3.


40 Years After Brown, Segregation Persists
Topeka Boulevard, a nine-mile-long stretch of commerce, fulfills most needs of the 120,000 people in this city on the plains.
But the four-lane thoroughfare also serves an unintended purpose: dividing the races.
Whites live to the west, blacks to the east.
Therein lies the problem for the city's public school system.
The elementary schools, which were once deliberately segregated on school board orders, are segregated still, only now it results from housing patterns, not laws.


Maryland's First Execution in 33 Years


FEDERAL RESERVE RAISES KEY RATES TO CURB GROWTH
The Federal Reserve raised two short-term interest rates by half a percentage point today, the sharpest increase in more than five years, but signaled that further increases were unlikely to follow soon.
Abandoning the gradual pace of three previous increases this year, the nation's central bank sought today to brake the nation's economic expansion before it feeds inflation, and to protect the value of the dollar in international markets.


Review/Recital; Mussorgsky's 'Pictures' With Pogorelich's Tints
Ivo Pogorelich, once a punkish and raffish stage presence whose pianism seemed partly intended to shock, has now settled into his maturity.
There is a piano competition bearing his name, he is described in program notes as an advocate of music education for young people, and in Carnegie Hall on Monday night he gave a performance of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" that was a pianistic tour de force.
For his followers, there is no need to worry: much in his playing is still bizarre and willful.
But those elements were so well executed that they became the object of fascination.
Mr.
Pogorelich wasn't out to shock; he was out, literally, to play, to toy with the score in the best tradition of the virtuoso.
Mr.
Pogorelich even engaged in a bit of rescoring, adding octaves to Mussorgsky's bass line, redistributing the parts between the hands.


BancTec Inc.(BTEC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


U.S. Clashes With Russia Over Bosnia
Beneath the show of unity on Bosnia and Herzegovina finally contrived last week by the United States, Russia and the European Union, a sharp diplomatic dispute flared between Washington and Moscow that underscored the fragility of international efforts to end the Bosnian war.
American officials said today that the dispute raised new questions about the effectiveness of diplomatic attempts to stop 25 months of fighting in the former Yuguslav republic.


In America; After Brown, What?
One of the many witnesses who testified in the Brown v.
Board of Education case as it made its way toward the Supreme Court and history was a sociologist named Louisa Pinkham Holt.
She was among the experts chosen by the plaintiffs to support their contention that enforced school segregation damaged black children.
In her testimony, Mrs.
Holt got quickly to the essential problem of legal segregation.
She said, "The fact that it is enforced, that it is legal, I think, has more importance than the mere fact of segregation by itself does because this gives legal and official sanction to a policy which is inevitably interpreted both by white people and by Negroes as denoting the inferiority of the Negro group."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Hones Clay-Court Strokes  Pete Sampras, the top-seeded player in the French Open, which begins in Paris on Monday, fine-tuned his clay-court game with another impressive victory yesterday.
Sampras beat Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 6-3, 6-3, in helping the United States sweep Russia, 3-0, at the World Team Cup in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Patrick McEnroe and Richey Reneberg won in doubles over Aleksandr Volkov and Andrei Olhovskiy, 6-7 (5-7), 6-4, 6-4. (AP) HORSE RACING  Sea Hero Returns to Track in Style  Sea Hero, last year's Kentucky Derby winner, made a successful and impressive return to competition yesterday, beat Rocking Josh by 1 1/4 lengths in the feature at Belmont Park.
Ridden by Jerry Bailey and assigned high weight of 119 pounds, Sea Hero showed no signs of rustiness after eight months away from racing.
The 4-year-old son of Polish Navy raced within easy striking distance of Dominant Prospect until the field turned for home, then pulled away.
The race, originally scheduled to be run on turf, was moved to the muddy main track.
Sea Hero covered seven furlongs in 1:223/5 , earning $24,000 for his owner, Rokeby Stable.
Sea Hero, the favorite, returned $5.40 for $2 to win. (AP) SOCCER  Small Consolation: England Beats Greece
England, which failed to qualify for the World Cup, routed tournament-bound Greece, 5-0, last night in London.
David Platt scored twice, Peter Beardsley got his first goal in an international match in four years and Darren Anderton got his first goal for England.
Alan Shearer also scored, his first international goal since returning from knee surgery last year. (AP)


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about the Foster Wheeler Energy Corporation misstated the number of contracts that the company received to build two coal-fired steam generators in the Hubei province of China.
It was one contract, not two.


Hofstra Turns a Sump Into a Sanctuary


Brady (W.H.) Co.  (BRCOA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Bonn Journal; His Gift: To Look Germany Straight in the Eye
For 10 years, President Richard von Weizsacker has been the conscience of his country, insisting again and again to his fellow Germans that the only solid foundation for their future is acknowledgment of the past.
Like any good conscience, the white-haired aristocrat has often deliberately made his listeners uncomfortable.
Speaking nine years ago about the killing of six million Jews by the Nazis, he said:


Corrections
An article yesterday about murder cases against teen-agers in New York City last year misstated the sentence received by one defendant, Jeffrey Washington.
It was 5 years to life in prison, not 5 to 15 years.


Helping Parents With Mental Illness
Because of schizophrenia, Lexie Poole lost her first child, a girl, to foster care.
Failing to take her medication, she became paranoid, hearing voices and hallucinating, and was deemed a danger to her daughter by the Department of Social Services.
She was determined not to let that happen again when she became pregnant last year, but it wasn't sheer will that allowed her to keep her 5-month-old son.
It was a sea change in the thinking about parenthood in New York's mental health system, and new programs that found her a place to live, monitored her medication and helped train her to be a mother and run a household.


Forty Years and Still Struggling
Yesterday's celebration of the 40th anniversary of Brown v.
Board of Education, the landmark school desegregation decision, was an occasion both for national pride and national shame.
In 1954 the Supreme Court knocked over the bankrupt notion of separate but equal.
Chief Justice Earl Warren, guiding the Court to unanimity with both moral fervor and political sense, liberated the nation from centuries of apartheid.
Forty years later, it seems the national consciousness has changed but the reality lags far behind.
An unacceptable number of minority students still attend all-minority or nearly all-minority schools.
Where statutorily sanctioned segregation once kept the races apart at school, now the trends of suburbanization, white flight, industrial decay and political ennui have combined to keep minority students in poorer districts, in schools with lower expectations for their students' achievement, in communities that are nurseries for failure.


Wine Talk
IN sunny climes, people have a simple method for making summer wine.
They add cold water to the red wine they drink the rest of the year.
The result: a do-it-yourself rose, light-bodied, low in alcohol and just right for a long afternoon on the shady side of a piazza.
Most of us don't have it so easy.
Should we choose a medium red, a light red, a white, a rose?
Or maybe a blush wine, like white zinfandel?


Despite a Loss, Lloyd's Sees Path to Recovery
Lloyd's of London said today that its losses had narrowed in its most recently completed accounting year, and that all signs pointed to an eventual recovery from the deep financial problems that had pushed it near the brink of collapse.
Lloyd's said it lost $:2.048 billion in 1991, the most recent year for which results are available under the insurer's system of waiting three years for all insurance claims to be processed.
The loss, which is about $3.07 billion at current exchange rates, was 11.7 percent lower than the previous year's loss of $:2.319 billion, or about $3.48 billion.


Japan Debates Emperor's Visit to Pearl Harbor
Just when Japan thought it was patching over the damage done by a Cabinet member's insistence that the Rape of Nanking never happened, a new and even more politically charged argument has broken out inside the Government: when Emperor Akihito makes his first state visit to the United States next month, should he stop off at Pearl Harbor?
The Emperor's schedule, though not officially published, calls for him to visit Honolulu on the way back from a two-week tour across the United States.
Until a few days ago, Japanese officials were whispering that the Emperor would visit the memorial at the battleship Arizona and express his sorrow over the war, which was begun under the reign of his father, Hirohito.


Eating Well: The Debate Over Milk and an Artificial Hormone; More Milk, More Confusion: What Should the Label Say?
PUBLIC apprehension about milk from cows treated with the artificial bovine growth hormone is not going away, despite the efforts of the hormone's manufacturer to allay the fear.
The conflict over the hormone, which the Federal Food and Drug Administration approved for use last November and which is meant to increase milk production, is reflected in torturous confusion over labeling of milk products.


For Pasta, the Bite of Arugula in a Creamy Sauce
SERIOUS fans of arugula have tried it in salads, as a base under fish dishes and combined with rice to make risotto.
Now, they can try it in a pasta sauce.
The sauce is served at room temperature, the pasta steamy hot -- similar to the wonderful midsummer dish of uncooked tomato sauce and pasta.
And the slight bitterness of arugula contrasts elegantly with the creaminess of a mixture of yogurt, ricotta and goat cheese.


Egypt Should Investigate Lawyer's Death
To the Editor:
A news item May 11 on protests in Cairo against the death in detention this month of Abdel Harith Madani, a 32-year-old Cairo defense lawyer, quotes a spokesman for the Egyptian Interior Ministry: " 'What do you expect the Government to say? He died God's death,' the spokesman said. 'We never violate human rights.' "


Dow Jones and West to Link Data Services
In yet another effort to make information services more user friendly, Dow Jones &amp; Company and the West Publishing Company said yesterday that they would integrate on-line services so customers of Westlaw, West Publishing's on-line legal information service, could also gain access to the Dow Jones News Retrieval collection of financial news and information services, without having to learn the Dow Jones search language.
Added Conveniences
Jeffrey Pemberton, who heads Online Inc., a publisher of magazines for professional on-line users, said the decision represented "a convenience" but did not reflect a big change in the on-line business.
"It simply expedites something that is not that difficult in the first place," he said.
"The service is relatively easy to use anyway."


Youth Agency Overspent, Giuliani Officials Charge
Giuliani administration officials said yesterday that the Department of Youth Services had committed to spend up to $11 million more than is in its budget, with much of the overdraft coming from contracts that were improperly approved in the last months of the Dinkins administration.
City officials said they did not know who was at fault in approving service contracts that were not also approved by the City Comptroller, as required, or what their motivation might have been.
They said they knew of at least 20 such contracts with community groups, but that the number may be far higher, and that the amount of money involved was still uncertain.


Reynolds Overturned In I.A.A.F. Victory
Butch Reynolds has still not crossed the finish line victoriously in his long and bitter fight against the international governing body of track and field over a failed drug test.
A Federal appeals panel in Cincinnati yesterday overturned on jurisdictional grounds a 1992 court ruling that awarded $27.3 million to Reynolds, the world record-holder at 400 meters.


Balaguer Holding Narrow Lead in Dominican Election
Joaquin Balaguer, this country's 87-year-old President, clung to a narrow lead today in partial election returns after a bitterly contested campaign against two longtime rivals in which race and relations with neighboring Haiti became major themes.
With 54 percent of the vote from Monday's elections officially counted, Mr.
Balaguer had 43 percent to 41 percent for Jose Francisco Pena Gomez.
Far behind with 13 percent was another longtime rival of Mr.
Balaguer, Juan Bosch, an 84-year-old former President.


U.S. Is Showing a New Caution On U.N. Peacekeeping Missions
The blunt refusal of the United States to authorize the immediate dispatch of 5,500 United Nations troops to Rwanda reflects a new caution from a White House now determined to stand in the way of United Nations peacekeeping missions it regards as unwise, Administration officials said today.
In insisting that a first-wave United Nations force in Rwanda remain more modest, the Administration has made clear that it intends to apply its rigid new constraints on peacekeeping to all United Nations operations, not just the ones in which the United States might play a central role.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
So I'm a cynic.
Living and working in New York it's hard not to be.
For a brief moment or two the other springlike afternoon I mellowed a bit.
Foolish me.
It won't happen again, I assure you.
The scene was the theater district, where I was waiting for the traffic light to go green and congratulating myself for having survived the wretched winter without breaking a bone or two as so many city dwellers had.
When the light changed, I stepped off the curb, intending to continue my journey uptown on Eighth Avenue.
But I never made it.


Maxxam Reaches Pact In Shareholders' Suits
A tentative $52 million settlement was reached yesterday between Maxxam Inc. and former shareholders of the Pacific Lumber Company, ending a bitter, nine-year legal battle that began when Maxxam acquired Pacific Lumber in 1985.
The settlement was disclosed just before the trial over the $900 million buyout was to begin yesterday in Federal District Court in New York before Judge Milton Pollack.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Fired Buck Rodgers, manager. Named Marcel Lacheman manager.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Delta Air Lines' move into Europe referred incorrectly in some editions to the the operations that Delta acquired from Pan American World Airways in 1991.
Delta bought the European routes and East Coast shuttle of Pan Am, not the entire airline.


Market Place; The Latest Sales Pitch From T. Boone Pickens
Remember T. Boone Pickens?
He is the corporate raider who said during the 1980's that the best place to prospect for cheap, though mismanaged, oil and natural gas reserves was on Wall Street.
Well, he's back.
But this time, he's saying that the best bargain in natural gas is the stock of his own company, Mesa Inc.
None of his competitors have such high, dependable reserves of natural gas with so low a stock price, he said at the company's annual meeting here today.
His own recent purchases have raised his Mesa stake to 7 percent, his highest in 25 years.
And he points to an influx of what he says is smart money including Fidelity Investment's 13 percent stake, George Soros's 5 percent share and Fayez Sarofim's 2 percent stake.


A TELEPHONE ROLE BY TIME WARNER
In the first plan of its type in the nation, Time Warner Inc. intends to use its cable-television system in Rochester next year to provide telephone service to residential and business customers in competition with the local phone company.
Such direct competition between cable and telephone companies has long been foreseen.
But it has not yet occurred for ordinary customers because local utilities have resisted such head-to-head competition and because Government regulations have prevented it.


Edgar A. Grunwald; Magazine Editor, 84
Edgar A. Grunwald, an executive of the McGraw-Hill publishing company for more than 25 years, died on Friday at his home in Northport, L.I.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Janie.


Bringing the World Into Your Kitchen
NEVER one to be caught napping when a trend starts rattling the pantry, Sheila Lukins has tapped into the new global smorgasbord with her latest book, a 591-page tome, "All Around the World Cookbook" (Workman; $27.95 cloth, $18.95 paper).
A result of two years worth of visits to 33 countries, it is a whirlwind tour on the order of "If It's Tuesday This Must Be Belgium." Or Tunisia.
Or Jamaica.
Or Thailand.
In prose and drawings, she sketches the essentials of the cuisines she sampled.
Whether describing a noodle shop in Tokyo's airport or giving recipes for Turkish hamburgers or Swedish potatoes she ate off street carts, Ms.
Lukins makes everything, even conditions in Cuba and the markets in Russia, sound inviting.


Suffolk Man Killed By Officer in Chase
A 38-year-old Melville, L.I., man was fatally shot in the head by a Suffolk County police officer late Monday night after a three-mile chase, the authorities said today.
The police said the officer, Scott Welshimer, 26, fired when the victim, Miguel Rodriguez, ignored orders to raise his hands and instead reached for the floor of his van as the officer approached the driver's side window.
They said Officer Welshimer believed that Mr.
Rodriguez, who was alone in the van, was reaching for a weapon.


Orioles Beat Clemens; Palmeiro Streak at 19
Orioles 3, Red Sox 2
Rafael Palmeiro extended his hitting streak to 19 games and scored the go-ahead run in the eighth inning last night as the Baltimore Orioles beat Roger Clemens and the Boston Red Sox, 3-2, at Camden Yards.


Consensus: Just Get It To Ewing
Forgotten is the melodramatic, midseason lament of those wild and crazy anonymous Knicks, those who complained that the team was running too many plays for Patrick Ewing.
Remember that stroke of genius?
Suddenly, Ewing's teammates would love for their center to score as many points as he possibly can.
Their battle cry for Game 5 of the Eastern Conference semifinals against the Chicago Bulls might very well be, "Feed the post!" That's because a series they never really thought would be close enough for them to cough up is knotted at 2-2.
The Knicks know, from painful experience, that they must defend their Madison Square Garden advantage Wednesday night.


House Backs Independence For Social Security Agency
The House voted today to detach the Social Security Administration from the Department of Health and Human Services and make it an independent agency, ostensibly to protect its trove of money from the "political mischief" of free-spending bureaucrats.
The bill approved today, 413 to 0, would give the agency a higher profile in Washington, where every droplet in the monthly gusher of Social Security benefits to voters is a matter of some political importance.


Theater in Review
Loved Less  (The History of Hell)  Via Theater Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village Through May 28 Conceived, written and directed by Brian Jucha; assistant director and stage manager, Robin Riddell; created in collaboration with the Company.
Set by Sarah Edkins; lighting by Roma Flowers; costumes by Kasia Walicka-Maimone; sound by Mr.
Jucha; additional music by Rod Hohl; puppets by Ms.
Edkins.
Presented by Downtown Art Company, Ryan Gilliam, artistic director; Cliff Scott, producing director.


New Campaigns From Cola Giants
Two of the world's largest soft-drink brands are introducing significantly revamped advertising campaigns.
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it would begin running new advertising for Coca-Cola Light, as Diet Coke is called in 30 countries overseas.
This will be the first time the brand has been marketed as a distinct product.


Stocks Rise in Support Of Fed's Move on Rates
In a paradoxical show of exuberance, stock traders bid up share prices on the leading indexes yesterday after the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates, a move that would seemingly hurt stocks by making borrowing more expensive.
But in this market, traders fear inflation more than they do high interest rates, said Dudley A. Eppel, managing director of listed equity trading for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
"What used to be bad is now good," he said.
"We look forward to high interest rates."


Yanks' Streak Crumbles At Metrodome
Blame it on a blister, the bullpen and bumbling outfield play.
Blame it all on the Yankees.
The wondrous winning streak that continued for 10 games with beautiful and blemished victories finally ended tonight against the Twins.
Blame it on them, too.
While Manager Buck Showalter refused to blame anyone, the Yankees do not like to lose any games and especially do not like to lose in this manner.
The Twins erupted for three runs off three relievers in the eighth inning as they expertly exploited the Metrodome and opposing outfielders in sneaking to a 5-4 victory over the Yankees tonight and preventing them from fashioning an 11-game winning streak for the first time in nine years.


Two Arkansas Players in Goodwill Games
CORLISS WILLIAMSON AND SCOTTY THURMAN of Arkansas were among 12 players selected yesterday to the United States basketball team for this summer's Goodwill Games.
Williamson, who averaged 26 points and 10.5 rebounds as most valuable player of the Final Four, is one of five Final Four participants chosen to play in the Games, to be held July 23-Aug. 7 in St.
Petersburg, Russia.
He is joined by ANDREW DeCLERCQ of Florida, CHEROKEE PARKS of Duke and Arizona's DAMON STOUDAMIRE.


Aftermath of '54 Ruling Disheartens the Browns
Linda Brown Thompson's voice betrays weariness when she talks about school desegregation.
"It's disheartening that we are still fighting," said Mrs.
Thompson, 51.
"But we are dealing with human beings. As long as we are, there will always be those who feel the races should be separate."


Arguments Begin at Trial On Citadel's Male Policy
Lawyers this week began arguments over Shannon Faulkner's right to attend The Citadel, one of two remaining state-sponsored, all-male military colleges in the country, in which she is enrolled.
The first two days of testimony have been used to sketch the case as a matter of equal rights guaranteed by the Constitution versus the benefits of academic diversity in South Carolina's educational system.
Ms.
Faulkner was admitted to The Citadel last year after she intentionally deleted all references to sex in her application.
Her place at the college was canceled when Citadel officials realized she was a woman.


Don't Go Skating Without a Helmet
To the Editor:
A May 11 article reports on volunteers teaching in-line skating safety in Central Park.
I looked in vain for any mention of helmets to prevent or limit brain injury.


Fed's Move Heartens Markets
Financial markets surged in reaction to the Federal Reserve Board's decision to raise two key short-term interest rates yesterday.
Equally important, analysts said the Fed's move was likely to help stabilize market conditions into the summer, thereby ending a period of chaotic volatility that has persisted since early February.


Brown, Now
Half an inch beneath the surface of this week's triumphant rhetoric about the 40th anniversary of the Supreme Court's ruling in Brown v.
Board of Education is a prevailing view that Brown has a mixed, even disappointing legacy -- that it engendered dreams of racial integration that have failed to come true.
That assessment is grossly unfair.
The Brown decision was meant to end legally segregated public school systems, and it did so, in a way that forever changed the racial consciousness of the nation.


Spring Practice Is Fun As Ivies Buckle Down
Hunter Buckner, who has been playing this game for a good part of his life, was saying, "This is the most fun I've ever had with football."
The reference was to spring football practice, which has been reinstated among the Ivy League's eight members for the first time in 41 years.


No Headline
"School desegregation was not supposed to be a cure-all. There was supposed to be a housing act and job opportunities. Most of them have been beaten down. School desegregation is one of the last legs standing, although it is bruised and beaten." GARY L. ORFIELD, director of the Harvard Project on School Desegregation.  [ B7:1. ]


Orsulak Performs A Salvage Operation
Joe Orsulak does not fancy himself to be anything more than a workaday ballplayer.
He plays good defense.
He has a good arm.
He's good at moving runners over and executing the hit-and-run.
The other stuff -- the home runs, the big hits, the clutch plays -- are not things Orsulak thinks about, at least not that often.
But when the big moment comes, he's as capable as anyone.


In a Bleak Camp, Rwanda Refugees Say Each Tribe Is Joining in the Killing
For the first time since Rwandans by the tens of thousands began fleeing to Tanzania two weeks ago from army-led massacres in their homeland, refugees are bringing eyewitness accounts of killings by rebel soldiers, too, United Nations officials here say.
The scope of the killings, small compared with the slaughter by Government troops, has been described by Rwandans arriving in this tiny village in northwest Tanzania.


Steven Keats, 48, Film and TV Actor
Steven Keats, a screen, television and stage actor, who played Carol Kane's husband in the film "Hester Street," was found dead on May 8 in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 48.
He had committed suicide, said his son Thatcher, of Manhattan.


Public &amp; Private; Not the Facts, Ma'am
Those residents of his district in Texas who like to pop off without bothering with facts or fine points must surely feel ably represented by Dick Armey, their man in the House of Representatives.
Mr.
Armey's reputation for quick-on-the-draw characterizations was reinforced the other day when, during discussion of abortion coverage in a national health care package, he described women who chose the procedure as "self-indulgent" and "damned careless."


Review/Pop; Modern-Day Folk Songs Drawn From Life
Ani DiFranco doesn't just get mad; she gets invigorated.
Her songs are manifestos and conversations, delivered with a buoyant grin, rapid-fire guitar-strumming and articulation that might impress a rapper.
On Sunday night at Wetlands, she played for a packed house that whooped with pleasure at lines like "If you're not angry, then you're just stupid or you don't care." Yet her songs reject feeling victimized or strident: "I'm invincible, so are you," she sang in "If He Tries Anything."
Ms.
DiFranco has released six albums since 1990 on her own label, Righteous Babe Records; she recently moved from Buffalo to New York City.
On Sunday she called her music "folk songs" and recited some unaccompanied poems, but she's no 1960's throwback.
With a ring through one nostril and close-cropped hair topped by a few skinny blond braids, she looks like a rocker.
She performs with a drummer, Andy Stochansky, who doubles the drive of her percussive guitar-playing, turning folky melodies into folk-rock.
Her voice can be sweet or cutting, a wiry mezzo-soprano that takes on quavers, rasps and sometimes wordless yowls.
Even her ballads have a nervy energy; she's like Tracy Chapman in overdrive.


Littlefield, Adams
Shares of Littlefield, Adams &amp; Company, a maker of T-shirts and medical products, stopped trading on March 31 after the American Stock Exchange asked the company to revise financial statements.
Since trading resumed on May 4, its shares have slid.
Yesterday, after Littlefield withdrew an offer to buy Prime Time Licensed Products Inc., they fell again.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a proposal to extend the overrun area for the main runway at La Guardia Airport included erroneous figures from the Port Authority on the length of the existing overrun area and of the proposed extension.
The current area is 60 feet long, not 100 feet; the extension would be 400 feet, not 460 feet.


A City in the Enterprise Zone; Trenton Wrestles With a New Old Way of Beating Urban Ills
Amid the abandoned factories and urban blight of central Trenton, the Apex Lumber Yard stands out as a island of hustle and bustle.
"My parking lot is bursting at the seams," said Mark Goitein, the owner of Apex Lumber.
"Sometimes it gets so busy we have to go out and start directing traffic."


With Surgery Behind Him, Simms Starts on Road Back
Phil Simms participated in the Cadillac N.F.L.
Golf Classic at the Upper Montclair Country Club today.
But not the way he wanted.
He didn't have to worry about his distance off the tee.
His concern was how far his voice would carry.
Just two months off surgery to repair a torn labrum in his right shoulder, Simms was reduced to being the master of ceremonies, following the participants around nine holes and doing commentary for the gallery.
He said he would have rather been swinging a club.
But he did wield a mean microphone.


Corrections
The foreign stocks table in some editions of Business Day yesterday carried outdated closing prices, from last Friday; in other editions the table was omitted.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to Business Day, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Officials Apparently Lagged in Tracking Slain Truant Girl
Connecticut officials apparently squandered several opportunities to track down a 10-year-old Bridgeport, Conn., girl who had not attended school since last September and whose slashed body was found Saturday night, discarded near the squalid house she shared with her mother, three younger siblings and her mother's boyfriend.
Police detectives working on the case said they still had no reliable version of events or a suspect in the murder of the girl, Erica Corbett, whose troubled life and cruel death have brought criticism from local residents and officials charging that the child welfare system failed to look out for her.


Cato Corp.(CACOA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Killed by Her Friends, Sons of the Heartland
In the middle of a silent country night last August, 17-year-old Michelle Jensen was shot to death.
Her body was left along a dusty rural road, near a cornfield not far from the center of the city.
Three teen-age gang members murdered her, a jury ruled on Friday, for the keys to her Ford Escort.
The killing by the youths, all from Davenport's blue-collar West End, rocked the eastern edge of the state, not only because of the cold-blooded brutality of the crime but because Iowa boys are supposed to join the Scouts, not gangs; they are supposed to be committing pranks, not murder.


ATCO Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On Top of the Hill


Look Before Plunging Into Rwanda
The Clinton Administration has rightly resisted a clamor for instantly expanding a minuscule United Nations peacekeeping force to halt the human carnage in Rwanda.
An ill-planned military debacle might only deepen the conflict there and jeopardize peacekeeping missions elsewhere.
The U.S. did agree yesterday to a Security Council resolution that authorizes sending up to 5,500 blue-helmets once Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali reports back on these key matters: how such a force would be deployed and for what purpose; available resources; the consent of Rwandan factions to a U.N. presence; progress toward a cease-fire, and how long such a U.N. mandate would last.
The U.S. role would be solely logistic; there is no thought of committing American ground troops.


In Clinton Harassment Suit, the Stories Conflict
To the Editor:
Now that Paula Jones has formally filed a lawsuit against Bill Clinton for sexual harassment (news article, May 7), perhaps reporters will attempt to reconcile the vastly conflicting stories told about Mr.
Clinton's alleged encounter with Paula Jones in May of 1991 at the Excelsior Hotel.


Israelis and P.L.O. Go on Patrol Together
One sweltering afternoon in Jericho this week, Israeli border police officers and a fighter from the Palestine Liberation Organization leaned over the engine of a stalled Israeli jeep, trying to coax it back to life so they could start their patrol together.
The once unthinkable sight has become routine here, an indicator of the speed with which Israeli and Palestinian security forces have eased into a new partnership.


U.S. Moves to Oust Principal In Furor on Interracial Dating
After a principal's attempts to discourage interracial couples from attending the high school prom in Weedowee, Ala., the Justice Department today reopened a 24-year-old desegregation case and asked a Federal court to remove the principal.
In the action in Federal District Court in Montgomery, Ala., the Office of Civil Rights asked that the Randolph County School District be found in violation of a 1970 order barring the district from discriminating in its extracurricular activities, in its disciplinary practices and in its hiring of faculty and staff members.


Medicare's Big Cigarette Burn
Smoking, as its adherents like to point out, is a private choice.
But it is also a choice with public consequences.
Just how extraordinary those consequences are is evident in a report issued this week by Joseph A. Califano Jr., head of Columbia University's Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse.
Out of $87 billion spent by Medicare for inpatient hospital care this year, at least $20 billion is due to substance abuse.
Drug abuse accounts for 3 percent; alcohol abuse, 17 percent; and smoking a whopping 80 percent.
Those put in the hospital by cigarettes are, for the most part, suffering from lung cancer, coronary artery disease and chronic pulmonary obstruction disease.


Gilbert Roland Is Dead at 88; Actor From Silent Films to TV
Gilbert Roland, a lean, dynamic and virile performer who began his career as a Latin lover in silent films and over four decades became one of Hollywood's ablest and most popular character actors, died on Sunday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 88.
He had been suffering from cancer, said his wife, Guillermina.


Personal Health
WITH good evidence that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute has begun a major effort to prevent high blood pressure, rather than just detect and treat it.
The effort, if successful, could result in Americans who are thinner, more active and less saturated with salt and alcohol, as well as being less susceptible to heart attacks, strokes, congestive heart failure, circulatory disorders and kidney disease.
The problem is daunting.
Thirty million to 50 million adults in the nation have high blood pressure, and each year another two million join their ranks.
This makes high blood pressure, or hypertension, the most common risk factor for diseases of the heart, blood vessels and kidneys.
Pressure Uncontrolled
Because high blood pressure is so common, lacks warning signs and seems so innocuous for so many years, many people are far too casual about it.
They typically fail on one or more of three counts: having their blood pressure checked regularly, adopting living habits that could lower it and, once hypertension is diagnosed, taking the medication that can control it.
The result is tens of thousands of avoidable deaths and billions of dollars spent on medical care each year for preventable illnesses.


In Clinton Harassment Suit, the Stories Conflict; Statute of Limitations
To the Editor:
William Safire states in "Presume Innocence" (column, May 5) that when we consider accusations against public officials such as President Clinton or nominees for public office like Clarence Thomas, we should "hold fast to our presumption of innocence." We should also turn a deaf ear to any charge for which the applicable statute of limitations has already expired.


LuPone Settlement on 'Sunset'
Andrew Lloyd Webber and Patti LuPone have buried the hatchet, apparently.
According to a statement released in England on Monday by Mr.
Lloyd Webber's production company, the Really Useful Group, and Ms.
LuPone's lawyer, John F. Breglio, the two have reached a settlement in the dispute that arose after Mr.
Lloyd Webber chose Glenn Close to star in the Broadway production of his musical "Sunset Boulevard."
No terms were released and none of the principals were talking yesterday, but Ms.
LuPone had said earlier that it would take more than $1 million to buy her out of her contract.


Review/Film; A Seaside Outing, With Undertones
"Bhaji on the Beach" was shown as part of the recent New Directors/ New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 19.
The film opens today at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
"This is your day!" exclaims the organizer of the bus outing seen in Gurinder Chadha's "Bhaji on the Beach," a thoughtful, warmly inviting film about Asian women adapting to life in England.
"Have a female fun time!" That feeble nod to feminist solidarity avoids the fact that these women actually seem to have little in common.
They range from boy-crazy teen-agers to old ladies in saris, with a stylish visitor from Bombay who waves a cigarette holder and wears a fuchsia suit.
Their problems and prejudices are as different as their clothes.


Easing of Capacity Limit Cited in Tanker Explosion
The explosion of a gasoline tanker truck on a Long Island Expressway ramp in Queens on Sunday probably would not have happened had a ban on bigger trucks in the city still been in force, some truck safety experts said yesterday.
In the accident, a tanker carrying 7,200 gallons of gasoline tipped over and exploded, killing the driver.
Four other people who tried to help the driver to escape were injured.


Longs Drug Stores Corp.(LDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 28


Earlier Mishap Reported at Site Of Derailment
The investigation into the derailment of an Amtrak passenger train that apparently struck a dislodged trailer jutting from a passing freight train turned today to reports that the same freight line had recently had a similar but less serious accident.
Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board were said to have heard reports of such an incident while combing the scene of the derailment here on Monday.


Food Notes
Tops for Wedding Cakes
A trend these days is for wedding cakes to be topped with a likeness of the couple or with some personalized ornament, instead of an anonymous, factory-made plastic bride and groom.
Two confectioners in Manhattan specialize in creating them.
Ricki Arno, who owns Rosie's Creations, makes finely sculptured toppers out of edible sugar dough that dries to porcelainlike hardness.


Alfred Nier, 82; Physicist Helped Foster A-Bomb
Alfred O. C. Nier, a physicist at the University of Minnesota whose early work on lead and uranium isotopes helped determine the age of the earth and usher in the atomic age, died on Monday in Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis.
He was 82.
He died from injuries suffered in an automobile accident on May 2 near his home in Roseville, Minn., a suburb of St.
Paul, said Dr.
Edward Ney, an emeritus professor of physics and astronomy at the university.


Applied Materials (AMAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Wife of Missing Libyan Says Qaddafi Aide Sought to Muffle Her
The wife of a prominent Libyan dissident who disappeared in Egypt five months ago says a senior Libyan official offered her money to tone down her campaign against the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, widely viewed as having ordered the dissident's abduction in Cairo on Dec. 10.
The reported offer followed two conciliatory letters from the Libyan dictator in which he referred to the missing man, Mansour Kikhia, as a "patriot" whose disappearance is a major concern of the Libyan Government.
Colonel Qaddafi vowed in his correspondence to do anything in his power to locate Mr.
Kikhia, who was a Foreign Minister of Libya before turning against the Qaddafi Government.


Sports of The Times; Whose Fault Is Capriati's Runaway?
"WEDNESDAY morning at five o'clock as the day begins," a young woman in Britain in the early months of 1967 left a cryptic note to her parents and turned the backdoor key.
"Stepping outside she is free."
Whatever happened to that young woman?
I found myself thinking about her in the middle of the night while I was worrying about somebody else's daughter, named Jennifer Capriati.
Funny how real life can remind you of a song, and vice versa.


Till Death Do This Doubles Team Part
They are the French Open's reigning doubles champions, but there is nothing Gallic about the brash brothers Jensen.
The ambidextrous Luke and his sidekick sibling, Murphy, are determined to save doubles from the nefarious clutches of industry insiders who want it phased out for lack of income and interest.
"The tournament directors are saying let's slash, burn and streamline the 90's way," said Luke Jensen, whose survival campaign, considering that the brothers' ranking has dropped to 24th in the world, hinges on making a credible defense of last year's shocking title run at Roland Garros next week.


Compuware Corp.(CWPR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


State Warns Of Mercury In Its Lakes
Deep in the heart of the Pine Barrens, surrounded by the protected forests of Wharton State Park, Batsto Lake presents a picture of New Jersey that never emerges when late-night talk show hosts make jokes about the state.
Tall pines and cedars are mirrored on its smooth, broad surface.
Bald eagles wheel high overhead.
All that breaks the midday quiet are the calls of birds and the whoosh of water sliding over a spillway near a century-old sawmill that has been preserved as a museum.


Books of The Times; Past and Present Mingling in a State of Mind
Big Dreams
Into the Heart of California
By Bill Barich
Illustrated. 546 pages. Pantheon. $24.
California still seems a kind of new world, beside which the rest of the country looks known and worn.
Americans in the 19th century envisioned it as an Eden here on earth, or as an infernal wilderness, sheltering "the condemned and abandoned of God and man." In 1848, when the news broke that gold had been found there, citizens from Massachusetts to Tennessee headed west, throwing over the lives they knew and bolstering their courage with a new version of "Oh! Susanna":


Egyptian Police Forcibly Halt Lawyers' Protest March


CHINA MAY ALLOW U.S. BROADCASTS
China took another step today toward meeting President Clinton's human rights conditions, a sign of progress that the Administration quickly highlighted, apparently in an effort to prepare the public for a decision to renew Beijing's trade benefits with only a few symbolic conditions attached.
A senior Administration official briefing reporters in Jerusalem, where Secretary of State Warren Christopher is traveling, said that China had agreed to a visit by a team of American technicians to talk about halting its jamming of Voice of America radio broadcasts.


U.S. Says Man Bilked Investors of $130 Million
A California man has bilked thousands of investors across the country out of as much as $130 million, money they thought was being invested in low-income housing projects, Federal prosecutors in Minnesota charged yesterday.
And because tax shelters were involved, the prosecutors said, the investors face not only the loss of their money, but also the prospect of having to pay back taxes.


INSIDE
Prom Rekindles Bias Case
The Government asked an Alabama judge to reopen a 1970 desegregation case after a principal discouraged interracial prom couples.
Page A20.
Rangers Tie Series
Mike Richter tied a National Hockey League playoff record with his fourth shutout as the Rangers defeated the Devils by 4-0.
Page B9.


The Other John Malkovich: Director
As an actor, John Malkovich repeatedly transforms himself.
In his words, he can "go into other people's skins." These people happen to include some of the strangest, most obsessive characters in movies and theater: the volcanic Pale in Lanford Wilson's play "Burn This" and, last summer, the killer in Clint Eastwood's film "In the Line of Fire." In his next movie, Stephen Frears's "Mary Reilly," to be filmed this summer in England, he will face the doubly daunting task of playing Dr.
Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde (opposite Julia Roberts in the title role as the housemaid).
Preserving the prevailing Malkovich image, his current theatrical work -- as director and, for the first time, as adapter -- is a dramatization of "Libra," Don DeLillo's award-winning novel about Lee Harvey Oswald and the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
The production is at the Steppenwolf Theater Company, the theater that originally nurtured the talents of Mr.
Malkovich and his friends.


Custody Claim Withdrawn Over Slain Heiress's Child
On the eve of a pivotal court hearing, the brother of Scott S. Douglas, the Bronxville house painter who the police say killed his wife, a newspaper heiress, and then jumped to his death off the Tappan Zee Bridge, has decided to abandon efforts to win custody of the couple's 3-year-old child.
Instead, the brother, Todd Douglas, will support granting custody of the child, Victoria, to Mary Gibbs Scripps, the 42-year-old sister of the newspaper heiress, Anne Scripps Douglas.
Mr.
Douglas's lawyer, Luis Andrew Penichet, said Mr.
Douglas would not even ask Surrogate Court for visiting privileges, but hoped to work out an arrangement privately "without the press, without lawyers."


Book Notes
Cat in the Hat Is Back
It was more than a year ago and Audrey Geisel, the widow of Theodore Geisel, commonly known as Dr.
Seuss, was going through the painful, painstaking task of sorting through old papers at home in La Jolla, Calif.
Buried at the bottom of a drawer was an old typescript of a unpublished story in Dr.
Seuss's distinctive style.
She began to read.
"It's hard to believe such a thing could be true/And I hope such a thing never happens to you," it said.
"But it happened, they say, to poor Mayzie McGrew."
Narrated by the Cat in the Hat, the star of his own previous book, the new story, "Daisie-Head Mayzie," tells of a girl who unexpectedly finds a daisy sprouting from the top of her head.
Ridiculed by her friends and pursued by bees, Mayzie (who is not related to the identically named bird in the 1940 "Horton Hatches the Egg") hires a press agent and capitalizes on her new-found acclaim, only to learn valuable lessons at the end.
Mrs.
Geisel said in an interview yesterday that her husband, who was 87 when he died, had mentioned the idea to her just once, many years earlier.


Permanence Backed For Cameras in Court
A special New York State committee studying the effect of cameras in the courtroom has recommended that the experiment be given permanent status.
A law allowing cameras to film proceedings in the state's courthouses will expire next January unless the Legislature acts, which it has been reluctant to do since the experiment began in 1987.


Review/Ballet Theater; Bocca and Ferri in 'Manon'
Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon" has its choreographic high points.
But it is so padded that it requires strong dancers as Manon and Des Grieux to prevent it from becoming lugubrious.
Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca were electrifying in these leading roles when American Ballet Theater presented the work on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House in a performance conducted by Jack Everly.


Islamic Militants Slay 2 Settlers in Hebron
Two Israeli settlers were shot to death today by Islamic militants just south of this West Bank town, and Israel's army commander warned that the violence might be a foretaste of what settlements would face under Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip.
The question of what, if anything, to do about Jewish settlements in Gaza and the West Bank has been relatively muted lately.


Investor's Fund Makes Move On Olympia &amp; York in U.S.
The investment fund run by Leon Black, one of America's most aggressive deal makers and richest men, moved a step closer this week to taking control of Olympia &amp; York Companies (U.S.A.), the largest holder of commercial real estate in New York City, executives of Olympia &amp; York said yesterday.
In the last month, Mr.
Black's group, Apollo Real Estate Investments, has bought pieces of Olympia &amp; York's $5 billion debt held by a group of banks.
The group's purchases this week, according to an executive of Olympia &amp; York, give it "a strategic position to make a serious play on the U.S. company" by taking control of the debt of five of Olympia's 11 core properties in New York City." The total face value of the debt on the five buildings is about $140 million, according to Olympia &amp; York.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 13
May 6
May 14
1994
1993
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
221.3
220.4
218.6
Distillate stocks
107.8
105.0
99.5
Crude imports, daily
6.9
7.5
7.2
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.1
1.9
Crude stocks
332.2
335.2
351.8
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.8
96.2
89.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Patriots Sign McGinest, First-Round Pick
WILLIE McGINEST, who the Patriots hope will succeed the retired ANDRE TIPPETT as a premier pass rusher, signed yesterday with New England 23 days after being taken with the fourth pick of the National Football League.


CHRONICLE
Republicans have no monopoly on tributes: R. SARGENT SHRIVER is among the Democrats reaping rewards this year.
Mr.
Shriver, who was the first director of the Peace Corps and is now president of the Special Olympics, will receive a 1994 International Humanitarian Award from CARE at a lunch on Friday at the State Department.
The lunch is part of a three-day commemoration of CARE's 48th anniversary, which starts tomorrow.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAYER GROUP A.G., Leverkusen, Germany, the chemicals company, will buy two rubber divisions from Huls A.G., a chemicals subsidary of Veba A.G., Dusseldorf, Germany.
The operations have combined annual sales of $89.3 million.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
HUGHES SPACE AND COMMUNICATIONS CO., El Segundo, Calif., a maker of communications satellites and a unit of the General Motors Corp., won a $61.5 million contract to build a telecommunications satellite for Malaysia.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.38
4.29
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.21
4.22
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.69
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.04
7.22
6.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.44
7.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.52
8.32
7.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.43
6.51
6.00
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Work Starts On Theater In Times Sq.
After an overture that lasted more than a decade, the reclamation of 42d Street's neglected playhouses was officially declared under way yesterday with a ceremony at the Victory Theater, which is to reopen next year with performances and programs for children.
The 94-year-old Victory, a delicately ornamented two-balcony house, would be the first of the historic theaters along the street to be renovated.
So there were celebratory speeches yesterday and billowing cascades of balloons.


CHRONICLE
CYNTHIA HARVEY, a principal dancer with the American Ballet Theater, had a double-barreled reason to celebrate yesterday: she marked her 20th anniversary with the company and her 37th birthday.
Achieving the two-decade mark was "something I always wanted to do," she said, as she prepared for her starring role in last night's performance of "Manon" at the Metropolitan Opera House and a party afterward at Gabriel's on West 60th Street.


The Eclipse Made a Theater of Shadows; Day of Wonders
To the Editor:
On Tuesday, May 10, at 1:30 P.M., I stood with a disparate group of relative strangers watching the eclipse.
We exclaimed in wonder at the view through a piece of welder's glass and through pinhole cameras, knowing we could neither stop it from happening nor change its course.
We were powerless in the face of inexorable natural forces and only tiny blips in the cosmic scheme.


Suns' Ainge Is Fined $5,000 by N.B.A.
DANNY AINGE of the Phoenix Suns was fined $5,000 yesterday for throwing a ball into the face of Houston's MARIO ELIE during Game 3 of the Western Conference semifinals.
The incident occurred in the closing seconds of Houston's 118-102 victory last Friday.
Following a Houston basket, Ainge took the ball out of bounds and threw it baseball-style into Elie's face.
Ainge said it was an accident. (AP)


U.N. Council, Split on Iraq, Keeps Its Ban
The United Nations Security Council was divided today over the future of economic sanctions against Iraq, with more than half the 15 members ready to say the Administration of Presdient Saddam Hussein is making progress toward meeting conditions for lifting the ban on its sale of oil.
But the United States and some other members remain skeptical.
As a result the Council was unable, for the second time, to issue a formal statement at the end of a 60-day review of the sanctions imposed on Iraq for invading Kuwait four years ago.
And once again, the members recommended no change in the worldwide ban on trade and financial dealings with Baghdad.


Bulls Say United They Stand
The three-time defending champion Chicago Bulls would like the world to think that they carry a steady confidence into the resumption of their deadlocked playoff series with the Knicks.
But they left their final tuneup here today still answering questions about Scottie Pippen's insubordination at the end of Game 4 and wondering whether their pattern of fourth-quarter collapses would continue in Game 5 on Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.


International Recovery Corp.(INT,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Complexity Galore
The merger discussions between the Sprint Corporation and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation assume that at least a year will be needed to tie up all the loose ends with Federal regulators, an executive involved in the negotiations said.
Such patience may be a necessity, considering all the dispensations that E.D.S.'s parent, the General Motors Corporation, will be seeking from the Government before a merger can go through.


German State Eases Its Policy on Drug Arrests
After a recent court decision that removed criminal penalties for the possession of small amounts of marijuana and hashish in Germany, officials in the country's most populous state say the police there will no longer arrest people for possessing small amounts of any drug, including cocaine, heroin, morphine, amphetamine pills or LSD.
Most German states have accepted the court ruling on marijuana and hashish without protest, but the action taken by the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia was the first to extend the tolerance to other drugs.


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Princeton
The Tigers will have a new weapon ready for Johns Hopkins on Saturday when the two meet at Princeton in a quarterfinal match of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament.


Critic's Notebook; Even Cannes's Fray Can't Chase Away Hugh Grant's Smile
Hugh Grant came here and stayed in a youth hostel when he was 19 ("which was charming as well"), but things are a trifle different this year.
Now he is installed at the Hotel du Cap d'Antibes, the peaceful, costly, out-of-town oasis traditionally used by emissaries from le tout Hollywood who choose to avoid crowds.
"Ah, the sun's up," joked the director Mike Newell, sitting on a terrace overlooking the hotel's formal gardens and watching Mr.
Grant lope into view.
"Here comes the sun."
Mr.
Grant, wearing work boots and projecting an air of Riviera-defying normalcy, sat down with the director.
Their runaway success with "Four Weddings and a Funeral," and their current collaboration on "An Awfully Big Adventure" (which will be ready this winter), had obviously left both of them in high spirits, despite the little trials that come with visiting the Cannes International Film Festival.
"Like being in a safari park, but the other way round," Mr.
Grant said about the experience of being inside a car surrounded by festival crowds.


Preparing to Make a Stroll in Harlem a Walk Into History


Theater in Review
Sancho and Don  Intar Hispanic American  Arts Center 420 West 42d Street Clinton Through June 5 Conceived by Sigfrido Aguilar and Jim Calder; music by Andy Teirstein; lighting by Paul Clay; literary advisior, Janet M. Izzo.
Presented by Intar Hispanic American Arts Center, Max Ferra, artistic director.


Julia A. Bissell, 87, a Patron Of the Arts and Restorations
Julia Andrews Bissell, a patron of the arts and moving force in the restoration of the historic Kenmore mansion and museum in Fredericksburg, Va., died on Sunday at the Medical College of Georgia Hospital in Augusta.
She was 87 and had homes in Chadds Ford, Pa., and Aiken, S.C.
She had been ill for a long time, her family said.


ISRAELIS OFFERING TO LEAVE GOLAN, NEGOTIATORS SAY
Israel has offered to withdraw from the Golan Heights in three phases over five to eight years in return for peace with Syria and normal relations, officials involved in the indirect peace talks said today.
The officials said that Syria had responded with considerable interest, and that this had led Secretary of State Warren Christopher to decide to return to Damascus on Wednesday -- his third visit in a month -- to press on in his role as mediator.


Court Backs Arbitration For Police and Firefighters
The State Supreme Court today reaffirmed a 17-year-old law that requires binding arbitration to settle contract impasses between local governments and their police and firefighter unions.
But in its unanimous decision on companion cases involving two Bergen County towns -- Hillsdale and Washington Township -- the court said that arbitrators had erred by awarding new contracts to police officers based on countywide municipal salaries rather than on the pay scales in the individual towns.


In Clinton Harassment Suit, the Stories Conflict; Later Will Also Do
To the Editor:
The Paula Jones case may be the first lawsuit against a President for alleged conduct before his election.
But if it is allowed to stand, it will not be the last.
In our litigious society lawsuits can be filed at the drop of a hat.
The lure of publicity and the opportunities to inflict political damage make a President a particularly inviting target.


Stress in Teens Can Increase Risk Of Early High Blood Pressure
THE angst of adolescence can stir enough physical distress to more than double the risk of early onset of hypertension in some boys and girls, a new study has found.
When teen-agers feel that their strivings are continually frustrated, the resulting stress can lead to chronically elevated blood pressure, according to a report by Dr.
Craig Ewart, a psychologist at the School of Public Health at Johns Hopkins University.
High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a potentially life-threatening condition that usually develops in adulthood.
But children with blood pressure in the highest part of the normal range have a far higher risk of hypertension in adulthood.


Rangers Bounce Back as the Devils Draw a Blank
When the history of this gripping Rangers-Devils series is written, the Game 2 chapter will have several subtitles.
One could be "Richter Ties the Shutout Record." Another might say "Anderson Finally Scores." A third might read "The Thrill of Penalty-Killing."
But the main headline, in the big type at the top of the first page, should declare: "Crash! Boom! Bang! Captain Messier Leads the Charge." It was furious body-checking by Mark Messier on the first shift of the game, and his electrifying goal on the first shot, that set the mood for what became a 4-0 Ranger victory at the Garden last night.


Cigarette Maker Takes the Offensive on Capitol Hill
The political skirmish between tobacco companies and their Capitol Hill critics escalated today as a witness at a House hearing accused a cigarette maker of trying to stifle his testimony, and the same company subpoenaed six news reporters and two members of the House.
Both actions arose from growing efforts by the company, the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, to deal with the public disclosure of internal documents on the hazards of cigarette smoking that the company said were stolen from it.


The Fed's Prudent Course
The decision by the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates surprised no one.
The hike of one-half of one percentage point was twice as high as many economists believe is warranted.
Yet in an uncertain economic environment, the Fed's decision is a defensible move to ward off future bouts of inflation and bring order to volatile currency and financial markets.
Some will criticize the Fed's move as an unnecessary blow to economic growth.
Others will say it should have raised rates even higher.
The squabbling reflects disagreement about the best way for the Fed to set monetary policy in order to achieve steady growth without igniting inflation.
The Fed's effort since February to nudge interest rates higher one step at at time is within prudent guidelines.


The Debate Over Milk and an Artificial Hormone; Move Over, Elsie: Recasting the Cow As a Political Animal
KID RED PAULINE and Lisa's Pride of Ronnybrook Farm Dairy didn't expect to become political animals.
Like most 2,000-pound Holsteins, they'd never imagined anything other than a reasonably long life of a familiar green pasture, a predictable milking schedule and the steady twang of the country-and-western music that is played in their barn.
But last November, when the Federal Food and Drug Administration approved the use of bovine somatotropin, a synthetic version of the hormone that stimulates milk production, life as Pauline and Lisa knew it changed.
They began demonstrating against the synthetic hormone and taking their cause to the public, first at the Union Square Greenmarket in Manhattan and then at City Hall.
Several more demonstrations are planned.


Al Unser Sr., Near 55, Retires From Racing
Al Unser Sr., who could easily claim to be the most competitive driver in the history of the Indianapolis 500, announced his retirement from racing at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway yesterday after struggling to qualify for his 28th Indy 500.
Unser, who will be 55 years old on May 29, the day of the race, had been having trouble getting his car to go fast enough to qualify for the race.
He had previously expressed doubts that it was the car, leaving only one other possibility, one which he acknowledged yesterday.


Teachers Back Changes in School Boards
For the first time, the powerful New York City teachers' union has thrown its support behind a plan to overhaul the community school boards, some of which have been plagued for years by corruption and patronage.
The proposal would change the way the boards are elected and strip them of the authority to hire principals and other school administrators.
The changes, included in state legislation proposed last week, are among the latest suggestions of how to end the graft and patronage that have haunted several of the local school districts.
Other such efforts have languished in Albany, but supporters hope the combined backing of the teachers and the school system's Special Commissioner of Investigation, Edward F. Stancik, will give the latest package some momentum in the State Legislature.


De La Hoya Has Advice for Chavez
OSCAR DE LA HOYA, America's only boxing gold medalist of the 1992 Olympic Games, once idolized JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, Mexico's ranking hero.
But De La Hoya had nothing but contempt yesterday for his former hero.
"I believe he should quit now, now that he's ahead," said De La Hoya.
Chavez was awarded a split decision on May 7 after the ring physician believed that he indicated he was unable to continue after he was head-butted by FRANKIE RANDALL in the eighth round of their World Boxing Council superlightweight championship bout.
Chavez got the victory after 1 point was deducted from Randall for the unintentional butt and the three officials' cards were then tallied.


Boys Are More Comfortable With Sex Than Girls Are, Survey Finds
High school girls are less comfortable with their sexual experiences than are their male counterparts, according to a new nationwide survey of high school students.
In a random telephone survey of 503 teen-agers in grades 9 through 12 by Roper Starch Worldwide Inc., 36 percent said they had had sexual intercourse, and an additional 5 percent reported having engaged in sex other than vaginal intercourse.


Signals of Movement On Health in Senate
Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana, an influential conservative Democrat, signaled a new openness today to the idea of requiring employers to contribute to the cost of their workers' health insurance.
Mr.
Breaux is a co-sponsor, with Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, of a bill that attempts a more market-oriented approach to health care than President Clinton's and does not include a requirement that employers pay for insurance for their workers.


Mission Accomplished For Devils at Garden
Unlike Game 1, in which they earned a solid 4-3 victory in double overtime, the Devils experienced a letdown last night and suffered the consequences.
Their 4-0 loss to the Rangers was decided in the third period, when they lost their composure, allowing three goals.
But the Devils still went home to New Jersey happy to have earned a split of the first two games at Madison Square Garden.


The Eclipse Made a Theater of Shadows
To the Editor:
The eclipse May 10 was sublime in the suburbs.
The world not only mysteriously darkened, but also put on a display such as I had never before seen in my three-quarter century span of life.
I recollect the total darkness of the morning hours when I was a single-digit child and terrified by the strangeness of that eclipse.


BALLY PLANS TO SPIN OFF HEALTH-CLUB OPERATIONS
The Bally Manufacturing Corporation said yesterday that it would spin off its health-club chain, the nation's largest, to concentrate on the gaming business.
It also said it would change its name to the Bally Entertainment Corporation.
Bally, based in Chicago, operates about 350 fitness centers, including Bally's, Holiday Health, Jack LaLanne, Holiday Spa, Aerobics Plus and the Vertical Clubs.
The clubs have about 4.2 million members.
Bally also has two casinos in Atlantic City, one in Las Vegas, Nev., and one in Tunica, Miss.
It will open a New Orleans casino next year.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Burlington Northern Inc., Fort Worth, is selling $150 million of notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 7.4 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chevrolet says a single engine can give its 197 dealer ad groups a more powerful voice.
CHEVROLET, in one of the largest efforts ever to consolidate automotive advertising, is encouraging its regional dealer ad associations to work with Lintas Campbell-Ewald, the auto maker's national agency.
The eventual goal is to convince most or all of the 197 dealer ad groups to move their accounts from the agencies they now use.
That would cost those local and regional agencies an estimated $300 million to $400 million in billings.
The intensive campaign, which began in earnest last month, is pitting a giant marketer and its giant agency against 86 smaller shops.
So far, the Davids are ahead; there has been a single convert, the Heartland Chevrolet-Geo Dealers Association in Minneapolis and St.
Paul.


Bad Lyme Disease Season Expected
RESIDENTS of the Northeast could be facing a particularly bad year for Lyme disease, according to scientists at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station in Hartford.
The heavy snow cover that blanketed much of the Northeast for most of the winter is believed to have protected the ticks that spread Lyme disease against die-offs caused by subfreezing temperatures and other harsh conditions.
But the weather did little if any harm to the animals that can carry ticks infected with the Lyme-causing spirochetes.
These animals, mostly small rodents and deer, help to bring infected ticks into contact with people who venture outdoors without adequate protection.


CHRONICLE
In 1991, former President GERALD R. FORD presented the Nelson A. Rockefeller Public Service Award to former Secretary of State HENRY A. KISSINGER.
When Mr.
Ford receives the same award next Tuesday at the Waldorf-Astoria, the individual doing the honors will be Mr.
Kissinger.
The annual awards dinner of the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government, the public policy research arm of the State University of New York, has become a mainstay on the political banquet circuit.


Hirschfeld To Finance Disgruntled Perot Group
In an unusual political marriage, Abraham Hirschfeld, the millionaire developer who was thwarted in efforts to become both Lieutenant Governor and owner of The New York Post, has agreed to finance organizing efforts in New York by a group of disaffected Ross Perot supporters.
Mr.
Hirschfeld said today that he would give at least $100,000 to United We Stand America, New York, to support its efforts to become a full-fledged political party.
He also plans to provide office space to the group in a building he owns on the East Side and will charge below-market rent.


AT LUNCH WITH: Alan Alda; Hawkeye Turns Mean, Sensitively
THE first thing Alan Alda wants to know when he arrives is whether everything is O.K.
He has chosen the restaurant, Orso; he hopes that's O.K.
He has asked for a table outside, on the patio.
Is that O.K.?
In Hollywood, it isn't easy to get a reputation as a nice guy, but somehow Mr.
Alda has managed.
Perhaps it is because he spent so much time playing Hawkeye Pierce, that superficially snide but deep-down-lovable scamp.
Or maybe it is because he has been married to the same woman for more than three decades and campaigned for the equal rights amendment years before the sensitive guy was even invented.


Fare Sale by T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines yesterday offered discounts of up to 30 percent on its domestic routes this summer in a three-day sale.
The tickets can be bought from Wednesday to Friday and travel must be completed by Sept. 15.
The tickets require a Saturday night stay, but the airline does not require an advance purchase.
A spokesman for American Airlines said American planned to match the sale on routes where the two carriers competed.
Other airlines were expected to follow the routine of matching the sale to avoid losing customers to a rival.


Bigger Is Just One of E.D.S.'s Goals
For the last few years, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation's top executives have frequently gathered at the company's sleek mirrored-glass-and-concrete headquarters north of Dallas to ponder plans to make E.D.S. an all-purpose "information utility."
It has been, industry executives say, a preoccupation of the nine-member "leadership council," the top management panel that runs E.D.S. -- especially Lester M. Alberthal Jr., the chairman, and Gary J. Fernandes, the senior vice president in charge of business development.
Mr.
Alberthal, one consultant said, has talked privately of his ambition to make E.D.S., which had revenues of $8.6 billion last year, a $25-billion-a-year corporation by the year 2000.


House Kills a Bill to Require Registration of Private Sales of Handguns
The State House of Representatives today killed a gun-control measure intended to restrict the secondary market in handguns by making all sales of pistols, even between private individuals, subject to registration and waiting periods.
The bill was killed by a vote of 80 to 68 on a procedural motion to postpone action until next year's legislation session, as Republican opponents threatened to drive the debate deep into the night by offering as many as 30 amendments.
The House was meeting in special session because the General Assembly's regular 1994 session expired on May 9.
Bill's Sudden Collapse
The sudden collapse of the measure, which had been passed by the Senate, surprised its supporters after a legislative session that at times had been preoccupied with proposals to combat crime and address voters' concerns over public safety.


Working Double Time, The Nuggets Stay Alive
Nuggets 109, Jazz 101
The Denver Nuggets staved off elimination for the fifth time in the playoffs, beating the Jazz, 109-101, last night in double overtime in Salt Lake City.


Fight New Segregationism, President Urges Students
President Clinton, who attended segregated public schools until he went to college, said today that young people should not squander the gains of desegregation and should work to curtail violence and rebuild families.
Speaking in observance of the 40th anniversary of the Supreme Court decision in Brown v.
Board of Education, Mr.
Clinton said he would not be President today if the 1954 desegregation order had not paved the way for the Voting and Civil Rights Acts that allowed blacks to vote for him in large numbers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  ISRAEL OFFERS DEAL ON GOLAN  Israel has offered to withdraw from the Golan Heights in three phases in return for peace and normal relations with Syria, officials close to the indirect peace talks said.
A1  Two Israeli settlers were shot by militants south of Hebron.
A14


Review/Theater: Kindertransport; Another Perspective On the Holocaust
Just as there are earnest, hard-working people who make their contributions to society without flash or fanfare, there are earnest, hard-working plays.
Diane Samuels's "Kindertransport" is one of them.
It will never be thought earthshaking or innovative, but it has something worthwhile to say and does so with an honest competency.
You won't go away from the Manhattan Theater Club empty-handed.


Off the Menu
Waiting for Troisgros
Angels on the head of a pin are nothing compared with restaurants in the Park Avenue South area.
In less than a year, eight places have opened in what was already a vibrant hub.
Campagna, owned by Mark Strausman, should open in a few weeks, and by the end of June, Danny Meyer and Tom Colicchio hope their Gramercy Tavern will be ready.
But for now, all eyes and mouths are on C. T., Claude Troisgros's restaurant, which opens this evening at 111 East 22d Street, formerly the Banana Cafe.
It will be the only haute cuisine French restaurant in the area.
Mr.
Troisgros, whose father, Pierre, owns the Michelin three-star restaurant bearing his family's name in Roanne, France, has moved to New York from Brazil, where he worked and owned restaurants for 15 years.
He is now in partnership with Ricardo Amiral, the Brazilian restaurateur who owned Banana Cafe, and he is bringing his very personal cuisine to New York.


First Multiparty Election Tests a Long-Ruling African Dictator


Clinton's New Policy on Haiti Yields Little Progress So Far
President Clinton's new strategy to restore democracy to Haiti has thus far failed to weaken the ruling military junta, elicit help from other countries in resettling refugees or stem criticism by lawmakers, refugee groups and human rights leaders.
The policy initiative, unveiled by Mr.
Clinton nine days ago, included the appointment of a new special envoy, William H. Gray 3d, and the announcement that refugee processing centers would be created on ships and in third countries.
A few days before, the United States spearheaded a campaign in the Security Council to impose a near-total trade embargo on Haiti that is due to take effect on Saturday.


Cold Metal Products Inc.(CLQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Prince Drops Its Sponsorship Of Capriati
It may be a while before she comes to trial, but for Jennifer Capriati, the 18-year-old former tennis prodigy who was arrested on a marijuana charge in Florida on Monday, commercial judgment has been swift and severe.
According to her agent, Capriati has already lost one of her oldest and most lucrative endorsement contracts and may be on the verge of losing the other.


Economic Scene; Fund managers are brilliant, or is the record being misread?
HOW now the Dow?
For the right price, a thousand Wall Street gurus would be happy to tell you which stocks will go up, down or sideways.
But are their picks more likely to make you a winner than pure chance?
Economists, at least those not in the securities business, have long been skeptical that any person or system for choosing stocks works.
In the last two decades, though, these skeptics have been on the defensive, as study after study chipped away at the view that opportunities for beating the odds melt as quickly as snowflakes in May.
And the studies matched common sense: how else could super-investors like Peter Lynch of the Magellan Fund have made billions?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CHINA PRESENTS CASE TO U.S.
China's leaders have told the United States that they are willing to improve their human rights record with the goal of building better relations.
But they are also asking for understanding on what they see as a need to clamp down on dissent.
A1


President Doormat
Lee Kuan Yew, the aging dictator of Singapore, saw a way to make himself the ethnic hero of Asia by posing as the upholder of law and order against the decadence of the West.
His method was to provoke and ultimately humiliate the President of the United States by brutalizing and then torturing one of our citizens.
Forget the fascist city-state's propaganda line about "equal treatment" of Asians and whites: as William Branigan of The Washington Post has written from the scene (and as the Singaporean Embassy here does not dispute), "To date, no Singaporean has ever been caned for vandalizing a private car."


Intelligent Electronics Inc.(INEL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Streak Seems Distant As the Yankees Take Even Steeper Tumble
Suddenly, the Yankees, hailed as the best team in baseball, looked ordinary.
Forget that; they looked less than ordinary.
And after their pitching failed so miserably, their fielders mishandled two fly balls and their batters hardly stirred before the seventh-inning stretch, the Yankees looked like downright imposters today in a 13-5 thrashing by the Minnesota Twins.
Where were the surging Yankees who had parlayed stingy pitching, stellar hitting and resourceful play into a 10-game winning streak before arriving at the Metrodome?
Either they missed the charter flight from Milwaukee on Sunday or the Twins simply played superior baseball in sweeping the two-game series here.


L.I. Police Arrest 51 In Drug Crackdown
In a series of early-morning drug raids, the Suffolk County police arrested 51 people today, including the owners of a video store in St.
James who the police said were selling $75,000 worth of cocaine a week.
The police said the raids, which involved 100 officers, followed a four-month investigation of cocaine trafficking in the St.
James and Nesconset areas that began when a street-level dealer sold cocaine to an undercover officer.


SOUTHEAST ASIANS HIGHLY DEPENDENT ON WELFARE IN U.S.
Nearly 20 years after the end of the war in Southeast Asia brought thousands of Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese refugees to this country, many still languish in poverty, giving Southeast Asians the highest rate of welfare dependency of any racial or ethnic group.
More than 30 percent of all Southeast Asian households in the nation now depend on welfare for survival, according to a report on the economic diversity of Asian-Americans released Wednesday in Washington.
Among some groups, like Cambodians and Laotians in California, the percentage of those on welfare reaches 77 percent.
Nationwide, only 8 percent of households received public assistance in 1991.


Assembly Delays Bill to Keep New York City Out of Debt
Although New York City faces cash-flow problems this week because of delays in state aid, the Democratic-controlled State Assembly has postponed until at least Monday approval of a $660 million infusion of emergency aid for the city.
The delay could force the city to withhold payments to its contractors beginning as early as Thursday to avoid going $60 million into debt by Friday, city officials said today.


On the Brink With North Korea
Tiring of cat-and-mouse bargaining with North Korea over its nuclear program, the two Senate leaders, George Mitchell and Robert Dole, want to rush to impose economic sanctions.
Their impatience is especially ill timed: international inspectors arrived yesterday at the site of the North's nuclear reactor, which has been shut down for refueling.
A move to sanctions is almost sure to get them sent home.
Washington's top priority is to prevent North Korea from diverting spent nuclear fuel to bombs while refueling.
The inspectors' presence over the coming months is the best guarantee that that will not happen.
Only if North Korea impedes the inspectors from witnessing the refueling would immediate sanctions be warranted.


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


INSIDE
New Financial Rules Sought
A Congressional study of derivatives calls for sweeping new regulation of the market for these complex financial products.
Page D1.
Zeroing In on Jupiter
At least 21 icy chunks from a shattered comet will start smashing into Jupiter on July 16, according to scientists' latest predictions.
Page A16.
Are There Leaks at the Fed?
The Federal Reserve is investigating whether a former Fed governor was leaked information or simply had a brilliant hunch.
Page D1.
Knicks Lead Series, 3-2
Hubert Davis's two free throws with 2.1 seconds left after a questionable foul call gave the Knicks an 87-86 victory over Chicago.
Page B9.
Applause for Whitman
The determined Governor of New Jersey, Christine Todd Whitman, is riding a crest of popularity, according to a statewide poll.
Page B1.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GREAT LAKES CHEMICAL CORP., West Lafayette, Ind., said its board had authorized the repurchase of up to 5 million of its 69.9 million common shares outstanding.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Scott Lewis, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of John Farrell, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Herbert Perry, infielder, from Charlotte of the International League.
Optioned Mark Lewis, infielder, to Charlotte.


Fed Looks at Leaks and Hunches
The Federal Reserve, under Congressional attack for being selectively secretive, is so worried about leaks these days that it is investigating whether Wayne D. Angell, who departed recently as a Federal Reserve governor, received inside information about the Fed's activities or simply had a brilliant hunch.
The focus of their inquiry is a report that the outspoken Mr.
Angell wrote a few weeks ago for clients of Bear, Stearns, the Wall Street firm that is his new employer.
In the report, he said eight or nine of the 12 regional Federal Reserve banks had filed requests for an increase in the discount rate the Fed charges for the loans it makes to banks.


Japanese Premier Seeking To Limit Nuisance Taxes
Japan's new Prime Minister, Tsutomu Hata, responded today to growing public criticism of a wave of steep increases in government-controlled fees and tolls by ordering bureaucrats to freeze the fees at their current levels until the end of the year.
However, it is uncertain that Mr.
Hata's order will in fact bring about a freeze, because many of the fee increases -- covering everything from postal rates and highway tolls to rents in public housing and subway fares -- are the responsibility of local governments.
But his unusual call reflected mounting anger over the surging fees and potential political repercussions from the problem.
Terrible Timing
Japanese are dismayed because the increases come at the worst possible time.
The country is in a deep recession, inflation has all but disappeared, and wholesale prices of many goods are declining.
Nevertheless, governments have approved or are considering fee increases that will cost consumers more than $22 billion this year, according to estimates by Morgan Stanley International.


Florida State Kicker Suspended
Kicker SCOTT BENTLEY was one of two Florida State football players suspended by Coach BOBBY BOWDEN yesterday.
Bowden also suspended reserve tight end KAMAI CHARLTON from the Seminoles' national championship team.
Charlton was freed from jail yesterday after posting $10,500 bond on felony rape and simple assault charges.
Earlier in the week, Bentley was fined $500 and sentenced to 40 hours on a Leon County sheriff's department road crew for illegally recording a sexual encounter with a female student.


Developer of the New Tomato Expects a Financial Bonanza
For Calgene Inc., the Government's approval today of the Flavr Savr tomato represents a payoff for the longest-running gamble in agricultural biotechnology.
Having spent five years developing the genetically engineered tomato, Calgene is eager to introduce the product into the nation's fresh-tomato market, which is estimated at $3 billion to $5 billion a year.


U.S. Defends Efforts to Oust Principal for Racial Remark
Justice Department officials and experts on court-ordered desegregation agreed today that the department's move to oust an Alabama school principal accused of making racist remarks was an unusual step, but they also said that there appeared to be ample legal basis for the request.
The department's civil rights division took the case to a Federal District Court in Montgomery, Ala., on Tuesday, asking that the Randolph County School District in eastern Alabama be found in violation of provisions in a 1970 desegregation order that affected all the state's school districts.


Jets Give Tackle Second Chance
The Jets signed ALFRED OGLESBY, a free agent defensive tackle who spent a week with the team last season, yesterday.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
Oglesby, a three-year veteran, started 18 games for the Miami Dolphins in 1991 but was released in 1992.
He spent half the 1992 season with the Green Bay Packers, playing in seven games before being released.
Last year the Jets signed Oglesby on Dec. 8 and released him six days later.


2 Prominent Tax Lawyers Are Found Slain in Maryland Weekend Home
The two tax lawyers from Bethesda came to their gray and white clapboard house here with the notion of getting away from the stress of their daily lives.
Instead, they were killed sometime over the weekend in the newly renovated home just outside Annapolis.
Jose Enrique Trias, 49, was vice president and general counsel of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, one of the the nation's wealthiest research organizations.
His wife, Julie Noel Gilbert, 48, was a partner with Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a Philadelphia law firm with an office in Washington.


Books of The Times; Peggy Noonan Recounts Her Century-End Jitters
Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness  By Peggy Noonan 255 pages.
Random House. $23.
"When last we met," Peggy Noonan writes at the opening of her outspoken new book, "Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness," "George Bush had just been inaugurated President, Ronald Reagan was waving goodbye to Washington in a helicopter flyby, and I had just come back to New York, where I finished a book about being a speechwriter for both."


MicroAge Inc.(MICA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


A New Mantra From Utility Companies: Use More Electricity
HALF a million households around the country will soon receive catalogues that look as if they came from a time warp: sent by local electric utilities, they promote using more electricity.
After years of encouraging customers to conserve energy by selling compact fluorescent light bulbs and super-efficient water heaters, utilities are sending customers catalogues that say it's O.K. to feel good about using more electricity.


QVC Inc.(QVCN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Talbots Inc.(TLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Alain Cuny Is Dead; Film Actor Was 85
Alain Cuny, a tall and ascetic-looking French actor who seemed made to play priests and aristocrats, died on Monday night at the Cochin Hospital in Paris.
He was 85.
Mr.
Cuny was born and educated in St.
Malo in Brittany, and studied acting in Paris, where the playwright Paul Claudel gave him his first big break, in 1941.


Italy's New Rightist Cabinet Wins Slim Senate Approval
Italy's new right-wing Government scraped through a confidence vote in the Senate tonight, crowning the electoral triumph of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and his neo-Fascist and Northern League allies.
Mr.
Berlusconi's new Cabinet won Senate approval by 159 to 155.
The vote included two abstentions, which under parliamentary rules count as "no" votes on confidence motions.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson Services Inc.(SSSS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Dimitri Romanoff, Dancer and Teacher Of Ballet, Dies at 86
Dimitri Romanoff, a dancer, teacher and longtime ballet master with American Ballet Theater, died on Feb. 6 in a nursing home in St.
Helena, Calif.
Mr.
Romanoff, who lived in St.
Helena, was 86.
He died of natural causes, said Dr.
Michael Shifflett, Mr.
Romanoff's great-nephew, of Napa, Calif., who notified The New York Times of his death this week.


NATO Bends to Russia to Allow It a Broader Relationship
In a concession to Russian pride, NATO said today that the alliance's relationship with Russia could be broader than the so-called Partnership for Peace the allies offered to it and the other formerly Communist countries in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, officials said.
Unlike Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and many other countries, Russia has repeatedly postponed formal acceptance of the terms of the partnership, which President Clinton and other leaders proposed last January after Russia made clear it would regard full membership in the alliance by eastern European countries as a threat to its own security.


Dominican Tension Rises as Charges of Rigged Voting Mount
Tensions mounted in this city today as vote counting for elections held Monday neared its end amid charges by the main opposition party that supporters of President Joaquin Balaguer had rigged the process in his favor.
With nearly 95 percent of the votes counted, Mr.
Balaguer called himself the "virtual winner," even though the official tally put him ahead of his nearest rival, Jose Francisco Pena Gomez, by less than 38,000 votes out of 2.5 million votes counted.
The 87-year-old incumbent is seeking his seventh term in office.


Dealing With Sex Bias
To The Home Section:
In the sidebar accompanying "Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud"  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 28 ] , you quote Dr.
Myra Sadker as saying that if a child cannot name 10 famous women from American history, "the school may not have a sex-equitable curriculum."


With Israel Gone, Jericho Takes First Slow Steps to Self-Rule
The Jericho post office was open today, but since it lacked Palestinian stamps, no one could send any letters.
Government bureaus had new stationery of the Palestinian National Authority, but the authority still exists only in name.
Blue-uniformed patrolmen appeared in the police station, but they were not yet walking the streets.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
AmSouth Bancorp, Birmingham, Ala., is selling $150 million of 7 3/4 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 99.389 to yield 7.84 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, the holding company for Chase Manhattan Bank N.A., is selling $150 million of 8 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 99.455 to yield 8.08 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp.
The bonds are noncallable for five years and rated Baa-1 by Moodys', A- by S.&amp; P. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


All the Signs Are Pointing to Another Major-League Strike
How naive it all seems now.
March 1990, wee hours of the morning, a hotel ballroom filled with stale cigarette smoke, half-empty coffee cups and fatigued players, management officials, labor negotiators and reporters.
And, everyone thought, a breath of fresh air.


Ancient Rural Crafts of Japan Have an American Defender
IN her first book, "Japan: The Art of Living," Amy Sylvester Katoh recalled the first time she invited her new Japanese father-in-law to tea.
She served him freshly baked cakes and cookies on a bamboo tray traditionally used for noodles.
He was shocked.
That was three decades ago, when she was new to Japan, and it was also the beginning of a long and winding turnabout for the vivacious American.
She is now recognized throughout Japan for her dedication to preserving and venerating what has been rapidly disappearing here: traditional rural crafts.


Tomato Review; No Substitute for Summer
A judicious and conservative taster wants to detect a fresh outdoor note in the Flavr Savr, thanks to the gene that is spliced into its chromosomes, but is frustrated.
Tasted on three occasions -- once at a laboratory at the University of California at Davis and twice at a convention of biotechnologists in the summer of 1992 in New Orleans -- the tomato was plump and juicy, far more supple than standard out-of-season tomatoes, possessing the deeper red hue and thinner skin of summer's field tomatoes.


Etienne Hirsch, 93, Backer of a Europe United Like the U.S.
Etienne Hirsch, a French administrator who was a leading advocate of a United States of Europe, died on Tuesday in Paris.
He was 93 and lived in nearby Sevres.
The cause was a heart problem, his family said without releasing further details.


8 Lawyers in Egypt Arrested for Fomenting Violence
The Egyptian authorities arrested eight militant Islamic lawyers today on charges of fomenting violent protests over the death in police custody of a colleague, the Interior Ministry said.
The crackdown came a day after security forces crushed an attempt by 2,000 members of the Egyptian Bar Association to march on the presidential palace to protest the death of the lawyer, Abdel-Harith Madani.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section last Thursday about predominantly black enclaves in Sag Harbor, L.I., misstated the village's year-round black population.
It is 70 to 80, not 700 to 800.


Family Shift Is Expected For Seagram
The heir apparent at the Seagram Company, Edgar Bronfman Jr., is likely to be named the company's chief executive on June 1 at its annual meeting in Montreal, officials close to Seagram said yesterday.
Mr.
Bronfman, who is 39, would be promoted to the job held by his father, Edgar M. Bronfman, 64, who has been the chief executive and chairman since 1975 and is expected to remain as Seagram's chairman.


The Dusty Gaza Strip: An Unwanted Orphan
Overcrowded, poor and short on hope, the Gaza Strip is often described as a place nobody wants.
Certainly, opinion polls suggest, most Israelis are delighted to leave behind an area so bedeviling to them that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin once said it should sink into the sea.
Governing Gaza and its estimated 800,000 residents -- about half of them refugees and their children -- will be a profound challenge for the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Others have tried, and failed.


Review/Theater; Giving Shakespeare a Racial Twist
The well-worn opening monologue of Shakespeare's most villainous monarch takes on a new, electrifying resonance in the Acting Company's production of "The African Company Presents 'Richard III,' " which opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
In Carlyle Brown's maddeningly uneven play about a black amateur theater troupe in New York City in 1821, the crookback's familiar, embittered soliloquy becomes a startling cry of racial outrage.
The monologue, delivered by Allen Gilmore as the actor playing Richard, shimmers with an anger that evokes Genet's ritualistic dramas of oppressed outsiders.
And one can fully grasp what a threat the performance must have posed to a world still ruled unconditionally by white men.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in Business Day on May 10 about Douglas L. Cunningham misidentified the company of which he was named chairman and chief executive.
It is Rexair Inc., a subsidiary of Hanson Industries, and not Hanson itself.


Dow Climbs by 12.28 in a Late Recovery
It was a baffling day in the markets yesterday, as traders pondered the steep interest-rate increase they had long lobbied for and got.
The stock market drifted in the morning, but recovered strongly in the afternoon, especially as measured by the broad-based Standard &amp; Poor's 500.
For much of the day, however, stock traders scratched their heads over the course of the dollar, which failed to rally after the Federal Reserve Board's increase in interest rates.


Corrections
An article on April 25 about a move to recognize gay marriages in Hawaii misstated the number of communities in which benefits are extended to domestic partners of municipal employees.
Before Austin, Tex., repealed its ordinance this month, there were 15, not 150.


So Far, Go for Gin Is in Class by Himself
Only one of the 11 horses in the Preakness Stakes has won a Grade 1 race.
Only one has even run in three Grade 1 races in a row.
Only one, to be sure, has won the Kentucky Derby.
For all these reasons, Go for Gin reigns over the Stakes Barn at Pimlico Race Course three days before the Preakness, and he will be the favorite when they go to the post Saturday for the second leg in the Triple Crown series.
And nobody disputes his right to be the favorite, especially since he will not be running against stars like Holy Bull, Brocco, Valiant Nature and Strodes Creek, who withdrew to save their strength for later tests.


Kremlin Gossip, a Best Seller, Is Translated
Even with the explosion of historical research and truth-seeking that has been taking place in the former Soviet Union, few Russians had discovered what really happened behind the scenes when the Soviet Foreign Minister, Vyacheslav M. Molotov, declared war on Germany on June 22, 1941.
The first response of Molotov's alluring wife, Paulina, was to summon her beautician and have a manicure.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.(PDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Health Care Hearings Open in Squabble
Two Congressional committees took up national health insurance today, and the discussions promptly dissolved into the sort of cranky partisan squabbling that has kept the subject off the statute books since it was first proposed a half century ago.
It was predictable enough in the House Ways and Means Committee, where rigid partisan lines have become traditional.
Moreover, the committee planned only to talk this week and next, with no votes before June.


Haft Family Reaches Settlement
A bitter battle that had split one of Washington's most prominent retailing families has ended in a court settlement under which the family's patriarch, Herbert H. Haft, will retain control of the family's companies, which include the Dart Group, Crown Books and Trak Auto.
The case, which had the trappings of a soap opera, was settled on Tuesday.
The terms of the settlement were not disclosed, but people familiar with the case confirmed the details of an article in The Washington Post today that reported Mr.
Haft, 73, and one of his sons, Ronald, 34, had bought the interests of Mr.
Haft's wife, Gloria, and their eldest son, Robert, 40.


Molson Cos.(MOL.A) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Russians and Americans Join in Anti-Abortion Fight
A French geneticist showed slides of a curled fetus the size of a button and just as cute.
A Russian Orthodox priest explained what he called the direct corollary between abortion and divorce.
And American anti-abortion advocates advised their Russian counterparts always to refer to a fetus as a child, and abortion as murder.
The first major anti-abortion conference in Russia opened today in Moscow, a quiet but still surprising event in a country with the highest abortion rate in the world.
The Russian anti-abortion movement is small, and even its leaders say they have no hope of banning abortion.


Petrie Leaves Post in Portland
GEOFF PETRIE said yesterday that his decision to resign as head of basketball operations for the Portland Trail Blazers was no spur of the moment decision.
But he declined to be specific about his reasons for quitting a post he has held the last four years.


Kings Dismiss Two Executives
The Los Angeles Kings, who failed to make the playoffs a year after advancing to the Stanley Cup finals, fired NICK BEVERLEY, their general manager, and BOB OWEN, their player personnel director.
Beverley, 47, had been with the Kings since retiring as a player in 1980 and had held a variety of jobs in the organization.
The Kings said they plan to replace him in the next two weeks.


Doctor Gets An Ovation And a Rebuke
In his first public appearance since he was forced to resign from the breast cancer study he coordinated for three decades, Dr.
Bernard Fisher received standing ovations this week from several thousand of his peers at a national cancer meeting here.
The response to Dr.
Fisher, who spoke to the American Society of Clinical Oncology, of which he is the immediate past president, was something of a triumph for him.


AGREEMENTS FOR SYSTEMS TO SEND DATA OVER CABLE
The Intel Corporation and the General Instrument Corporation will sign agreements with Tele-Communications Inc. and Rogers Cablesystems Ltd. of Canada to develop systems that will permit transmission of computer data over cable systems at speeds of up to 30 million bits a second.
The systems will also permit personal computer users to send information upstream, but at slower rates.
Similar agreements were signed last year with the Comcast Corporation and Viacom Inc.
The technology, which is faster than a similar system being marketed by Zenith, is expected to make it possible to deliver multimedia information, including video, to personal computers in the home.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Window Boxes Ready?
Window boxes may not rank among the world's great landscapes, but there's no denying the color and spirit they bring to barren streets or the pleasure they bring to those who tend them.
Now is the time to measure the width and length of your sill, and check garden shops or hardware stores for boxes made of wood, cast cement, molded terra cotta, plastic or fiberglass.
Avoid metal boxes, since they will very likely rust in a few seasons and, if placed on sunny sills, will transmit heat, which burns roots.


Morgan Stanley Reports 41% Drop in Profit
Anyone wondering just how gruesome the last few months have been for bond traders got a clear look yesterday, as Morgan Stanley Group Inc. announced a drop of 41 percent in its profits for the three months that ended on April 30.
The company, one of the largest on Wall Street, earned $117 million on net revenues of $888 million in the period, compared with profits of $199 million on revenues of $1.05 billion in the comparable period a year ago.
That worked out to $1.27 a share, compared with $2.40 a share in the comparable period last year.


Woolworth Vindicates Executives
The Woolworth Corporation released a report yesterday clearing its senior executives of wrongdoing in accounting irregularities that caused it to misstate some interim quarterly results in 1992 and 1993.
But the report chided those executives for failing to send a clear signal to employees that inaccurate and improper financial reporting would not be tolerated.


For Whitman, Applause in the Early Acts
Take it or leave it, Christine Todd Whitman has been saying since she took office four months ago, pressing her unwavering drive for lower taxes and smaller, more efficient government.
And while legislators wilt and worry, while state workers fume about attacks on their pensions and pay and while Wall Street frets about some of the Governor's budget plans, the people of New Jersey seem to be loving every minute of it, and of her.


A Justice Denied
Death is the last taboo in America, a word to be avoided the moment it hits home.
But in the public arena, death is inescapable.
Arguments about abortion rights, the assisted suicides of Jack Kevorkian and capital punishment are all arguments about when life begins and ends and who, if anyone, should call the shots.
Even the health-care debate is in part a referendum on the myriad routes that can be taken to death and the cost of reaching that final destination.
This is why all the Monday-morning quarterbacking about President Clinton's choice of a new Supreme Court justice may miss the point.
The lost runner-up on Mr.
Clinton's short list of three was not the politically controversial Bruce Babbitt but the medically controversial Richard S. Arnold, a highly regarded chief judge on the Federal Court of Appeals who has been under treatment for lymphoma since 1978.


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"Foreign statesmen will surely make mistakes in their decisions if they base their  understanding of China  merely on the words or views of a tiny number of Chinese, and ignore the interests and wishes of all other Chinese people." -- PRIME MINISTER LI PENG.  [ A1:1. ]


Let's Stop Making Myths and Scapegoats of Those on Welfare
To the Editor:
By your choice of a young African-American boy with 10 siblings to illustrate your May 8 Week in Review lead article on welfare reform, you play into the hands of the mythmakers who would have the American public believe that families on welfare are different from themselves.


Indresco Inc.(ID,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Schilling to Have Surgery
Philadelphia Phillies pitcher Curt Schilling will have surgery Friday to remove bone spurs from his right elbow, the team said today.


Philip Morris Settles Charge on Cigarettes
The New York State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said yesterday that he had reached a settlement with Philip Morris U.S.A., after accusing the tobacco company of violating a state law by distributing free samples of Marlboro cigarettes.
Philip Morris denied wrongdoing but agreed to discontinue the practice and to pay $250,000 to settle the charges, said John C. Lenzi, a spokesman for the company.


A Thief Dines Out, Hoping Later to Eat In
Every now and then, Gangaram Mahes slips on his best donated clothes and lives the high life.
He strolls to a nice restaurant, sips a fine aperitif, savors a $50 meal and finishes with hot black coffee.
The waiters call him sir, but Mr.
Mahes could not dig a dollar from his pocket for a bus ride to heaven.
He is a thief who never runs, a criminal who picks his teeth as the police close in.
To be arrested, to go home to a cell at Rikers Island, is his plan when he unfolds his napkin.


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc.(CBRL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Lamps that knock your eyes out


Why the Fed Acted
On the face of it, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates on Tuesday mainly to take some steam out of a growing economy so that it would not become inflationary.
But that explanation, offered by the Fed itself, hardly tells the whole story.
Quite apart from inflation, which is still quite modest, the Fed was forced to deal with a concoction of events -- most of them only loosely connected to the real economy -- that had pushed up interest rates.
More than in the past, rates and reality became disconnected.


F.D.A. Approves Altered Tomato That Will Remain Fresh Longer
The first genetically altered food, a tomato that is supposed to offer garden-fresh taste year-round, is heading for the markets after gaining approval today from the Food and Drug Administration.
The tomato, developed by Calgene Inc., a biotechnology company based in Davis, Calif., is called Flavr Savr and should arrive in some grocery stores in the West and Midwest within 10 days.
The tomato has been genetically altered to ripen longer on the vine while remaining firm for picking and shipping, characteristics that should make it more flavorful and last longer than most other tomatoes on the market, the company said.


Textile Union Opposes Kmart Stock Issue
More pension funds with investments in the Kmart Corporation are raising objections to the company's plans to sell stakes in some of its specialty-store divisions, including the Office Max and Sports Authority chains.
The pension funds of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, which owns 23,000 shares of Kmart stock, released a letter yesterday to other shareholders urging them to reject the company's proposal to issue new classes of stock representing 20 percent to 30 percent of its Borders-Walden bookstore division, Builders Square home-improvement chain, Office Max and Sports Authority.
By selling a minority stake in those divisions, Kmart would retain control of them.


Dow Jones Utilities Average
After dropping for two weeks, the Dow Jones utilities average, which is made up of 15 large electric utilities, turned up this week.
Advocates of the average say an upturn means interest rates will stabilize and inflation will remain mild.
Critics say the average's track record as an economic indicator is spotty at best.


Lewis Jumping at the Chance to Show He's Not Through
Sunday, in his first long jump since winning a gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics, Carl Lewis is looking to go over the rainbow, lest anyone think he is gone over the hill.
Though he will not face them in the Reebok New York Games, Lewis will be measured this season against two challengers.
Mike Powell has the world record at 29 feet 4 1/2 inches.
Erick Walder, a senior at Arkansas, has the world's best jump this season at 28-8 1/4.


Market Place; As Xerox's insurance unit inches toward a sale, the stock rises.
WHEN will Xerox sell its property insurance business, formerly known as the Crum &amp; Forster insurance group, and who will buy it?
Since Xerox announced plans early last year to end a 10-year-old diversification move into insurance and concentrate on the copier business, it has reorganized the insurance business to make it more profitable and salable.
But Xerox has said only that sales talks are "active and ongoing."


Exoneration Fails to End School Molestation Case
Child welfare and police officials have concluded that a group of fourth graders seeking to retaliate against a strict substitute teacher concocted a tale accusing him of molestation.
But both the accusations and subsequent investigation have left a few parents angry and threatening to file charges against the teacher, Albert Thompson, who is 43.


Review/Music; A Forgotten U.S. Composer Is Resurrected
One of the functions of the American Composers Orchestra is to root out music that after a few moments of prominence has simply died away.
Edward Joseph Collins was, for example, somewhat of a Midwestern darling during the first half of this century.
Program notes for the orchestra's concert on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall tell us that between 1924 and 1941 the Chicago Symphony played three of Collins's piano concertos and two other orchestra pieces.
The listener is indebted for the information, for Collins's name is absent from the most prominent reference books now in circulation.
One of these Chicago performances was of the "Tragic Overture," a well-made bit of melodrama offered by the American Composers Orchestra under Dennis Russell Davies on Sunday.
This tidy piece fights off every modernistic impulse while clutching Liszt and Wagner firmly to its breast.
Yet the "Tragic Overture" celebrates more modern calamity than Romantic tragedy.
Its dire mood wells up from the bottom of the orchestra: tubas, trombones, double basses.
There are moaning half steps, nasty little snare drum figures and, at the end, a funeral march set against solemn drums.


Corrections
An article yesterday about state enterprise zones misstated the number of enterprise zones in Connecticut.
As the accompanying map showed, it has 12 such zones, not 11.


Humocaro Alto Journal; Rebel Is Free to Fish in Venezuela's Roiling Waters
A spring storm swept down from Andean coffee fields and rattled across the tile roofs of this mountain village, but the powerfully built man speaking in the central plaza stood his ground, solid as a tree stump.
"The crisis is so deep," the speaker in a red military beret boomed to a shivering but enthusiastic audience.
"The gangrene is so profound, as Bolivar used to say, that it can't be cured by palliatives. The only way is revolution."


Bomb Sent to ABC Offices
A device that appeared to be a bomb and was in a package addressed to the president of ABC was delivered to the network's headquarters on the Upper West Side yesterday, but it was deactivated by the police bomb squad, the police said.
The package, addressed to Robert A. Iger, president of the ABC Television Network Group, contained gunpowder packed in wood cylinders and covered with foil, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Mr.
Iger was traveling when the package arrived at his office at 77 West 66th Street, near Columbus.


Analog Devices Inc.(ADI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Texas Tops New York
New York State has slipped to third in population among the states.
The Census Bureau said projections indicated that Texas had overtaken New York sometime in January.
Article, page B1.


Sony Starts a Division To Sell Game Machines
Seeking to stake out turf in the increasingly competitive video-game market, the Sony Corporation said yesterday that it had formed a unit called Sony Computer Entertainment of America to market a CD-based video game machine, which is scheduled to be introduced in the United States in 1995.
Sony's game machine, called Playstation, will feature a 32-bit microprocessor.
Most of the industry currently sells machines based on 16-bit microprocessors, though a new generation of 32-bit machines is expected to reach the market next year.
By moving now, Sony is trying to get a jump on its rivals, including Sega, Nintendo and 3D0.


The Exiles From Edmonton Earn Cheers in Manhattan
Sometimes, events tell a story best simply because they coincide.
That was the case Tuesday night, when news reports flashed out of two distant, diverse places -- Edmonton and Manhattan.
Out west, Peter Pocklington, the owner of the Oilers, did not deliver a $1.25 million letter of credit that was supposed to seal the deal to keep his team in a renovated Northlands Coliseum.
He still might get it right, or he might not.
The team may stay, or it may not.
Although the Oilers finished 23d in a 26-team league this season, people living in Edmonton still care despite dwindling attendance that ranks the team in the bottom third of the league.
They watch the Stanley Cup playoffs on television now.


It's Brodeur in Goal For Devils Once More
Jacques Lemaire surprised no one today when he emerged from a meeting with his players and announced that Martin Brodeur would start Game 3 Thursday night against the Rangers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Although Brodeur allowed all four goals in New Jersey's 4-0 loss Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden that evened the series at one game each, the rookie was the Devils' best player, making 36 saves.


Robert P. Mauthner; Journalist, 65
Robert P. Mauthner, the diplomatic editor of The Financial Times, died yesterday in London.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, the newspaper said without providing further details.


Aides to Giuliani Criticized For Lacking Job-Cuts Data
City Council committee chairmen angrily criticized high-ranking members of the Giuliani administration at budget hearings yesterday, accusing some commissioners of not being forthcoming about how services will be affected by the Mayor's proposed budget cuts.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed cutting 15,000 jobs from the city payroll by June 1995 through attrition and a $200 million severance program.
Though more than 6,800 employees are in line for severance, the administration has yet to provide details about where jobs will be lost or whether the eliminated jobs mesh with the Mayor's proposed reductions.


Plenty of Complaints on Airline Air Quality, Lawmakers Say
Members of Congress said today that they were besieged by complaints from passengers about the air quality in airline cabins.
"Our mail, questions we receive from our constituents, and my conversations with colleagues are a catalogue of complaints of headache, ear discomfort, sinus and bronchial ailments, viral infections, respiratory illness, nose and throat irritation, and other ailments following flights," said Representative James L. Oberstar, the Minnesota Democrat who is chairman of the aviation subcommittee of the Public Works and Transportation Committee.


Israel Finishes Withdrawing Troops From the Gaza Strip
Relieved to lay down the burden but nervous about what lies ahead, Israel completed its army withdrawal from Palestinian towns and refugee camps in the Gaza Strip today.
With the soldiers' departure, under a final cascade of stones and jeers from young Gazans determined that the Israelis would be chased out, Palestinian self-rule went fully into effect, as it did days ago in the West Bank town of Jericho.


Defining the Problem
To The Home Section:
Who gets to define a "problem" as such?
This question crossed my mind as I read "Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud" and its companion, "How to Find Out if There Is a Bias Problem"  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 28 ] .
Drs.
Myra and David Sadker, who are quoted throughout the article as experts in the bias field are listed as professors of education.
They may have spent years researching how boys and girls may be treated differently in various school settings, but that does not qualify them to define "problem."


Head Start Is Expanded


Staples Inc.(SPLS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Knicks Get a Break and Then Davis Does the Rest
The Knicks felt fortunate. The Chicago Bulls felt as if they were robbed.
With the Knicks on the verge of sinking against the Chicago Bulls again in a pivotal Game 5, New York was saved by a referee's call.
After Scottie Pippen was called for a highly questionable foul with 2.1 seconds to play, Hubert Davis made the two biggest free throws of his career to lift the Knicks to an 87-86 victory at Madison Square Garden last night.


TJX Cos.(TJX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Glavine's 100th Makes the Braves No. 1
Braves 3, Reds 1
Atlanta's Tom Glavine got his 100th career victory in style.
He held Cincinnati to two hits over seven innings as the Braves beat the Reds, 3-1, last night.
With the victory, the Braves (24-13) overtook the Reds for the best record in the National League.


House Leaders Are Criticizing Welfare Plan
President Clinton's plan to change the nation's welfare system hit another snag this week, when leaders of the House sharply criticized the Administration strategy for financing it.
In a closed meeting with top Administration officials on Tuesday, several House leaders also expressed regrets that events were forcing the White House to propose a bill this year, said several people who were at the discussions.


Most Treasury Rates Lower in Active Trading
Interest rates on most Treasury securities moved lower again yesterday in what dealers said was active but orderly trading.
But weakness in the dollar and a rise in some commodity prices preyed on long-term bond yields, which were rose fractionally following Tuesday's big drop.


Review/Television; Two Posthumous Tales From Rod Serling
It's a sweep month, and the networks are scurrying to bolster ratings that will determine their local stations' ad revenues for the next quarter.
Specials are on prominent display, things like a Stephen King mini-series or still another movie about the creepy Menendez brothers.
On the less-expensive front are weekly series with the season's final episodes offering cliffhangers.
And, as always in commercial television, there are assorted forays into the past.
Some of the nostalgia trips are straightforward repackagings.
Tomorrow, for instance, CBS offers "Carol Burnett: The Special Years," in which the star pays homage to the performers she has worked with in specials over 30 years.
Next Thursday on the Disney Channel, Paul Reiser ("Mad About You") is host of "The Honeymooners Really Lost Debut Episodes," featuring Jackie Gleason in sketches from the old Dumont network's "Cavalcade of Stars," sketches long thought lost or destroyed.
Good stuff.


Accounts
*
Shapeware Corp., Seattle, to Cole &amp; Weber, Seattle, to handle the software company's account, previously handled on a project basis by Poppe Tyson, Mountain View, Calif.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Land Rover North America, Lanham, Md., to Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York, its agency in the United States, as the first agency to handle advertising for the sports-utility vehicles in Canada.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Salomon's Former Chief Is Rebuffed on Pay Claim
John H. Gutfreund, whose tenure as chairman of Salomon Brothers ended in scandal in 1991, has lost a bid to collect $55.3 million in compensation from the firm he once ran -- a figure that largely reflected the strong rebound in the company's stock since he was ousted.
Salomon Inc., the securities firm's parent, announced in a terse statement last night that an arbitration panel at the New York Stock Exchange had denied all the compensation claims filed by Mr.
Gutfreund against the firm in March 1993.
According to exchange records, the unanimous decision came after 32 days of hearings before a three-member panel of arbitrators.
The decision was made last Friday but was not announced until last night.


Recalling Harry Lauder
To The Home Section:
You will be surprised to get a letter from so far away as Scotland and from the grandniece of the late Sir Harry Lauder (1870-1952), but I always write and thank anyone who keeps his name alive -- however inadvertently in your case, writing about the shrub Harry Lauder's Walking Stick in "Finding the Perfect Place for the Perfect Plant"  [ Cuttings, April 10 ] .


Julie Noel Gilbert, Tax Lawyer, 48
Julie Noel Gilbert, 48, who spent her 20-year professional career as a lawyer in Washington, became a partner in Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius in 1985 after its merger with the tax firm of Cohen &amp; Uretz, where she had practiced previously.
Much of Ms.
Gilbert's practice involved such nonprofit organizations as museums, universities, pension funds, foundations, hospitals and historic preservation groups.
Her charitable legal activities included legal work for Second Harvest, a national network of food banks and food kitchens that supplied meals to the needy.


On the Drag Strip, Oxygen = More Power
When the National Hot Rod Association holds its Mopar Parts Nationals at Raceway Park in Old Bridge Township, N. J., this weekend, Eddie Hill and the rest of his drag-racing competitors will be enjoying the sylvan wooded surroundings at the central New Jersey drag strip.
But that does not necessarily make them a bunch of rabid environmentalists.
Trees produce oxygen.
And -- to a drag racer like Hill, sitting with a 5,000-horsepower engine just behind his head -- more oxygen means more power.
Hill, 58, is the defending N.H.R.A. national champion in drag racing's fastest division, top fuel.


Jose Trias, Julie Gilbert, Lawyers in Capital, Slain
Jose Enrique Trias, 49, and his wife, Julie Noel Gilbert, 48, tax lawyers from Bethesda, Md., were found dead of gunshots in the head in their weekend home near Annapolis on Monday.
The authorities said they had apparently been killed in a robbery.


METRO DIGEST
UNLICENSED DRIVER CHARGED IN DEATH There was nothing on the blackboards, and no books were open.
The final exam had to be rescheduled because funeral arrangements were being made.
Psychology 206 no longer had a teacher.
James Donald Wynne, who was adored by his students at York College, died after he was struck by a car driven by a man with a suspended license.
A1.
AN EAGER INMATE CONFOUNDS THE SYSTEM Every now and then, Gangaram Mahes slips on his best donated clothes, strolls to a nice restaurant and savors a $50 meal.
The waiters call him sir, but Mr.
Mahes could not dig a dollar from his pocket for a bus ride to heaven.
He is a thief who never runs, a criminal who picks his teeth as the police close in.
To be arrested, to go home to a cell at Rikers Island, is his plan when he unfolds his napkin.
A1.


CHRONICLE
The ascension of JAMES TRUMAN, 36, the new editorial director of Conde Nast Publications, one of the most influential jobs in magazine publishing, was celebrated on Tuesday night at a party given by ANNA WINTOUR, the editor in chief of Vogue; TINA BROWN, the editor in chief of The New Yorker; GABE DOPPELT, the former editor in chief of Mademoiselle, and BRYAN FERRY, the British rocker.
The evening was also a sneak preview of the Garage, a still-under-construction restaurant on the Bowery, at 4th Street.
ERIC GOODE and SERGE BECKER, the night-life impresarios behind the defunct clubs Area and M. K., who plan to open the Garage late next month, showed off the converted Gulf Station to 250 guests including Anne Bass, Tom Brokaw, Barry Diller, Peggy Noonan, Mort Zuckerman, Lauren Hutton, Jann Wenner, Madonna and other people rarely seen on the Bowery.


Israeli-Syrian Round Ends Without Breakthrough
Secretary of State Warren Christopher ended four days of intensive diplomacy between Syria and Israel today, saying that no breakthrough was in the offing and that the countries were not ready to resume face-to-face talks.
Mr.
Christopher said the two longtime antagonists preferred to continue with the current format of indirect talks in which he serves as intermediary and travels between the two countries.
Several Administration officials said today that Mr.
Christopher was likely to return to the Middle East in the middle of June to push the Syria-Israel talks forward.


Heigh-Ho! It's Off to Reassess We Go!
Not much is predictable in the movie business, but the closest thing to a sure bet is that Disney's new animated musical, "The Lion King," which is to open on June 15 in New York and Los Angeles, will emerge as one of the summer's biggest hits.
That's the good news for the Walt Disney Company.
The not-so-good news is that its feature-film division -- in contrast with the animation unit -- has been rolling out movies in assembly-line fashion, and too many of them are Edsels.


Right to Die Cases Also Support Suicide Ruling; Why Prolong Pain?
To the Editor:
Re "First Do No Harm" (Op-Ed, May 9) by Walter Reich: For 11 years, under the shadow of advanced breast cancer, my mother was slowly ravaged by medical technologies that destroyed her immune system, physically disfigured her and devastated her emotionally until her death.


Williams-Sonoma Inc.(WSGC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Dealing With Sex Bias
To The Home Section:
In the sidebar accompanying "Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud"  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 28 ] , you quote Dr.
Myra Sadker as saying that if a child cannot name 10 famous women from American history, "the school may not have a sex-equitable curriculum."


After Serb Forces Shell Airport, U.N. Cancels 3 Flights to Tuzla
The United Nations canceled three planned flights into the northern Bosnian city of Tuzla today, only a day after Bosnian Serb forces shelled the first plane to land at the airfield in over a month.
Four Serbian tank rounds struck the Tuzla airport, which is part of a United Nations "safe area," on Tuesday and one of the shells exploded near a United Nations transport that had just landed in the first flight to the Muslim-held town since the airport was closed on April 14.


Tommy Hilfiger Corp.(TOM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.27
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.21
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.50
4.58
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
7.04
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.26
6.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.52
7.52
7.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.43
6.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports &amp; Recreation Inc.(SPRC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Review/Dance; San Francisco Ballet in Modern Mode
Everything the San Francisco Ballet dances, it dances more than well.
But above all, the company's neo-classical style has been especially refined since Helgi Tomasson, once a star with the New York City Ballet, became the artistic director in 1985.
It was no surprise that the troupe, which opened a week's run at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here on Tuesday night, turned in such a sparkling performance of George Balanchine's neo-classical "Symphony in C."


Review/Dance; The Devil in a Son Applauded by His Father
The Jose Greco Foundation company met Rainer Werner Fassbinder on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater in an eveninglong piece of homoerotic dance called "Diablo." Yes, that is the Jose Greco of "Ed Sullivan Show" fame, the man who popularized flamenco and made it a comfortable part of American middlebrow culture.
As a gracious Spanish woman in the cheering audience put it, this was "un flamenco actual, modern." The world of Spanish dance may never be the same.
"Diablo" featured Mr.
Greco's son Jose Greco Jr., in the title role.
Program notes describe the piece, inspired by a poem by Rafael Alberti, as "a tale of transgression and revolt" in which a "man angel" or Everyman character "welcomes a world without light inside of himself" and hands his soul to the devil.
"Diablo" is similarly overwrought, which is its saving grace.
Until the final 15 minutes or so of this 90-minute piece, "Diablo" is great fun.


Maple Leaf Foods (MLF) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


To Change China
To the Editor:
Calls to revoke China's most favored nation trading status with the United States as a way of changing China's human rights practices neglect to point out that our country routinely bestows the most favorable tariff rates of that status on all but nine nations.
Expanding global trade is the strongest engine pulling the world toward peaceful relations and subsequent democratic governance.
Of course, we ought to promote human rights with quiet bilateral diplomacy and through multilateral forums such as the United Nations' International Labor Organization and Human Rights Commission.
The alternative to free trade may be trade wars of the sort that led to Hitler's rise and World War II.
ERIC COX Exec.
Dir., Campaign for U.N.
Reform Washington, May 10, 1994


Sports of The Times; Attention: The Series Isn't Over
HUBERT DAVIS saved Patrick Ewing.
He saved every Knick, and Pat Riley, too.
He played 14 minutes, then walked into every kid's fantasy, and some players' nightmare.
Not Davis's.
He stepped up to the free-throw line with 2.1 seconds left and made a couple.
He saved the Knicks' season and Ewing's championship dream.
The Knicks survived, which is the only way to describe how they got out of last night.
The call?
Davis took a pass from a double-teamed John Starks, went up from the top of the circle, one foot on the 3-point line.
He was wide open, so Scottie Pippen came a calling from inside the lane.
Pippen, with two of the longest arms in pro basketball, leaped out at Davis, tried to alter the shot.
He did that, too, but he got a piece of Davis's hand, no question, on the way down and an official named Hue Hollins didn't let him get away with it.
He didn't give Pippen the superstar's call in the other guy's building.


Robertson-Ceco Corp.(RHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Financial Concern for Atlanta
Despite their optimistic public remarks about the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, International Olympic Committee officials are concerned about the lack of a government safety net in case organizers cannot meet fund-raising projections.
DICK POUND, a Montreal lawyer who has influence as a member of the I.O.C. executive committee and as a negotiator for television rights, said in a speech at the Canadian Embassy in Washington on Monday that the I.O.C. would not grant future Olympics to a city without "significant public sector commitment."


Software Etc. Stores Inc.(SFWR) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Principal Charged With Stealing Funds
A Brooklyn school principal was charged yesterday with stealing nearly $10,000 in public school funds and, in a separate case, with coercing teachers into joining a political club so it could be stacked to endorse an ally who was running in school board and City Council elections.
The charges against the principal, Stuart Possner, of Public School 100 in Brighton Beach, are the latest accusations of misconduct in School District 21, which for years has faced allegations of rampant patronage, nepotism, cronyism and intimidation of employees and parents.


Applause in Congress for India's Leader


Spurs' Owners Reward Lucas With Another Season as Coach
JOHN LUCAS, his team eliminated in the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs, will remain coach of the San Antonio Spurs.
The team also said yesterday that BOB BASS, a vice president with the Spurs, has resigned.
Bass will remain an adviser to the club, which he has been associated with since 1974.
The first-year ownership group met often over the last two weeks since the Spurs were eliminated by the Utah Jazz.
The Spurs' chairman, ROBERT McDERMOTT, said the team owners have "full confidence" in Lucas and unanimously chose to retain him.


Trying to Measure A Park's Worth
OU could make a case that Van Voorhees Park is just a rundown little playground in Brooklyn, so polluted by traffic from the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and Atlantic Avenue that the children would be better off if a parking garage were put there.
"That's a park?" said Brooklyn Borough President Howard Golden last week.
"I used to go down there every day, and I was overwhelmed with the amount of pollution on the B.Q.E. And I never saw more than a handful of children utilizing it at any time of day."


A Rank That Rankles: New York Slips to No. 3; Now Texas Is 2d Most Populous State
New York, first in the American League, second in apple production, has slipped to third in population, behind not only California but now Texas.
Texans have already laid claim to unofficial bragging rights as the nation's second most populous state.
And yesterday, the Census Bureau disclosed population projections indicating that Texas had indeed overtaken New York sometime in January.


Mail Call
This is what happens when you send electronic mail, as millions of Americans now do.
Your fingers fly; so, in a sense, do your words; and you never run out of stamps.
But if you're the recipient and the correspondence is personal, you are not getting all the message.
True, you're getting some of it, the part that is articulated anyway.
The rest, however, is in the handwriting, and in whether it is slanting up or down, backward or forward.
It is in the loop -- or dangling tail -- of the "y," and the size of the caps and the spaces between the letters.
It is in whether the writing is Palmer Method (the correspondent is getting on), clerk's cursive (he took a course) or illegible (he is either un- or over-educated).


A Game of Shame in Albany
What will convince the dawdlers in New York State's Legislature that it is time for a budget?
The fiscal year begins -- began -- 49 days ago, on April 1.
Only once in the 12 years since Mario Cuomo became Governor has budget enactment been later than it is today.
The people's elected representatives deserve nothing but contempt for their sorry performance.
The dawdlers took care of the Albany bureaucracy on time, voting appropriations for agency operations before April 1.
But every city and hamlet, every county, school district and food kitchen that depends on state funds is still waiting, trying to plan its own budget without knowing what it will get from the state.
School boards are shaping budgets for voters' approval without knowing where to peg next year's property tax rates.


An Uncertain Future For 3 Deep-Water Ports
The bananas unloaded off ships from South America keep 62 longshoremen busy for two days every week at the port here.
The manager for Turbana Corporation, the banana importer, says the port is one of the most efficient in the nation.
But the workers unloading the bananas face an uncertain future.
New Haven Terminal Inc., the private company that owns and operates the port, is seeking investors or a buyer because of financial problems, and the amount of cargo coming into Bridgeport is less than half of what it was five years ago.


Calendar: An Auction And Tours
Benefit Auction  Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue (72d Street); (212) 348-2120.
On Wednesday, from 6 to 9 P.M., there will be an auction of furniture and decorative objects to benefit the Isabel O'Neil Foundation for the Art of the Painted Finish.
Tickets start at $100.
Cast-Iron Treasures  Bard Graduate Center for Studies in Decorative Arts, 18 West 86th Street; (212) 721-4245.
"Cast Iron From Central Europe, 1800-1850," an exhibition of cast-iron objects made for the home and for personal use, starts next Thursday and continues through Aug. 7.
Items include furniture, candlesticks, clocks, jewelry, combs and buttons.
The exhibition is organized by the Bard Graduate Center and Austrian Museum of Applied Arts in Vienna.


Dress Barn Inc.(DBRN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Israelis Are Out of Gaza


Kellogg Seeks to Reset Latvia's Breakfast Table
For as long as anyone can remember, the favorite breakfast here and in much of the former Soviet Union has been a hearty plate of sausage, cold cuts, potatoes, eggs and a few slices of thick, chewy bread slathered with wonderfully high-cholesterol butter.
But now one of the great missionary enterprises in American business, the Kellogg Company of Battle Creek, Mich., is trying to change the way hundreds of millions of Russians, Latvians and other former Soviet citizens start their day.


Chief of Pension Fund Leaving in California
Dale M. Hanson, one of the leaders in the movement to strengthen shareholders' rights, is expected to announce today that he is stepping down as the chief executive of the California Public Employees' Retirement System, the nation's largest pension fund, on July 1.
Mr.
Hanson, who has run the fund -- widely known as Calpers -- for seven years, did not return phone calls to his Sacramento office yesterday.
But acquaintances say he informed the 13 members of the board on Monday night, and restated his decision yesterday at an open board session in Anaheim.


Lamps That Knock Your Eyes Out
FOURTEEN years ago, R. M. Fischer, a New York artist, was pretty close to monopolizing the concept of wacky lamps.
His lamps were big and imposing, or small and rather sweet.
And always very inventive: The kind of thing one had just never laid eyes on before.
Found objects, pools of water and references to an array of cultures were the trademarks of Mr.
Fischer's early lamps, before he took a several-year hiatus to concentrate on large public sculptures.
Like his new crop, on display through June 4 at the Jay Gorney Modern Art gallery at 100 Greene Street (Prince Street), some of the first lamps were easy to love and others looked hard to live with.


Hanson Plc(HAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thousands of Fleeing Rwandans Huddle at Remote Tanzania Site
Louis Manirakisa was once a prosperous mechanic in the Rwandan capital, Kigali.
Now, after a treacherous monthlong odyssey, he is simply a survivor in this wretched, remote encampment, which appeared out of nowhere last week on the Tanzanian plain, a spontaneous massing of Rwandans running for their lives.
It has become the newest stop on the refugee trail, a spot on the map that almost overnight became a small city, but without food, shelter or medical care.
Its only advantage is that it is not in Rwanda.


G.A.O. Seeks Sweeping Rules for Derivatives
A two-year Congressional study of the explosive growth in financial derivatives that was released yesterday calls for sweeping new regulation of the companies that create these often complex financial products and the companies that use them.
The General Accounting Office said the banks, brokerage firms and insurance companies that deal in derivatives should be subject to uniform rules on how to manage the risk of their trading positions, how much capital to keep to cushion against losses, and how to disclose data about their derivatives activity.


Sportmart Inc.(SPMT) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


After the Stormy End, Silence From Pippen
After the game, Scottie Pippen wasn't talking.
He quickly threw on his purple suit and white shirt and left the locker room.
And so all we know about what happened on the next-to-last play of the game, and the last play, would have to come from others.
Did he foul Hubert Davis, to allow the Knicks' guard to go to the free-throw line with 2.1 seconds remaining and the Bulls up by a point, 86-85?
After Davis made both free throws to put the Knicks up by a point, 87-86, was Pippen held by Anthony Mason as he looped around the Bulls' basket to take an out-of-bounds pass from Pete Myers, and was he slapped on the arm by Mason?
And was he hoping for a welcome whistle and instead heard the disheartening buzzer, ending the game and putting the Bulls down three games to two in the Eastern Conference semifinals?


Wherehouse Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Japan Likely to Retain Curb on Software Raiding
In an apparent victory for the United States, the Japanese Government is expected to abandon a plan to revise its copyright law in a way that would have made it easier for one company to reverse-engineer another company's computer software.
An advisory committee to Japan's Agency for Cultural Affairs has finished its deliberations without reaching a conclusion on whether and how the law should be changed, according to committee members, industry officials and Japanese press reports.


Suspended Driver Is at Wheel of Car That Kills Professor
The students at York College began to file into Classroom D-401 shortly before 2 P.M.
There was nothing on the blackboards, and no books were opened.
The final exam had to be rescheduled because funeral arrangements were being made.
Psychology 206 no longer had a teacher.


Aides to Giuliani Criticized For Lacking Job-Cuts Data
City Council committee chairmen angrily criticized high-ranking members of the Giuliani administration at budget hearings yesterday, accusing some commissioners of not being forthcoming about how services will be affected by the Mayor's proposed budget cuts.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed cutting 15,000 jobs from the city payroll by June 1995 through attrition and a $200 million severance program.
Though more than 6,800 employees are in line for severance, the administration has yet to provide details about where jobs will be lost or whether the eliminated jobs mesh with the Mayor's proposed reductions.


Police Stops For Truancy Include Errors
A new police campaign aimed at getting truant students off the streets has returned many to class, but some parents have complained that the police have been overeager and are picking up students with legitimate excuses, school officials said yesterday.
About one in 10 of the nearly 4,000 students picked up for truancy had valid reasons for being out of class, according to a report on the six-week-old program, which covers seven specially designated zones in the five boroughs.


As Agency Cuts Faulted, Other Issues Are Raised
New York City's Department of Youth Services has become the center of a political storm, with Giuliani appointees accusing their predecessors of fiscal mismanagement, while they themselves are facing criticism over salary levels and patronage at the agency.
Looming over the charges and countercharges is a bitter political battle over Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to cut $25 million from the agency's budget.
The Mayor says the cuts are needed to balance the city budget, but social service advocates have denounced the proposals, and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone has promised to try to restore the money.


Artists Win Round No. 1 In Dispute Over a Sculpture
A Federal District Court judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday that Helmsley-Spear, the owners of a former Macy's warehouse in Long Island City, Queens, may not dismantle a sculptural installation in the lobby of the building, at 47-44 31st Street, until a civil suit brought by the three artists who created it has been resolved.
The artists are John J. Veronis, John Swing and John Carter.
In his ruling, the judge, David N. Edelstein, accepted the argument of Richard A. Altman, the lawyer for the artists, that the sculpture qualifies for protection under the Visual Artists' Rights Act, a Federal statute that has been in effect since June 1991 but has never been tested in court.


Right to Die Cases Also Support Suicide Ruling; Hospice Care
To the Editor:
Your May 3 article on the Kevorkian verdict reports that several jurors described the not guilty verdict as appropriate because Dr.
Kevorkian's interest in relieving his patient's suffering was noble; yet the jurors acknowledged that his means may not have been appropriate.


Commencements; Secretary of Air Force Encourages Barnard Graduates
The first woman to head a branch of the United States military addressed Barnard College's class of 1994 yesterday, telling the 550 graduates of the women's college that their presence would enhance any environment they chose to enter and that their success would help women who follow them.
In an afternoon ceremony on the college's front lawn, Dr.
Sheila E. Widnall, Secretary of the Air Force, received Barnard's Medal of Distinction and delivered the commencement address.


CHRONICLE
COLIN L. POWELL, the retired Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and his wife, ALMA, had a special reason for showing up at the Washington home of Pie and Alfred Friendly on Tuesday for a party honoring MARIANA COOK.
Ms.
Cook's photographs are assembled in a book called "Fathers and Daughters: In Their Own Words," published by Chronicle Books, and General Powell is in it with their daughters, Linda and Annemarie.
In his new incarnation as a private citizen, General Powell said he was busier than ever working on his memoirs and keeping up with the mail that continues to find its way to him despite the fact that much of it is simply addressed "Colin Powell, the Pentagon."


CHRONICLE
When AMANDA LEHRER, the youngest of JIM and KATE LEHRER'S three daughters, is married Saturday to LEW NASH at the ruins of an old church in Charles Town, W.Va., the music will be performed by BARRY TUCKWELL.
No one was more surprised than Mr.
Lehrer, the co-anchor of the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour, when Mr. Tuckwell, widely considered to be the world's greatest French horn player, said yes to his invitation to play at the nuptials.


U.S. Tries to Hide Indian Ruins From Intruders
Forget about finding this place on a road map ever again.
And don't bother looking for Cutthroat Castle nearby.
These and three other groups of tumbledown stone towers used more than 600 years ago by Anasazi Indians -- the Hackberry, Horseshoe and Cajon Ruins, a few bumpy miles from here -- are also set to slip beneath the cartographic sands of time.


With the end of monopolies, California utilities prepare to take self-promotion more seriously.
THANKS to California regulators, a huge industrial sector that now spends a pittance on building its image and market share is expected to change its habits.
The sector is electric power generators.
Last month, the state's Public Utilities Commission disclosed plans to virtually do away with utilities' monopolies by permitting customers to shop for power.
Under the proposal, which must undergo public hearings, large users like refineries and military bases would be free to buy from competing suppliers in 1996.
Residential customers will join the fray by 2002.


Small Outfits Find Backers In F.C.C. Bids
Steven Zecola is the head of a tiny company that plans to take advantage of generous new Federal rules intended to help small businesses start wireless telephone services.
His partner is the not-so-tiny Fidelity Investments, one of the nation's biggest mutual fund companies.
Mr.
Zecola, president of Columbia PCS Inc., a start-up company in Alexandria, Va., is raising money to bid on licenses being offered by the Federal Communications Commission for the coming generation of wireless communications known as personal communication services.


Guessing At French Baroque Staging
Every age has its ferocious battles over matters of musical style.
Adherents of Wagner and Brahms considered each others' heroes the bane of musical culture.
More recently, Minimalists and Serialists have hurled brickbats at each other.
Usually, both sides find their place in the repertory, leaving future generations to wonder what all the fuss was about.
In late-17th- and early-18th-century France, the war for musical taste was fought by partisans of styles that seem quintessentially French to listeners today, but that at the time were regarded as French and Italian.
The French faction, which preferred graceful vocal writing and lavishly choreographed ensemble pieces, venerated Jean-Baptiste Lully.
Those who preferred the Italian influence, with its more overtly virtuosic solo vocal writing, championed Marc-Antoine Charpentier.


Jose E. Trias, 49, Counsel to Institute
At his death, Jose Enrique Trias, 49, was a prominent tax lawyer and a vice president and the general counsel of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, one of the nation's richest research institutes.
He was in charge of all legal matters affecting the institute, which has 60 laboratories throughout the country and a scientific work force of more than 2,000.
Mr.
Trias was born in Hato Rey, P.R., five miles southeast of San Juan, and was the son of Jose Trias-Monge, a former Chief Justice of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court who helped shape the commonwealth's Constitution in 1952.


Defining the Problem
To The Home Section:
Who gets to define a "problem" as such?
This question crossed my mind as I read "Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud" and its companion, "How to Find Out if There Is a Bias Problem"  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 28 ] .
Drs.
Myra and David Sadker, who are quoted throughout the article as experts in the bias field are listed as professors of education.
They may have spent years researching how boys and girls may be treated differently in various school settings, but that does not qualify them to define "problem."


Teledyne Wins Small Court Victory in Chilean Sale in 80's
A Los Angeles military contractor, accused of illegally exporting an ingredient that ended up in Iraqi cluster bombs, won a partial victory today when a Federal judge here ruled that limited evidence could be presented at the company's coming trial to try to show that the United States allowed the sales for military purposes.
But lawyers in the case say any evidence of Government complicity would be found mostly in classified documents that the judge said he might not make available to lawyers for the company, Teledyne Inc.


'Little Whorehouse' Closing
"The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public," a musical comedy with book by Larry L. King and Peter Masterson and music and lyrics by Carol Hall, is to close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, 205 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
The Saturday-evening performance of the play, directed by Tommy Tune and Mr.
Masterson, will be its 15th regular performance; it had 29 previews.


Sparkling Outlook for Memorial: Clear Weather and Quick Greens
There are certain givens at the Memorial Tournament: The field is strong, the crowds are huge, the fairways are manicured and the greens are fast.
But something is different this year at the course and the tournament that Jack Nicklaus built.
The sky is clear.


Fred's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


OVERTURES BEGUN FOR PLEA BARGAIN ON ROSTENKOWSKI
Lawyers for Representative Dan Rostenkowski have approached Federal prosecutors to try to negotiate a plea bargain that would avert a broad felony indictment against the powerful Illinois Democrat, lawyers involved in the case said today.
The lawyers said the discussions could lead to Mr.
Rostenkowski's agreement to plead guilty to a lesser charge.
At this point, they said, the Government and Mr.
Rostenkowski's lawyers are far apart and the effort to reach an agreement could go nowhere, in which case Mr.
Rostenkowski could be indicted, possibly before Memorial Day.


Bridge
The fourth-youngest player ever to reach the rank of life master in the New York metropolitan area, and the tenth-youngest anywhere, is Kent Mignocchi, 15, of Riverdale, the Bronx.
He is an honor student at Riverdale Country School, and his grandmother, Mirette Mignocchi, is a leading tournament player.
He would have achieved his goal four months earlier but for a shortage of the required silver points awarded in sectional tournaments, theoretically easier than the red and gold points that have to be won in higher-rated events.
His last silver point was won last month in White Plains, where the diagramed deal was played.


ON THE LOWER EAST SIDE WITH: Caleb Carr; Writing to Flee the Past
CALEB CARR inhabits two New Yorks.
There is the New York of 1994, where he lives alone in a somewhat messy Lower East Side walkup.
And there is his other New York, the New York of his latest novel, the city in 1896 when a fictitious eye-gouging, boy-mutilating serial killer prowled the streets.
But as you talk to him, it becomes clear that his two New Yorks are not so far apart.


Envirodyne Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHINA SEES RISK TO ITS STABILITY IN U.S. DEMANDS
China's leaders have told the United States that they are willing to make further gestures on human rights to build more constructive relations.
But they have asked for understanding on what they see as the need to clamp down on dissent and preserve "social stability."
The importance of President Clinton's decision whether to extend China's preferred trading status, a decision that is expected next week, has prompted an extensive high-level dialogue, including the dispatch of a secret envoy from the White House.


A Ruling by French Court Finds Copyright in a Design
In a French court ruling that may give fashion the same sort of copyright protection offered to software and art in America, Yves Saint Laurent won a total of $395,090 from Ralph Lauren yesterday, for "counterfeiting and disloyal competition."
Yves Saint Laurent had sued Ralph Lauren, accusing the company of copying a black tuxedo dress that Mr.
Saint Laurent first created in 1966 and showed again during the haute couture fall collections for 1991-92.


Ohio Cousins To Take Boy After Mother Faked Illness
Aaron Storck, a 10-year-old Long Island boy who was placed in a foster home over a year ago after a judge found that his mother abused him by faking or causing his illnesses, is to begin a new life in Ohio this summer, living with relatives of his mother.
A couple from Centerville, Ohio, John and Diane Gintz, who have two grown sons and a daughter, were granted permission on Tuesday by Judge David Freundlich of Suffolk County Family Court to become Aaron's new foster parents, effective June 24th, when school is out.


Review at Digital Narrowed to 6 Shops
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $35 million worldwide account to six agencies, from about 20.
The account has been handled by five primary agencies in the United States and one in France, all of which were eliminated from the review.
The shops eliminated were Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston; Ciociola &amp; Company in New York; Holland Mark Martin in Burlington, Mass.; Ketchum Advertising in Pittsburgh; Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., and Publicis Etoiles in Paris.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A Congressional study of derivatives calls for sweeping new regulation of both the companies that create these often complex financial products and those that use them.  [ Page D1. ]
The Federal Reserve is so worried about leaks that it is investigating whether a former Fed governor had inside information about Fed activities or simply had a brilliant hunch.  [ D1. ]


Telescopes Set to View A Cosmic Collision
Most of the world's telescopes on the ground and in space will be pointed at Jupiter this summer, watching for a cosmic collision that is certain to happen and waiting to give scientists their first view of the kind of catastrophic event that may have accounted for mass extinctions on Earth long ago and the eventual emergence of humans.
A comet, now shattered into at least 21 icy chunks, is zeroing in on the largest planet in the solar system.
Scientists who have been tracking the course of the comet, Shoemaker-Levy, for more than a year disclosed new and more precise estimates of the impending collision yesterday.


Bad Backdoor Deal on Health Care
Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of the House Ways and Means Committee has offered a prominent group of health insurers a deal on health care reform.
Mr.
Rostenkowski promises to drop several provisions odious to the insurers if they agree to stop squawking about others.
The proposed deal might be a victory for Mr.
Rostenkowski -- who is fighting to save his chairmanship by plea-bargaining with prosecutors over accusations of financial improprieties; it might be good for the insurance companies.
But it looks bad for everyone else.
The Health Insurance Association of America paid for the "Harry and Louise" television commercials, which used exaggerated claims to scare Americans silly about President Clinton's health reform plan.
To ward off further attacks during a critical negotiating period, Mr.
Rostenkowski would give insurers the right to offer coverage to only part of the population and base premiums on the medical experience of the patients they choose to insure.


Home No More


Old Egyptian Road Preserves Bible Link
To the Editor:
A May 8 news report that the world's oldest paved road has been found in Egypt states that studies of an ancient road near Lake Qarun, 43 miles southwest of Cairo, suggest that it served to transport quarried stones.
Historical fact and local lore, however, connect the place to the biblical Joseph and his achievement of feeding Egypt during the seven lean years.
My recent visit to the area supports this link and raises the possibility that the road served to transport food, rather than stones.


Triggering A Playoff Explosion
At a downtown Chicago health club last weekend, I ran into Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager, on the stationary bicycle.
As we pedaled our way to nowhere, like Greg Anthony dribbling out the 24-second clock, we got to talking about today's young basketball players, most of them millionaires before their first professional dribble.
That morning's Chicago Tribune contained an article in which Seattle Coach George Karl admitted he had looked the other way this season while players such as Gary Payton and Shawn Kemp came late for practice and assorted team functions.
The team was winning, Karl said, so he didn't want to risk damaging its so-called chemistry.


U.S. Peacekeepers Echo Anti-Serb Confusion
To the Editor:
Your May 11 article on the United States force with the United Nations in Macedonia states: "The resentments voiced by Macedonians are not directed at Serbia but at neighboring Greece . . . and against their many fellow citizens who are ethnic Albanians." Yet for the Americans, "Serbia is identified as the enemy, and their mission is seen as helping to protect Macedonia against Serbian attack."


Shiloh Industries(SHLO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Arafat and Peres, at a Meeting in Oslo, Accentuate the Positive
On the day Israel surrendered control of Gaza to the Palestinians, Yasir Arafat and Shimon Peres met here today for a celebration in the city where their journey toward peaceful cooperation began secretly nearly two years ago.
Mr.
Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Mr.
Peres, Israel's Foreign Minister, joined by Jimmy Carter, arrived here early today to honor Norway's role as a broker in the talks that led to their accord last September.


Right to Die Cases Also Support Suicide Ruling
To the Editor:
A May 5 front-page article reports that a Federal judge in Seattle has ruled a ban on assisted suicide unconstitutional.
"A Jury's Sympathy for Suicide" (editorial, May 6), on the Michigan jury that cleared Dr.
Jack Kevorkian of charges that he illegally helped a terminally ill patient commit suicide, also discusses the Washington State decision.


Marlins' Old-Timers Leave Mets Mystified
Charlie Hough is 46 years old, he throws a knuckleball, and he split his fingernail the other day.
That's almost like a kicker in football breaking his big toe.
Last night, as part of a Florida Marlins' battery that totaled 80 years in age, Hough helped undo the Mets in posting a 4-3 victory at rainy Shea Stadium.
Hough Doesn't Knuckle Under
With his youthful, dancing knuckler, Hough did not give up a hit until there were two outs in the sixth.
But Nolan Ryan's record as the oldest no-hit pitcher -- he was 44 when he tossed one in 1991 -- remained safe.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp. (RESC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


A Youngster Looks Ahead Amid Troubled Time in Florida
Venus Williams, a promising junior tennis player, will celebrate her 14th birthday on June 17, an occasion that will allow her to become a professional.
But the more important date for her father, Richard Williams, is July 6, when Venus will receive her final report card from school.
A straight-A report card, Williams said today, would be rewarded with an opportunity for Venus to play in her first professional tournament, the Virginia Slims championships in Manhattan Beach, Calif., in August.


Memorex Telex N.V.(MEMXY) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Civilians Still Aren't Military Targets
To the Editor:
Re "The Nature of One Particular War" (Books of The Times, May 9), on "The Massacre at El Mozote" by Mark Danner: Your claim that the guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or F.M.L.N., provoked the Salvadoran Atlacatl battalion to massacre hundreds of men, women and children at El Mozote in December 1981 has truly insidious implications.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a gorilla that escaped from its confines at the Como Zoo misidentified the zoo's home city in some editions.
It is in St.
Paul, not Minneapolis.


Review/Film; Thumbing a Ride Backward in Time
The 70's haven't aged well, especially if you take them seriously.
"Tell me about being a cowgirl," the large-thumbed Sissy Hankshaw says to her future lover, Bonanza Jellybean.
"When you say the word you make it sound like it's painted in radiance on the side of a pearl." One of the many problems with Gus Van Sant's tortured, worked-over "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" is that Sissy Hankshaw talks like a novel, and a dated one at that.
To read Tom Robbins's 1976 best seller today is to step into a different cultural moment, a time when Sissy, a natural-born hitchhiker with enormous phallic thumbs, could plausibly have been the heroine of a free-spirited counterculture.
But the 70's were fading even then, and it's impossible all these years later to film "Cowgirls" without assuming some perspective on the past.
Mr.
Van Sant, who was more successful with "Drugstore Cowboy" and more ambitious with "My Own Private Idaho," seems to have swallowed "Cowgirls" whole.


Big Role for AT&amp;T
By winning a third major contract to build an advanced video and data network, AT&amp;T will have a pivotal role in determining which companies thrive in a new communications market.
The contract from Bell Atlantic is for a network that would reach 8.5 million homes by the year 2000.
Article, page D1.


Senate Acts to Loosen Rules on Purity of Tap Water
Eight years after it voted to drastically tighten the purity standards for tap water, the Senate decided today that it had overreached and voted 95 to 3 to loosen them again.
Whether the Senate's changes, made to the Safe Drinking Water Act, would actually increase the existing tiny risks of drinking tap water was in some dispute.


Officer Is Charged in Robbery Of Bodega While in Uniform
In the second case of suspected corruption in an East Harlem precinct within months, a police officer was charged yesterday with robbing a bodega at gunpoint while in uniform.
Investigators were seeking the identity of another uniformed officer who is thought to have helped him, said the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.


Cause for Celebration, Twice


Turkey's Crises: Rebellion, Recession and Religion
The currency has lost half its value, the southeast of the country is in the grip of an armed rebellion, and a militant Islamic party captured 19 percent of the vote in the last elections.
Turkey, which wants to show that a Western-oriented, secular society can succeed in the Muslim world, is facing a deep crisis, and the Government of Prime Minister Tansu Ciller, the first woman in the job, is hanging on largely because no other party or candidate wants to take on the thankless task.


A Death at Home, Among Family and Friends, and Even Strangers
In her final hours yesterday, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was surrounded by close friends and family members who gathered at her Fifth Avenue apartment in Manhattan while a crowd of admirers, tourists, passers-by and reporters kept a sodden vigil outside the apartment.
Mrs.
Onassis, the 64-year-old widow of President John F. Kennedy, died at 10:15 P.M. yesterday from an aggressive form of cancer.
A spokeswoman for her employer, Doubleday, said funeral arrangements would be announced today.


Sprewell Cracks the All-N.B.A. Lineup
It was no surprise that Chicago forward SCOTTIE PIPPEN, Houston center HAKEEM OLAJUWON, and forward KARL MALONE and guard JOHN STOCKTON of Utah made the all-National Basketball Association team that was announced yesterday.
LATRELL SPREWELL, the Golden State guard, was another story.
Sprewell broke into the elite group in his second N.B.A. season.
He was the Warriors' top scorer, averaging 21 points a game.


Dismal Whalers Dismiss Their Coach
After one of their most trying seasons on and off the ice, the Hartford Whalers dismissed Coach PIERRE McGUIRE yesterday.
McGuire, 32, was hired in November when PAUL HOLMGREN, who was coach and general manager, stepped aside to concentrate on his front-office responsibilities.
Under McGuire, the fifth coach in six seasons, the Whalers were 23-37-7.
They finished 27-48-9 and missed the playoffs.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing  INTERNATIONAL MOTOR SPORTS ASSOCIATION -- Named Donald R. Schnieders technical director and Bob Manry technical director of production cars.
Baseball  National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Placed Ellis Burks, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 18.
Purchased the contract of Chris Jones, outfielder, from Colorado Springs of the American Association.
NEW YORK METS -- Traded Jeff Manto, catcher-infielder, to the Baltimore Orioles for future consideration.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Named John Martin assistant director of basketball operations.
United States Basketball Association
ATLANTA TROJANS -- Activated Migjen Bakalli, guard, from the taxi squad.
Placed Tony Turner, forward, on the taxi squad.
JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Activated Norris Coleman, forward, from the taxi squad.
MIAMI TROPICS -- Signed Melvin Simon, center.
WESTCHESTER STALLIONS -- Signed Mark Morse, guard, and Darrell Mims, forward.
Placed Rob Phelps and Brenton Birmingham, guards, on the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Paul Jetton, offensive lineman, and Josh Butland, punter.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Named Bobby Monica equipment manager.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Agrred to terms with Henry Thomas, nose tackle, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Pat Terrell, defensive back.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Announced the retirement of Bryan Hinkle, linebacker.
Canadian Football League
HAMILTON TIGET-CATS -- Re-signed David Bailey, defensive end, and John Hood, running back.
LAS VEGAS POSSE -- Signed Robert Hall, quarterback; David Maeva, defensive back; and Tom Petithomme, tight end.
Waibed William Robinson, quarterback.
SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Signed Jim Kemp, quarterback; Damien Semien, wide receiver; and Curvin Richards, running back.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Mario Perry and Raymond Savage, linebackers; Luke Fisher, tight end; and Ed Sullivan, wide receiver.
Arena Football League
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Signed Donald Brown, defensive specialist.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Ryan Poetsch, kicker.


Art in Review
Leon Levinstein and Frank Paulin
'The Street Walkers'  Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through June 18
The daily drama of the New York City streets has provided material for a host of photographers, from Alfred Stieglitz to Garry Winogrand.
This valuable show presents the work of two lesser-known chroniclers of the city hustle.


CHRONICLE
When the PRINCESS OF WALES dialed her cellular phone the other day, she did more than reach out and touch somebody; she helped save a man's life.
Two English newspapers, The Times of London and The Daily Telegraph, reported yesterday that the princess, being driven home after an evening jog last Sunday, saw a man face down in a pond in Regent's Park in London and called the 999 emergency number from her mobile phone.
She then rushed to the water's edge and helped a Finnish opera student, KARL KOTILA, pull the man, MARTIN O'DONOGHUE, who apparently had fallen from a bridge, out of the pond.


Review/Film: Maverick; So Quick, So Suave And Oh So Spineless
"YOU always been gutless?" an ornery poker player snarls across the table at Bret Maverick.
Mel Gibson looks thoughtful -- for all the world like Jack Benny pondering "Your money or your life?" -- then cheerfully answers, "Yeah, I guess so." As the suave but disaster-prone Maverick has cause to say later, "Being spineless has kept me alive a long time." It also helps that he's quicker on the draw than most gunslingers, smarter than the average gambler and wears a lucky poker shirt.
Fast, funny, full of straight-ahead action and tongue-in-cheek jokes, "Maverick" is "Lethal Weapon" meets "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid." That combination won't win any prizes for originality, but it works like a movie mogul's dream and sets the summer-film season off to an unbeatable start.


At City College, Time Is Healing an Old Wound
"You're talking about kids, kids, who were busting their humps while the school was making a ton of money," said Norm Mager, the sixth man on the college basketball team whose proper place in the history of sports, of higher education, of 20th-century morality, may never be resolved.
"What can I say? We loved the game; we really loved the game. I'm not proud of what I did. And we will never know how great we could have been."
Perhaps that's all that needs to be said now, some 44 years after the real championship season.
But tonight, at an oversubscribed alumni dinner at Flushing Meadows, the glorious triumph and the unhealable wound will be examined yet again when Ed Warner is inducted into the City College Athletic Hall of Fame.


Umbrellas Get a Workout


Agency Switches By 3 Advertisers
Three consumer marketers have changed agencies on their accounts with combined billings estimated at more than $25 million.
The Geico Corporation said yesterday that it had selected the Martin Agency in Richmond to handle its general advertising and direct-response programs, which had been at Earle Palmer Brown in Bethesda, Md., for the last decade.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $8 million.


Inside Art
A Stolen Work Is Found
The Metropolitan Museum of Art will make an addition today to its exhibition "Petrus Christus: Renaissance Master of Bruges."
"Christ as the Man of Sorrows," a devotional image by the artist dating from about 1450, was originally to be part of the show, which opened April 14 and runs through July 31.
But the painting, which belongs to the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery in Birmingham, England, was stolen on Dec. 2.
Although the museum's burglar alarm sounded when the picture was ripped from its security mounts and the building was sealed in less than two minutes, according to a statement by the Birmingham City Council, the thieves got away.


Time Warner Keeps Adviser
The board of Time Warner Inc. said today that it would continue to employ a financial adviser who last week agreed to pay $931,000 in penalties and interest to settle insider trading charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The adviser, Oded Aboodi, "remains a trusted and valued adviser," Gerald M. Levin, Time Warner's chairman, said at the company's annual meeting held here at the Warner Brothers studio.


No Headline
"For 2,000 years, wars have seeded our land with the bones of the missing in action, and the American war produced a particularly rich crop. We'll never find most of our own dead soldiers, but they remain in our hearts." NGUYEN TRONG VINH.  [ A1:1. ]


Computer Associates To Buy ASK
Computer Associates International Inc. announced yesterday that it would buy ASK Group Inc., a struggling software supplier, for $310 million.
The planned purchase by Computer Associates reflects its drive to diversify beyond mainframe computer software, which still represents about 70 percent of its business, analysts said.
The move quickly gives Computer Associates a larger stake in the fast-growing field of industry-standard software that runs on desktop computers.


METRO DIGEST
BRIBERY CHARGED IN SCHOOL CONTRACTS
Federal prosecutors charged that the Board of Education division that maintains schools and leases space has been rife with corruption, five years after it was stripped of the power to build new schools because of earlier scandals.
A1.
A contractor who knew his way through the corridors of corruption was a pivotal figure.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY


Cars Racing Electrically To '98 and Philadelphia
When the 1998 model-year cars and light trucks hit the showroom floors, 2 percent of them will have to be electric, according to state air pollution rules in New York, Massachusetts and California, and several other states may join in.
But what will they look like?
No one knows, but scores of prototypes and production models and a few flights of fancy will line up for public inspection on Sunday at Battery Park City in Manhattan for the opening of the American Tour de Sol, a race and road rally that this year runs from New York City to Philadelphia.
There will be single-seat electric racers, four-passenger electric commuter cars, electric mopeds, cars that run on batteries, cars that run on solar cells, a bus that runs on a fuel cell and even a 27,000-pound electric armored personnel carrier.


Severance Begins to Take Its Toll; As New York City Workers Depart, Agencies Juggle Needs
With thousands of city workers leaving their jobs today, signs have been posted on the doors of the Parking Violations Bureau's Manhattan center warning motorists fighting parking tickets that next week the office will cut its hours, opening later and shutting earlier.
The City Health Department is bracing to lose 3 of its 10 pharmacists who man the Poison Control bureau 24 hours a day, dispensing such information as what to do if a child has just swallowed bleach.
At the Parks Department, one of three specialists who restore and maintain the city's 700 monuments will be departing.  4,800 to Leave Today
And at the small Conflicts of Interest Board, which is charged with monitoring the ethics of more than 200,000 government employees, the only attorney charged with enforcement will be leaving.


Union Chief Says Strike Is Looming At L.I.R.R.
Mediation efforts are to resume in Washington on Monday in a bid to avoid a strike next month on the Long Island Rail Road, a union leader said today, but he said he doubted a settlement would be reached.
"The way it looks now, we're going to strike one minute past midnight on June 16," said Edward Yule Jr., general chairman of the United Transportation Union, as he received a delivery of 400 picket signs, the first of an order for 1,500.


Commencements; New President of Columbia Asks Graduates to Lead
In his first commencement address at Columbia's helm yesterday, President George E. Rupp told graduates that he hoped they would strive to become leaders.
"You will challenge us and lead us not only in your various disciplines and professions, but also in our common life as we engage the tasks that generations preceding you have left undone," said Dr.
Rupp, who was named president last fall.


H. W. Fitelson, 89, Broadway Lawyer
H.
William Fitelson, an entertainment lawyer in New York for 50 years who was active in the Theater Guild and Actors Studio, died yesterday at his home in New York.
He was 89.
The cause was obstructive cardiopulmonary disease, said his son, Dr. David Fitelson.


Creative Director Back With Benetton
Oliviero Toscani, the creative director behind the contentious advertising for the apparel company Benetton since 1984, has patched up his much-publicized differences with the company, a spokesman said.
"He is very much with Benetton," said Peter Fressola, a spokesman for Benetton in New York, who added that after Mr.
Toscani had "suspended his activities on behalf of Benetton for about a week," he and the company "quickly ironed out their problems and he was back shortly thereafter."


AT&amp;T Picked to Build Bell Atlantic's Network
If the United States is indeed moving toward what Vice President Al Gore calls a national information infrastructure, the AT&amp;T Corporation may be emerging as the principal architect.
AT&amp;T today won its third big contract to build an advanced video and data network for a regional telephone company, when the Bell Atlantic Corporation selected AT&amp;T and the General Instrument Corporation to jointly construct a network that would reach 8.5 million homes in the Middle Atlantic region by the year 2000.


Review/TV Weekend; Corporate Brutality, for Starters
The Reagan 80's are really over.
Now, evidently, it's back to good old American get-the-big-guy basics.
In HBO's "White Mile," a fact-based movie making its debut tomorrow night at 8, the corporation returns not only as brutal but sometimes as murderous also.
Competition runs amok.
Assertiveness training goes berserk.
Dan Cutler, played brilliantly by Alan Alda with a cunning combination of malevolence and driving ambition, is president of a Los Angeles advertising agency.
Dan is the embodiment of corporate ruthlessness.
"Everybody works hard," he says, "but who wins?" Dan's answer: "The guy who walks up to you in the schoolyard and says I want your lunch." Dan gets his way because he has doubled the agency's billings in four years.
An intense student of corporate bonding, he arranges annual white-water rafting trips for top executives and important clients.
In terms of cementing relations, Dan figures, it beats golf.


Review/Art; Incarnations of an Itinerant Holy Man
It would be hard to find in any public collection in New York a more striking image than the bronze sculpture at the center of "Buddha of the Future," the third of the Asia Society's small-scale "Object in Context" exhibitions.
The statue is a standing figure, just over 3 feet high, uncovered 30 years ago in the ruins of a temple at the village of Prakhon Chai in Thailand.
It depicts Maitreya, the bodhisattva, or enlightened being, who bides his time in heaven until the next cosmic cataclysm brings him into the world as the savior Buddha of future ages.


G.M. Expected to Create Top North America Post
The General Motors Corporation is preparing to elevate one of its young executives to a new post, the president of its crucial North American operations, in a sign that it believes its once-collapsing core business has stabilized, people inside G.M. said today.
John F. Smith Jr. has had the lead role in stemming billions of dollars of losses in North America since G.M.'s board ejected the company's top managers and installed him as chief executive in November 1992.
Now that a vigorous cost-cutting campaign and a realignment of G.M.'s divisions and vehicle-development programs have taken hold, Mr.
Smith would prefer to focus on strategic planning for the entire corporation, G.M. executives said.


Michael Schwartz, 47, Dancer And Video Archivist of the Arts
Michael Schwartz, a dancer and pioneer in dance video documentation, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
Mr.
Schwartz was 47 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Mark Robison.


On My Mind; License for Torture
Finally and with startling clarity, the Chinese Communist dictatorship is sending its core message to the United States: Nationwide repression by arrest of dissenters will not only continue but widen.
By June 3, President Clinton will decide whether to live up to his executive order to remove China's low-tariff privileges unless it makes significant progress toward giving the Chinese and Tibetan people some relief from such instruments of government as political arrests, forced labor and torture boards.


Rangers Come to Praise Brodeur After 50-Shot Burial
The shots kept coming in Martin Brodeur's direction and the Devils' rookie goaltender kept turning them aside.
He could not stop the 50th shot -- Stephane Matteau's at 6 minutes 13 seconds of the second overtime -- but everyone praised Brodeur's performance tonight after the Rangers' 3-2 victory.


Corrections
A brief article in some editions yesterday about a package bomb sent to the president of ABC misspelled his surname.
He is Robert A. Iger, not Eiger.


Sounds Around Town
Seven Decades' Worth
Dick Hyman Trio, Tavern on the Green, Central Park at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Dick Hyman's virtuosity as a keyboard player knows practically no bounds -- pop, classical, jazz -- and his skills as a musical chameleon enable him to conjure the styles of a variety of jazz piano stars.
The trio he is leading at Tavern on the Green is made up of musicians representing seven decades of jazz: the pianist Bob Haggart, a mainstay of the Bob Crosby Band of the 1930's; the guitarist Howard Arlen, one of the bright young contemporaries, and Mr.
Hyman himself, who first appeared in the late 1940's in a band led by Guy Lombardo's brother Victor.
Their presence enables him to venture into the tradition of such celebrated piano-bass-guitar trios as those led by Nat (King) Cole and Art Tatum.
They take the stage tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11 and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
There is a music charge of $17.50 tonight and tomorrow, $12.50 on Sunday.
JOHN S. WILSON Continuing Song
Baby Jane Dexter, Eighty Eight's, 228 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-0088.
Baby Jane Dexter is completing the sixth month of an engagement that started tentatively last December as a series of once-a-week performances.
She is still doing them, Saturday nights at 8:30, but the artful power and forcefulness of her singing has kept audiences coming month after month.
Her repertory ranges from Screamin' Jay Hawkins's "I Put a Spell on You" to Bob Dylan's "Forever Young"; from Harold Arlen's "Let's Fall in Love" to Abbey Lincoln's "I Got Thunder," and her own unique "Fifteen Ugly Minutes." At the annual awards ceremony of the Manhattan Association of Cabarets and Clubs in March she was named Outstanding Female Vocalist of the Year.
There is a $12 entertainment charge and a two-drink minimum.
J.
S.
W.
Chris Connor, Mellowed
Chris Connor, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
When Chris Connor was singing with Stan Kenton's Big Band in the 1950's she was taking the dry, often agonized style of the two Kenton singers who preceded her -- Anita O'Day and June Christy -- to an often tortured extreme.
Since then, maturity and rethinking have brought a more mellow aspect to her voice, giving her the security and confidence that had often eluded her.
At Fat Tuesday's she is accompanied by Bob Kaye, who has been her pianist for almost 15 years, the bassist Chip Jackson and the drummer Vinnie Johnson.
She sings tonight at 8:30 and 11 tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
J.
S.
W.


Women in Senate and Military Chiefs Meet
Six of the seven women who serve in the Senate held a highly unusual private meeting with senior leaders of the armed forces late Wednesday to discuss how the military can better address equality for women and improve the handling of sexual harassment cases.
The lawmakers, officers and the civilian military leaders gathered in a small Senate hearing room, excused virtually all their aides and, for nearly 90 minutes, traded concerns and criticisms in blunt language, participants in the meeting said.


Market Place; The success of 'Four Weddings' rings bells for Polygram's stock.
ON March 18, Polygram used an unusual gimmick to lure audiences: the company gave moviegoers free admission to "Four Weddings and a Funeral" at a Manhattan theater if they showed up in wedding attire.
Only a handful donned appropriate dress.
But Polygram had no need to worry.
"Four Weddings" is a certifiable hit.
The humorous tale of a young man who endlessly attends his friends' weddings but eschews marriage for himself, has already taken in $34.8 million at the box office in the United States.
Of that total, Polygram keeps roughly half, while theater owners receive the balance.


Koor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Canadian Marconi (CMW,A) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Art in Review
Jacopo de' Barbari
'View of Venice'  Pace Prints  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through May 28
Anyone interested in the history of prints, cartography or the Renaissance -- or simply in extraordinary human achievement -- may want to drop by Pace Prints for a glimpse of Jacopo de' Barbari's bird's-eye view map of Venice.
This 4 1/2-by-9-foot woodblock print, among 24 surviving examples and made with 6 separate blocks, has not been seen in New York for years.
The largest and most intricate print ever made when it was published in 1500, "View" was considered a technical and artistic feat and was offered for sale at the then exorbitant price of three ducats.


Sports of The Times; Is This The End Of the Bulls?
THE first thing the Bulls had to do, Phil Jackson, the storklike coach, analyzed, was forget the last thing that happened to them.
Instead of putting them on a couch, Jackson put them on a plane and turned on the television sets.
On the charter plane back to Chicago from New York on Wednesday night, following the team's wrenching 87-86 defeat to the Knicks in the last seconds, Jackson did something he rarely does: he played a tape of the game.


Many U.S. Friends Helped Free South Africa; Communist Party Role
To the Editor:
On the South African elections and the African National Congress, you state, "while the A.N.C. alliance includes the Communist Party, its economic brain trust is packed with market-inclined economists and businessmen" (The Week in Review, April 24).
The South African Communist Party dominates the African National Congress by controlling majorities in the National Working Committee and its subordinate National Executive Committee, which run the A.N.C.


Schott's Comments Again Under Scrutiny
Baseball's ruling executive council said it would investigate the latest comment that could get MARGE SCHOTT in trouble.
The Cincinnati Reds owner, in a speech to the Ohio County Treasurers Association on Wednesday, said about the appearance of ballplayers, "Only fruits wear earrings."


Report Faults Commanders Of U.N. Forces in Somalia
A confidential investigation into the heavy casualties suffered by Pakistani, American and other forces taking part in United Nations operations in Somalia last year divides the blame among the Somali factions, the United Nations commanders on the ground, troop-contributing countries and the Security Council.
Although the investigation -- conducted by the Zambian Chief Justice, a retired United Nations peacekeeping commander from Ghana and Finland's Chief of Staff -- was completed in March, the United Nations has refused to publish its findings and has only given copies of the final report to the Security Council's 15 members.


A Lead in Killings of Washington Lawyers
Detectives investigating the slayings of two prominent Washington lawyers today released photographs of a man using one of the victim's credit cards at an automatic teller machine near Baltimore.
The bodies of the couple, Jose Enrique Trias, 49, and his wife, Julie N. Gilbert, of Bethesda, Md., were found on Monday at their weekend home across the Severn River from Annapolis, Md., by a workman they had hired.


Harris Chemical North America Inc. reports earnings for Year to Mar 26


Kansas City Southern May Sell Railroad
Kansas City Southern Industries said yesterday that it was considering selling its railroad, the nation's 12th largest, a move that would enable the company to focus more on mutual funds and other financial services.
The company also said it would increase its ownership of Berger Associates, a Denver-based mutual fund manager, to more than 80 percent from its current stake of about 18 percent.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
AT&amp;T won its third big contract to build a video and data network for a regional telephone company, making it a principal architect of the national information infrastructure.  [ Page D1. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An adventure trip for agency and client executives that turned fatal becomes a morality play on HBO.
A FILM that recalls perhaps the deadliest day in advertising is renewing the debate over the blurring of the line between fact and fiction when actual events are dramatized for entertainment purposes.
The dispute centers on "White Mile," a movie about a rafting trip that claimed the lives of five marketing and agency executives.
It was made for the HBO cable television network and will have its initial showing at 8 P.M., Eastern and Pacific times, tomorrow, then be repeated six times through June 11.


18 NAMED IN GRAFT TIED TO PROJECTS FOR SCHOOL BOARD
Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that the division of the Board of Education that maintains schools and leases space remained rife with corruption, five years after it was stripped of the power to build new schools because of earlier scandals.
The prosecutors charged a senior lawyer for the Board of Education who resigned last week and 17 other people with paying or accepting bribes for awarding contracts, approving fake invoices and expediting board payments to contractors.


DSC Communications
DSC Communications, a fast-growing manufacturer of telephone-switching equipment, has seen a sharp run-up in its stock in recent years, from the single digits in 1991 to an October 1993 peak of $73 a share.
But yesterday, the company lost a major Bell Atlantic contract to AT&amp;T and its shares fell sharply.


Review/Theater; Amorous Adventures From a Simpler Time
These days, Jerry Herman's score is the best reason for reviving "Milk and Honey," the 1961 musical he created with Don Appell.
In fact, it may be the only reason.
The book, which has to do with a busload of American widows touring Israel and all hoping to catch husbands along with the sights, can easily be mistaken for a travel brochure when it is not serving as a pep rally for what was then a young, idealistic state.
And the budget-conscious revival, put together Off Broadway by the American Jewish Theater, isn't about to dazzle you with the splendors of the land, even though the characters are constantly pointing them out and gasping.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Americans Upset in World Team Cup  France upset the defending champion United States in the World Team Cup yesterday in Dusseldorf, Germany, with the only American success coming on Pete Sampras's 29th straight victory of the year.
Sampras beat Cedric Pioline, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3).
Arnaud Boetsch surprised Michael Chang, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6), and the French completed the upset when Boetsch and Olivier Delaitre beat Patrick McEnroe and Richey Reneberg, 6-4, 3-6, 6-1, in the doubles.
Germany was also upset, 2-1, in the other Blue Group match against Russia, even though the Russians were without their No. 1 player, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, who is nursing a hamstring injury.
Michael Stich, ranked second in the world behind Sampras, lost by 6-4, 7-6 (7-5) to Aleksandr Volkov and Andrei Chesnokov clinched a Russian victory by beating Bernd Karbacher, 6-2, 6-2.
All four teams in the Blue Group are now 1-1, and all four have a chance of reaching the final.
The Red Group of Sweden, Spain, Australia and the Czech Republic was idle yesterday. (AP) Davenport Dispatches Austin: The defending champion Lindsay Davenport beat former world No. 1 player Tracy Austin 6-1, 6-2 in the second round of the Eurocard Open in Lucerne, Switzerland.
Other Americans also reached the quarterfinals.
Amy Frazier ousted Sarah Pitkowski of France, 6-2, 6-3; Meredith McGrath beat Eva Martincova of the Czech Republic, 6-3, 6-1, and Chanda Rubin defeated a fellow American, Linda Harvey-Wild, 6-4, 6-1. (AP) Sabatini Gets Off to Fast Start: Top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, who has not won a tournament in two years, breezed into the quarterfinals of the Strasbourg Open in France with a 6-1, 6-1 victory over Alexandra Fusai of France.
It was Sabatini's first match of the tournament after a first-round bye and a rainout on Wednesday.
Sabatini, ranked eighth in the world, last won a tournament, the Italian Open, in May 1992. (AP)


From Calpers to Affordable Housing
Dale H. Hanson, who is stepping down as head of the $80 billion California Public Employees Retirement System, said today that he would become chief executive of a newly formed venture that would seek to invest in single-family housing in California, using money from smaller public pension funds throughout the state.
At a news conference in Sacramento, where he formally announced his resignation as chief executive of Calpers, widely used shorthand for the pension fund, Mr.
Hanson said he would join American Partners Capital Group, founded recently by a close friend, Tom C. Stickel of San Diego, a Republican fund-raiser.


CHRONICLE
There's about to be an important opening in the diplomatic corps: EDWARD P. DJEREJIAN, the Ambassador to Israel, is to be the first director of the James A. Baker 3d Institute for Public Policy, which was established last year at Rice University in Houston.
The official announcement will be made today at the university, and Mr.
Djerejian, who has served as Ambassador since June 1993, will begin his new job in August.
Mr.
Djerejian, a career Foreign Service officer, was the Ambassador to Syria under President Bush, working with James A. Baker 3d, who was Mr.
Bush's Secretary of State.
"Ed is capable of anything he sets his mind to," Mr.
Baker said in a statement yesterday, "and that includes making the Baker Institute a world-class center for the study of public policy."


For Children
Brooklyn Public Library
Brooklyn Heights branch  280 Cadman Plaza West  (718) 722-3367  Recommended for all ages
The paradox in the children's room at this recently renovated library branch is that the buzz centers on the computers, not the books.
"We're mobbed with kids," said Sofia Sequenzia, the branch's librarian.
She was speaking of the computer stations, where four computers with CD-ROM's allow children as young as 3 to use software programs for reading, math, games and encyclopedias.
The printer also gets a lot of exercise, maybe a bit too much, said Ms.
Sequenzia.


Koss, the Star of Lillehammer, Retires
JOHANN OLAV KOSS, the local hero of the Lillehammer Winter Games, has retired from international competition.


Durufle Requiem
The Durufle Requiem and the Kodaly Missa Brevis are to be performed by the Ascension Music Orchestra and Chorus on June 1 at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street in Greenwich Village.
The ensemble's music director, Dennis Keene, who studied with the organist Marie-Madeleine Durufle, the composer's widow, will conduct.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


Review/Video; Aladdin, Iago et al.: A Sequel
What would "Aladdin" have been without Robin Williams?
That may not be a question anyone wants answered, but you have a chance to find out anyway in "The Return of Jafar," Disney's heavily promoted, made-for-video sequel.
The hourlong tape, available today, features all the characters from the 1992 film, which has turned out to be almost as beloved as it has been profitable.
But while the Genie looks the same, here it is not Mr.
Williams's manic, movie-stealing voice that booms out, "He's big, he's blue, he's back!" but that of Dan Castellaneta, better known as the voice of Homer Simpson.
There are other differences that mark the sequel as a pale "Aladdin" wannabe.
The four new songs are not by Alan Menken with Howard Ashman or Tim Rice, but by a variety of unfamous, uneven composers.
And "The Return of Jafar" was produced by Walt Disney Television Animation, which means that the animation looks sophisticated by television standards, but is nothing next to the sumptuous, elaborate world created for the film.


Looser Rules on Water
Eight years after it voted for drastic tightening of the purity standards for tap water, the Senate decided to loosen them again.
But whether the changes would increase the tiny risks of drinking tap water was in dispute, as environmentalists argued that the strict standards were warranted.
Article, page A12.


No More Could Be Done, Mrs. Onassis Was Told
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis returned to her apartment on Fifth Avenue on Wednesday, after doctors at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center had found that cancer had spread to her liver and had told her there was nothing more they could do for her.
Aggressive therapy, including antibiotic treatment of pneumonia that she developed early this week, was halted in keeping with the wishes Mrs.
Onassis had expressed in a living will, a health worker familiar with her care said.


Team Confirms North Koreans Extracted Rods
International inspectors said today that North Korea has begun to remove fuel from a nuclear reactor, heightening concern that it is moving to build up its supply of bomb-grade plutonium.
But Pyongyang has not yet taken any irrevocable steps that would preclude international monitors from conducting measurements to determine how much plutonium may have been diverted in the past, Administration officials said today.


Seles Seeks Money From Event Organizer
MONICA SELES announced yesterday that she wants the German Tennis Federation to cover the financial losses she has incurred since being stabbed during a match in Hamburg over a year ago.
The former top-ranked player, who has not played competitively since the attack, also said she would appeal the sentence of GUNTHER PARCHE, who was released on probation without serving time in jail for stabbing her on April 30, 1993.


Tobacco Companies Serve as Scapegoats
To the Editor:
The Government has accused cigarette manufacturers of "manipulating" nicotine content and trying to "addict" purchasers to their product.
Regulating contents and making a product more attractive for consumers are intrinsic to the production and sale of substances we ingest.
We do not say milk producers manipulate fat content in 2 percent milk, or that Ben and Jerry are trying to "addict" people to cholesterol.
That smoking is unhealthy does not justify scapegoating tobacco manufacturers.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Census projections showing Texas passing New York State in population misspelled the surname of a Texas historian at one point.
He is T. R. Fehrenbach, not Fehrenback.


Go for Gin Designated Favorite in Preakness After Getting No. 2 Post
Go for Gin drew the No. 2 post position in a field of 10 horses entered in the Preakness Stakes today, and the question arose whether the small field and favorable post would enhance his chances of becoming the first horse to sweep the Triple Crown in 16 years.
At least, it enhanced his chances of avoiding the kind of traffic trouble that bedeviled almost all 13 of his rivals during the roughhouse running of the Kentucky Derby in the mud at Churchill Downs 12 days ago.


Aides at Justice Study Immunity For Presidents
The Justice Department is preparing to tell a Federal judge that the sexual harassment suit brought against President Clinton should be dismissed or delayed indefinitely because Presidents are entitled to broad immunity from lawsuits while in office, Administration officials said today.
The Justice Department argument is being readied to support a motion that Mr.
Clinton's private lawyer, Robert S. Bennett, plans to file soon in Federal court in Little Rock.
Mr.
Bennett will ask that the suit brought by Paula Corbin Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, be dismissed or postponed until after the President leaves office.
Mr.
Bennett has indicated that he will argue that the President should be given immunity from all lawsuits because the need to defend himself would distract him from his official duties and throw the Government into disarray.


British Reply Gingerly to Sinn Fein's 20 Questions
The British Government, seeking to keep alive efforts to bring peace to Northern Ireland without violating its pledge not to negotiate with terrorists, gave a series of carefully couched replies tonight to questions from the I.R.A.'s political wing about proposed talks on the province's future.
But London also made clear in its statement that its patience with the Irish Republican Army and its political arm, Sinn Fein, was running out.
Prime Minister John Major's Government emphasized again that Sinn Fein could take part in peace efforts only if the I.R.A. renounced violence.


Long-Term Decline In Smoking in U.S. Is Apparently Over
Federal officials today expressed fear that the nation's long decline in smoking may be over.
New figures show that the steady decline since 1966 has halted, while smoking among young people has increased for the first time in a decade.
The data, issued today in the Government's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, show "a leveling-off in adult smoking in the United States for two years in a row, and that gives us reason for serious concern," said Dr.
Michael Eriksen, director of the Federal Project on Smoking and Health at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.


Critic's Notebook; Stylish Storytelling and Some Fodder for Remakes at Cannes
Big guns are about to arrive here, literally and figuratively.
"Pulp Fiction," Quentin Tarantino's daring, wildly funny new crime drama, can be counted on to take this year's Cannes International Film Festival by storm.
Known until now as a screenwriter with an exceptionally identifiable voice ("True Romance") and a director with affinities for both nasty violence and oddball wit ("Reservoir Dogs"), Mr.
Tarantino now moves into the cinematic mainstream.
"Pulp Fiction" is as stylish and exhilarating as it is clever.
This is not to say that Mr.
Tarantino has lost his taste for hair-raising excess, only that he now has it much more firmly in check.
"Pulp Fiction" remains bracingly off kilter as it mixes lurid, outrageous elements with sweetly appealing ones, to the point where the viewer never has the faintest idea what to expect.
If that sounds random, it isn't: Mr.
Tarantino has also devised a graceful circular structure that sustains his film's bold ambitions and two-and-a-half-hour running time.
The storytelling is solid and the time flies.


Many U.S. Friends Helped Free South Africa
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to read the May 6 Anthony Lewis column, "Help From Outside," on the importance of efforts around the world, and especially in the United States, in the demise of apartheid in South Africa.
Those of us active in those efforts, some for more than 40 years, felt a special exhilaration as the old South African flag came down and the new one was put afloat at midnight the day the voting ended.
Many of us saw the new South Africa as a victory for us too.


Jets Get Insurance by Signing Rams Safety
The Jets signed safety PAT TERRELL, an unrestricted free agent from the Los Angeles Rams, yesterday.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Terrell is expected to back up both the free and strong safety positions and will probably take over at free safety in 1995 if RONNIE LOTT retires after this season.


EXPERTS SAY U.S. FAILS TO ACCOUNT FOR ITS PLUTONIUM
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary's campaign to open the nation's atomic complex to public scrutiny has stumbled on the seeming inability of her department to assemble reliable figures on its production of plutonium, the main ingredient of nuclear warheads.
Experts say crude tallies and shifting numbers raise new doubts about the Government's attention to detail in guarding one of the deadliest substances on earth.
In the past, private experts have charged that Federal plants were sloppy and prime targets for atomic theft and diversion.


Trade Gap With Japan Widens as Talks Start
As new data today showed America's trade deficit with Japan soaring, American and Japanese officials held talks to see whether they could revive their moribund negotiations for gaining more access to closed Japanese markets.
The talks extended late into the evening and were not expected to conclude until Friday morning.
Late today, however, an official involved in the talks said that the Japanese side had come with "detailed, serious proposals" that the American side felt were worth exploring.


Hechinger Co.(HECHA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Rabin Says Arafat's 'Jihad' Remark Set Back Peace Effort
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel said today that Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, had harmed the Middle East peace talks with a speech in which he seemed to call for a holy war to liberate Jerusalem for Muslims.
Mr.
Rabin waved off Mr.
Arafat's explanation that he was not calling for violence when he talked recently of a "jihad" for Jerusalem -- an Arabic word often interpreted as holy war -- but rather was speaking in a religious sense and urging a crusade for peace.


Old Signs Towed Away; Special Privilege Remains
Members of Congress may have given up their discount hair cuts.
They may have sacrificed their subsidized memberships at the gym.
They may have even agreed to end the longtime practice of having their local parking tickets fixed.
But give up their free parking spots at Washington's two airports?
No.
Not only will they hold on to their privileged spots close to the terminals at National and Dulles airports, but questions are arising over whether some sleight of hand has recently occurred to cover up the fact that members even have the parking perk.


Hormel (Geo. A) &amp; Co.  (HRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Angelica Corp.(AGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Art in Review
Tabboo
Tom Cugliani Gallery  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through May 28
Stephen Tashjian, whose professional name is Tabboo, has shown intermittently in the clubs and galleries of New York City for more than a decade, but this is his first solo gallery show.
His washy, deftly splattered scenes of the city include the Manhattan skyline at dusk, a nocturnal view of skyscrapers whose lights twinkle through the bare trees of Central Park and a view of brick tenements.
Most of his subjects have been around since the Ash Can School and some images seem only a few grades above most of the work in the Washington Square Art Fair.
But his luminous colors, unpretentious (and well-observed) images and quietly inspired handling of paint can be engrossing.
It's as if an artist reared on a steady diet of Color Field abstraction has been seduced by the sights of the Big Apple.
ROBERTA SMITH


As Shots Ring Out in Overtime, Rangers Triumph
It took the Rangers 50 shots to finish the job, and the final one was hardly a thing of beauty.
It came amid crashing bodies and clashing sticks during a furious scramble in front of the Devils' net.
But Stephane Matteau's shot crossed the goal line, behind the magnificent Martin Brodeur, at 6 minutes 13 seconds of the second overtime, to give the Rangers a 3-2 victory tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and a two games to one lead in the Eastern Conference finals.


Mr. Balaguer's Dubious Victory
After a campaign marred by racism and a vote discredited by allegations of fraud, 87-year-old President Joaquin Balaguer is claiming victory in this week's election in the Dominican Republic.
The international community should not accept Mr.
Balaguer's assertion at face value.
This election has been watched closely because of the Dominican Republic's role in the crisis in Haiti.
The two countries share the island of Hispaniola, and unimpeded smuggling over their common border has made a United Nations oil embargo against Haiti's illegitimate military junta ineffective.
Mr.
Balaguer dislikes the deposed Haitian President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and has been reluctant to help enforce sanctions designed to return Mr.
Aristide to power.


Art in Review
'Little Pictures' 'The Modernist Perspective'
Banning &amp; Associates  138 West 18th Street  Chelsea  Through June 14
No photograph here is larger than about 4 by 6 inches, but many still exert a strong appeal.
This exhibition was conceived as a sequel to another show of small photographs, held this year at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.; where most of the works in the Getty show came from the 19th century, the pictures here are mainly from the 1920's and 30's.


Review/Dance; Classical, but Unpredictable
TWELVE choreographers, including newcomers, testing their ideas on a first-class ballet company before a live audience: That is the not-so-everyday premise of the Diamond Project, a festival in all but name that the New York City Ballet opened on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater with a full plate of four premieres.
David Allan, who was introduced as a major talent in the first edition of this huge choreographic showcase, in 1992, returned with "Pastoral Dances," the program's most polished ballet, danced to the music of not one but three composers from Sweden.


Blue Plague
There's a disturbing pattern in the corruption scandals that periodically erupt in New York City's police force, and we saw it once again when 14 police officers were arrested in the 30th Precinct in Central Harlem, accused of stealing from drug dealers or taking money to protect them.
Government and police officials and the media have focused, as always, on the repercussions on the "boys in blue" -- most of whom (we were told by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and others) are fine, upstanding citizens.
It's as if the primary victims were cops: good men who somehow went bad.


AIDS Walk on Sunday
The ninth AIDS Walk New York to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis will be on Sunday.
Participants sign up as many sponsors as they can, each of whom donates money for each of the 10 kilometers the participants walk on the 6.2-mile route.
The opening ceremony is at 9:30 A.M. on the Great Lawn of Central Park, midpark above 80th Street, with music and appearances by Michael J. Fox, Kathy Mattea and Shirley Verrett.
Walkers set off at 10 A.M., following a route through the Upper West Side that ends back at the Great Lawn.
Walkers can register until the time of the walk.
Information: (212) 807-9255.


S.E.C. Seeks New Penalties For Improper Broker Sales
Securities and Exchange Commission officials said today that during a two-year investigation of nine big brokerage firms, they found an unexpectedly large number of cases of improper sales practices and had referred them to the agency's enforcement division for further investigation and possible punitive action.
In releasing a report on the inquiry, Arthur Levitt Jr., the S.E.C.'s chairman, also outlined plans for a crackdown on stock and bond brokers who generate extra commissions by pushing clients into inappropriate investments.
He said in an interview that the agency would be quicker to bar brokers from the industry and impose stiff fines for violations that previously would have drawn lesser penalties.


Prices of Bonds Rise, Tracking Dollar's Rally
Yields of Treasury securities declined modestly yesterday, despite rising commodity prices that threatened to reignite inflation worries among some investors only days after the Fed moved to calm those fears.
In a seesaw session, the bond market managed to erase morning losses after the release of new trade data, rebounding in sync with the dollar amid reports that the Fed was buying intermediate Treasury securities for the accounts of foreign central banks.


The Spoken Word
"SPEAKING WITH NATURE," Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 252d Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A workshop in translating one's perceptions of nature into art.
Tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Admission: $20.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
"REMEMBERING ROBERT DE NIRO," Fulcrum Gallery, 144 Mercer Street, SoHo.
A reminiscence of the late painter, who died last year at the age of 71.
Sponsored by Artist Talk on Art.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $4.
Information: (212) 385-2862.





Woolworth's Treasurer Blew Whistle
Ever since the Woolworth Corporation made the startling announcement on March 30 that its books might have been cooked, Wall Street has wondered where the tip-off came.
The mystery was solved on Wednesday when a special board committee that was investigating the matter released its findings, and John H. Cannon, the company's treasurer, emerged as the whistle-blower.
The committee found no wrongdoing but came down hard on top management for pursuing profits too aggressively.


California Assigns Anti-Tobacco Ads
The California Department of Health Services has awarded its anti-smoking account to Asher/Gould of Los Angeles.
The high-profile account, with billings estimated at $23 million for two years, was handled by Livingston &amp; Company of Los Angeles for the last two years.
Bruce Silverman, president and chief creative officer of Asher/Gould, confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek.
He said his agency was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included the team of Stein Robaire Helm of Los Angeles and Paul Keye, an ad executive who had worked on the account for the last four years at agencies including Livingston.


Cars Racing Electrically To '98 and Philadelphia
When the 1998 model-year cars and light trucks hit the showroom floors, 2 percent of them will have to be electric, according to state air pollution rules in New York, Massachusetts and California, and several other states may join in.
But what will they look like?
No one knows, but scores of prototypes and production models and a few flights of fancy will line up for public inspection on Sunday at Battery Park City in Manhattan for the opening of the American Tour de Sol, a race and road rally that this year runs from New York City to Philadelphia.
There will be single-seat electric racers, four-passenger electric commuter cars, electric mopeds, cars that run on batteries, cars that run on solar cells, a bus that runs on a fuel cell and even a 27,000-pound electric armored personnel carrier.


Bank Takes Giuliani Incentives To Keep Workers in New York
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that Republic National Bank of New York, the banking subsidiary of the nation's 20th-largest bank holding company, had accepted $6.4 million in incentives to remain in New York City and was canceling plans to move 900 workers to New Jersey.
Under the agreement, the Giuliani administration will help the bank by issuing bonds to finance construction of a $55 million, 232,000-square-foot addition to its midtown Manhattan headquarters at Fifth Avenue at West 40th Street and to finance a $23 million renovation of its data center at 1 West 39th Street.


Two G.O.P. Leaders Differ In Choices for Governor's Race
The Nassau County Republican chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, who will control nearly 11 percent of the vote at the state Republican convention in Manhattan next week, endorsed Senator George E. Pataki for governor today.
But Mr.
Pataki's chief rival, Herbert London, countered Mr.
Pataki's growing momentum by producing a major endorsement of his own, that of the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino.


Sarajevo Journal; Shattered by War? Yes. But Dowdy? No Chance.
Before the war, the people of Sarajevo prided themselves on their elegance and the beauty of their city.
Today, the town has been largely destroyed by Serbian shells, but the people still strive to maintain what the Italians call "la bella figura" -- in this instance a death-defying statement of refinement amid ruin.
If they have succeeded, it is largely thanks to a small factory in the modern sector of town that despite the punishment of 25 mortar rounds and the death of six workers has continued producing colognes, perfumes, lipsticks, creams and mascara, as well as the more basic ingredients of an attractive appearance, like soap, shampoo and toothpaste.


Pollster Finds Error on Holocaust Doubts
A widely publicized survey was wrong in finding that one in five Americans doubted the Holocaust happened, the poll taker now says, because the question was so clumsily worded it drew many opposite responses.
"I deeply regret this entire incident, and I feel it most important to set the record straight publicly," Burns W. Roper told a conference of professional pollsters last week.


Pep Boys - Manny, Moe &amp; Jack (PBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Art in Review
Nancy Shaver
Curt Marcus Gallery  578 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 28
Nancy Shaver gets credit for pushing her art in a new and better direction.
In her fourth exhibition in a New York gallery, she has dispensed with the poetic arrangements of found objects, and thus some of their sentimentality.
In addition, she is developing to better effect their main points of interest, specifically their rough, put-together structure and indifference to distinctions between drawing, painting and sculpture.


Art in Review
Beauford Delaney
'The New York Years (1929-1953)'  Philippe Briet Gallery  558 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through June 18
Beauford Delaney, who died in Paris in 1979 at the age of 77, had an innate understanding that color and surface could bring a new immediacy to painting.
He reached this realization in the early 1940's while working in New York, possibly inspired by van Gogh and the Fauves.
Similar conclusions were reached earlier by Stuart Davis, later by Alfred Jensen and about the same time by William H. Johnson.
Like Delaney, Johnson was a black artist who contributed to modern American painting against great odds.
While Delaney's life and art deserve to be better known -- in fact, seem ripe for full-length treatment -- the richness of both are apparent in this diamond-in-the-rough exhibition.


Rings Around Exploding Star Are Mystery
The Hubble Space Telescope, taking detailed pictures of the site of an exploding star, or supernova, has confronted astronomers with a new mystery: How to explain the appearance of two thin loops of bright gases encircling the region like a pair of Hula Hoops out in space.
In describing the new Hubble pictures yesterday, Dr.
Christopher Burrows, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, said the rings are "are completely unlike anything we had expected to see" in the area of a supernova.


CHRONICLE
LARRY KRAMER, the playwright and advocate against AIDS, has mixed feelings about the release next month of a recording of his 1985 play about the AIDS epidemic, "The Normal Heart," on compact disk.
"You're always worried that what you've done is dated," Mr.
Kramer said.
"Unfortunately, I could have written this yesterday for all the progress we've made on AIDS."


Cold Metal Products Inc.(CLQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dawson's Home Run Caps Red Sox Rally
Red Sox 3, Orioles 2
Andre Dawson homered in the eighth inning to snap a tie and Danny Darwin won his seventh game as the Boston Red Sox rallied to beat the Orioles, 3-2, last night at Baltimore.
Dawson drove a 1-2 pitch from Sid Fernandez into the left-field seats to lift Boston to its sixth victory in seven games.
It was Dawson's third homer in four games and the fourth off Fernandez (2-2) in 54 career at-bats.
Dawson has eight homers this season.


Breast-Feeding: A Civil Right
This week Gov.
Mario Cuomo signed a bill that protects a woman's right to breast-feed her babies in public and private in New York State.
Why on earth, one might wonder, does any state need such a law?
Because without it what happened last December to Liza Habiby will go on happening.
Ms.
Habiby and her 7-month-old son Alexander were in the Latham Circle Mall, near Rochester, N.Y., when Alexander got hungry.
Rather than let him howl, Ms.
Habiby did what comes naturally to a nursing mother.
She breast-fed her baby.
But not for long.
A security guard told her to cover up because she was embarrassing the other shoppers.


When the Death of a Fetus Is Murder
In the latest ruling on the question of when a fetus should have the legal status of a person, the California Supreme Court decided on Monday that an assault on a pregnant woman that kills her fetus can be prosecuted as murder, even if the fetus is not viable.
The ruling came in a San Diego case involving a robbery in 1991 in which a pregnant woman was shot after cashing a welfare check.
The woman, Maria Flores, survived the shooting, but her fetus, a male 22 to 25 weeks old, did not.


Remembrance of Malcolm X Enlightens a New Generation


Western Beef Inc.(BEEF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Henry Morgan, Acerbic Wit of Radio and TV, Dies at 79
Henry Morgan, the scalpel-tongued satirist who became the legendary bad boy of radio in the 1940's and went on to appear on such television panel shows as "I've Got a Secret," died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79.
The cause was lung cancer, said Joan Harris, a spokeswoman for the family.
His survivors include his wife, the former Karen Sorensen, whom he married in 1978, and a son by another liaison, Steve Robinson of Los Angeles.


Abroad at Home; The Logic of Peace
The sound from the Middle East is of a glacier cracking.
After decades in which they seemed to be frozen in eternal hostility, Israel and its neighbors are edging toward peaceful relations.
After all the frustration since the signing on the White House lawn last September, the actual transfer of authority to the Palestinians in Jericho and the Gaza Strip was an anticlimax.
But its potential significance was great.
Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, put it correctly:


Sounds Around Town
Eccentric Pianism
Chris Anderson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Chris Anderson is one of jazz's gifts, a completely eccentric and assured pianist who has a way with remaking a standard.
His playing is angular and jagged.
He leaves wide-open spaces in his playing, and starts and ends lines abruptly.
He'll be joined by Ray Drummond on bass, a regular partner who is rarely surprised by any of the avenues he takes in pursuing a new way through an old tune.
Sets are Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Chicago Blues
Otis Rush, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
The guitarist Otis Rush has just released an excellent new album, "Ain't Enough Comin' In," on a major label (Mercury) no less, and is here to celebrate it.
Mr.
Rush is one of the finest living exponents of Chicago blues, and on a good night he can convince an audience that the blues can be both Saturday-night party music and a way for a performer to banish his own feelings of loss and pain.
The shows tonight are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; the cover is $15; there is an $8 minimum at the tables.
P.
W.





Chrysler to Raise Dividend and Finance Pensions
Flush with record earnings and anticipating further growth in the North American auto market, the Chrysler Corporation announced today that it would raise its quarterly dividend by a nickel a share, to 25 cents, and that it would fully finance its pensions by the end of the year.
If Chrysler makes good on its vow to set aside the money required to meet its obligations for current and future retirees, it will be the first time in its history that the No. 3 auto maker has fully financed its pension plan.


Hanna Grunwald; Psychotherapist, 94, Led Amnesty Group
Dr.
Hanna Grunwald, a retired group psychotherapist and former director of Amnesty International U.S.A. in New York, died on May 15 at the Jewish Home for the Aged in Fairfield, Conn.
She was 94 and had lived in Washington Heights until the late 1970's.
She had a long illness, Amnesty International said.


A Big Cake for the Big Five-O


Noah W. Moore Jr.; Methodist Bishop, 92
Bishop Noah W. Moore Jr., a retired executive of the United Methodist Church, died on May 14 in the Linwood Convalescent Center, Linwood, N.J.
Bishop Moore, who lived in Atlantic City, was 92.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Carolyn Weddington.


Critic's Notebook; Biography Becomes A Blood Sport
"FORMERLY we used to canonize our heroes," Oscar Wilde wrote in 1891.
"The modern method is to vulgarize them. Cheap editions of great books may be delightful, but cheap editions of great men are absolutely detestable."
The trend discerned by Wilde a century ago, of course, has only accelerated in recent years, as the line between trashy celebrity exposes and serious biographies of eminent artists, statesmen and thinkers has grown increasingly blurred.
At the same time, the imperatives of deconstruction and the rise of "creative" critics have helped sanction the spread of wholesale speculation in biography writing, even as feminist and Marxist schools of criticism have fostered highly politicized readings of individual lives.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SUNAMERICA INC., Los Angeles, agreed to acquire Imperial Premium Finance, Sherman Oaks, Calif., from the failed Carteret Federal Savings Bank in Carteret, N.J., for an undisclosed price.


A Small Loss Narrows for TLC Beatrice
In what may be the start of a campaign to take the company public, TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., the closely held foods company, released financial results yesterday for the first quarter that showed a small and decreasing net loss.
The numbers show that TLC Beatrice, the nation's largest black-owned business, is benefiting from improving economic conditions in Europe, where it does most of its business.


Escort Service Is Sued
In a case with broad implications for uninsured workers, a former escort service employee is suing for workers' compensation benefits for injuries she received when a client choked her.
Julie Nelson, now 34 and living out of state, is asking that Connecticut pay more than $1 million for past and future medical expenses, lost wages and retraining since it was established that Deb's Escort Service of East Haven did not carry workers compensation insurance, as required by law.


Remaining Objective Amid the Excitement
A TV analyst would have to be dazed not to revel in calling the Knicks' 87-86 victory over the Bulls Wednesday night in Game 5 of their playoff series.
The MSG Network's John Andariese, working beside Marv Albert, scintillated and fibrillated (whoops, I've slipped into Clyde Frazier gear) as never before.
Andariese is not the detailed X's and O's coach/analyst that Hubie Brown of TNT is, but he displays an acute, objective grasp of the game.


Lawyers Receiving $22.6 Million of Prudential Settlement
The plaintiffs' lawyers in the largest class action lawsuit stemming from the limited partnership scandal at Prudential Securities are walking away from the case with a quarter of the total settlement of about $90.5 million reached last year.
A Federal district judge in New Orleans on Wednesday granted the group of law firms handling the action about $22.6 million in fees and expenses.
Most of that amount will be shared by about a dozen law firms that served as class counsel.


Blue Cross Says It Plans Clinics In New Jersey
The state's largest health insurer, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey, said today that it would establish a statewide system of private family clinics, putting the company in the business of directly providing health care as well as insurance.
The clinics would be allied with a network of 56 acute-care hospitals that are part of a health maintenance organization that Blue Cross established a year ago.
The result would be one of the largest health care delivery systems in the Northeast, with the ability to offer cheaper services than most rival clinics or physicians.


Prado Is Getting Its Fourth New Director in Three Years
The Culture Minister has nominated Jose Maria Luzon Nogue to be the new director of the Prado Museum, succeeding Francisco Calvo Serraller.
Mr.
Calvo Serraller resigned last weekend after being criticized for allowing a magazine to photograph designer chairs in a museum gallery.
The appointment of Mr.
Luzon, a university professor who has served as head of the National Archeology Museum and as Director General of Fine Arts in the Culture Ministry, was approved on Wednesday by the Prado's honorary board.
It is expected to be endorsed at Friday's weekly meeting of the Spanish Cabinet.


Every Shot Is Now a Pressure Shot for Elkington
There are days on the golf course when Steve Elkington can barely breathe.
Sometimes, he has trouble seeing the green from 150 yards away.
These difficulties have nothing to do with the throat-tightening pressure that is an occupational hazard of the PGA Tour.
They are related to an occupational hazard of another kind.
Steve Elkington, touring golf professional, is allergic to grass.
Bermuda grass, bent grass, rye grass, poa annua, bluegrass.
It doesn't matter.
Elkington, 31 years old, is allergic to all the various strains.
To say this has put a strain on his golf game would be akin to saying that a pilot could be hampered by acrophobia.


One of Africa's Last Dictators Bows to Democracy
The last prominent ruler in the generation of African strongmen who displaced the European colonialists, Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi, conceded today that voters had decisively ended his autocratic 30-year personality cult.
The self-proclaimed Life President, an eccentric leader in three-piece suit and homburg, accepted defeat in an extraordinary show of mutual graciousness.
After a vote widely acclaimed as peaceful and fair, Dr.
Banda, who is in his 90's, offered his cooperation to the new Government and was offered in turn generous praise and a comfortable pension.


World Turns Its Attention To Rwandans
Weeks after the first widespread killings were reported in Rwanda, diplomatic efforts to end the civil war have increased, with a series of high-level visits to Rwanda.
But these efforts, so far, have amounted to little more than "wringing hands," in the words of an American official here, and the fighting continues unabated.


Long-Jump Star Starts On a Long Road Back
Llewellyn Starks has seen the videotape, and even the camera picked up the loud pop that sounded to some like a rifle shot or a splintered branch, but was actually the sound of his leg snapping.
On May 24, 1992, in his third long jump at the New York Games, Starks broke a bone in his right leg upon takeoff.
By the time he had slumped to his stomach in the landing pit, he had suffered a compound fracture of the fibula and tibia, had lost any chance to compete in the 1992 Summer Olympics and had perhaps come to the frightful end of a promising career.


Knicks Can Close Bulls and Stadium
The controversy of Game 5 did not change the facts heading into Game 6.
The Knicks led the Chicago Bulls, 3-2, in their four-of-seven-game playoff series and needed just one victory to dethrone them as three-time National Basketball Association champions.
That was enough to motivate Pat Riley.
And he hoped it was enough to motivate the Knicks as they prepared for Friday night's Game 6 at Chicago Stadium.


.400 Talk? O'Neill Takes a Walk
At .455, Paul O'Neill is batting a shocking 187 points higher than the career average he brought into this season, so there is seven years of evidence predicting that the Yankee outfielder will experience a swoon.
While O'Neill declines to discuss such a possibility, he knows it is a realistic expectation.
Or does he?
What if O'Neill does not falter?
What if the patience he has shown over he first seven weeks of the season in taking pitches and the diligence he has displayed in driving through the ball remain?
What if O'Neill keeps batting over .400?


Capriati Voluntarily in Rehabilitation
Jennifer Capriati, in compliance with the wishes of her family, voluntarily checked into a Miami Beach rehabilitation facility on Wednesday following the tennis star's arrest Monday on charges of marijuana possession.
Capriati's agent at the International Management Group, Barbara Perry, said Capriati would stay at Mount Sinai, a hospital that specializes in substance-abuse therapy, for an indefinite period of time.
"This was something that she wanted to do," said Perry, "and from what I've heard, she went in with a very positive attitude about getting better."


Citadel Says State Can Provide Suitable Women-Only Program
Lawyers for one of two remaining publicly supported all-male military colleges in the country today tried to show that South Carolina could provide a suitable alternative for a female student who wants to join the Citadel's corps of cadets.
They also used several witnesses' testimony to stress that the student's request is an aberration in a state that has shown little demand for a military-style education for women, and the lawyers suggested that that would be a needless expense.


New York City Courts Trying to Become More Juror-Friendly
To the Editor:
We are delighted to have Norman Cantor (letter, April 28) lobby for the legislative reforms proposed by Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye's Jury Project, on which I was privileged to serve.
His complaint is mainly on the voir dire (questioning of jurors to determine their acceptability on a given case), which may be controlled by administrative rule, not requiring a judicial presence in every civil case.


Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Dies of Cancer at 64
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, the widow of President John F. Kennedy and of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis, died of a form of cancer of the lymphatic system yesterday at her apartment in New York City.
She was 64 years old.
Mrs.
Onassis, who had enjoyed robust good health nearly all her life, began being treated for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in early January and had been undergoing chemotherapy and other treatments in recent months while continuing her work as a book editor and her social, family and other personal routines.


Contractor Known For Work On Schools
Over three decades, Martin Singer forged a reputation as a major school-construction contractor in New York.
Starting in the late 1950's, his firm, Mars-Normel Construction Corporation, obtained scores of multimillion-dollar contracts and he was known for his expertise in speeding up payments from the Board of Education's bureaucracy-clogged administrators.
Mr.
Singer, who died in October, was described yesterday by Federal and state law-enforcement officials as a contractor who knew his way through the corridors of corruption at the school board.
Investigators said he was a pivotal figure in an investigation that led to Federal charges against Mr.
Singer and 17 other men, including school officials, contractors and lawyers.
Network of Corruption
The indictments, affidavits from Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and interviews with law-enforcement officials paint a portrait of a network of graft that infected the school construction and repair programs for at least 13 years.
According to the agents and other investigators, meetings and discussions for payoffs up to $40,000 were held in restaurants, at board headquarters in Brooklyn, lawyers' offices and in parked limousines.


Senate Panel Backs Plan to Contain Health Costs
The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, in the first significant display of bipartisanship in the health care debate, agreed today on a plan for insuring that costs would not soar beyond expectations.
Republicans dropped their argument that Congress should not establish a benefits package because it would be unable to keep the package from becoming too generous.
They gave it up in exchange for a Democratic agreement to a system that would bring about nearly automatic cuts in benefits if costs seemed about to exceed estimates.


Vietnamese Also Extending The Search for Their M.I.A.'s
"For 2,000 years, wars have seeded our land with the bones of the missing in action," the general told a visitor, "and the American war produced a particularly rich crop. We'll never find most of our own dead soldiers, but they remain in our hearts."
The speaker, Maj.
Gen.
Nguyen Trong Vinh, spent most of his 68 years fighting the French and the Americans, and he now publishes a monthly magazine for North Vietnamese and Vietcong veterans listing grave sites and missing soldiers and guerrillas.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Duke Power Co., Charlotte, N.C., is selling $150 million of 7.875 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2024 at a price of 96.914 to yield 8.151 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
The bonds are noncallable for five years and rated Aa2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.. *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., is selling $150 million of 7.5 percent of notes due in 2004 priced at 99.443 to yield 7.58 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A3 by Moody's an A- by S.&amp;.
P.


Hollywood a Flop for Sony Earnings
Hollywood lost some of its glamour for the SonyCorporation last year.
Hurt by costly flops like "Last Action Hero," Sony, the Japanese consumer electronics giant, suffered a sizable loss in its movie business in the last fiscal year.
It was the first annual deficit since Sony bought into Hollywood in 1989, executives said today.


New York City Courts Trying to Become More Juror-Friendly; Justice vs. Revenue
To the Editor:
A May 9 article reports that a Metuchen, N.J., municipal court judge, has been removed because he did not generate enough income.
This should not surprise anyone who has dealt with such municipal courts.


Secret Service Breaks Up a Counterfeit Ring


I. Frank Crystal; Insurance Broker, 90
I.
Frank Crystal, a retired New York insurance broker, died on Wednesday at his home on the Upper East Side.
He was 90.
He suffered a lengthy illness, his family said.
A native of Manhattan, Mr.
Crystal was a 1926 graduate of Harvard University, majoring in economics.
He established his national brokerage firm, Frank Crystal &amp; Company in 1933 and retired as its chairman in 1975.


Review/Theater; Family Life Colored by Menace
Early in "The Hyacinth Macaw," Mac Wellman's entertainingly immoderate portrait of America adrift (at Primary Stages), a sinister stranger announces what could be the play's credo: "What's real has no name. None. Whatever."
There's certainly no reason to doubt that the assertion holds true in Mr.
Wellman's anomic universe.
But that doesn't stop the play's characters from trying their hardest to describe the undescribable.
Words spew out of them in an untrammeled flow of logorrhea: plain words, fancy words, space-age words, Victorian words and words that defy the dictionary.
They pile up in towering, flamboyant catalogues, only to topple into chasms of inanity.


Accounts
*
Digital Communications Associates, Alpharetta, Ga., to West Advertising and Marketing, Atlanta, to handle its account, previously at Donino &amp; Partners, Atlanta.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Vetta Sports, New York, to McCabe &amp; Co., New York, as the first agency to handle the bicycling accessories manufacturer's account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Officials Say Woman on Welfare Stole Thousands With Fake ID's
At her peak in early 1991, the authorities said, Shirley Simmons collected welfare benefits under eight names at once, increasing her take with claims for 46 children, none of whom existed.
When investigators counted all the fake names they said Ms.
Simmons used over almost seven years, they found that she had obtained at least 15 different identification cards from the New York City Human Resources Administration, each with her real photograph on the front and each entitling her to public assistance.
The authorities said Ms.
Simmons allowed some accounts to lapse while she opened others, and she claimed a total of 73 fictitious children, including 11 sets of twins.


Bratton Seeks Help On Court Misdeeds
Responding to reports that police officers often fake evidence, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton announced yesterday that he has called on the city's judges, district attorneys and United States Attorneys to help him uncover instances of police perjury and improve the quality of the department's courtroom testimony.
Mr.
Bratton said yesterday that he did not think the problem of police perjury and evidence tampering was pervasive, although he is forming a task force to consider ways to overhaul police training on the role officers play in gathering and introducing evidence for trials.


Restaurants
They look innocent: small pale dumplings sitting quietly in a steamer.
But they explode upon contact with the teeth, turning into flavor grenades that fill the mouth with a gush of intensely hot soup.
Everyone who tastes the famous soup dumplings of Shanghai for the first time looks surprised, and then puzzled.
How did that soup get inside the pastry?
What made it stay there?
Xiao long bao, the soup dumplings of Shanghai, seem magical.
A trick of kitchen chemistry traps a spoonful of soup inside a pastry wrapper, where it awaits an opportunity to escape.


Home Video
Today there is something new on the shelves in video stores: a major animated feature from Disney that did not play in theaters but instead has gone, if purists will forgive the expression, straight to video.
The film, "The Return of Jafar," is promoted as a sequel to the Disney blockbuster "Aladdin." In the video industry, its release sends a signal that a lowly order of film making is about to stage an uprising.
Of all the scorn heaped on movies, few pejoratives curl the lip like "straight to video," a term suggestive of exploitative fodder churned out quickly at a low cost.
"It usually means the product didn't make the cut for theatrical distribution," said Ann Daly, the president of Buena Vista, Disney's video-distribution company.


Philanthropic Coalition Names a New President
Ask Sara Melendez what prepared her to lead the nation's largest philanthropic coalition and she often replies: "I know what it's like to need and get help."
She acknowledged that she was a surprise choice to become president of the Washington-based coalition called the Independent Sector: a 53-year-old Puerto Rican woman who raised a family in a tenement in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, a single mother who worked seven years as a clerk-typist to get through Brooklyn College, a virtual unknown in Washington political circles.


TLC Beatrice Intl Holdings Inc.(X.TLC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Matteau Atones For His Mistake and Steps Into the Spotlight
He had dreamed of being a part of a big moment when a Stanley Cup was at stake.
Stephane Matteau, as he grew up in Quebec, saw himself as a focal point at the most important time, with the whole province, the whole country, watching.
Except Matteau's moment last Sunday, in the first game of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference final series between the Rangers and Devils, developed into the type of scenario that can define a young career.
Matteau's pass, taken away by Devils center Bernie Nicholls, led to a goal by Bill Guerin that tied the score, 2-2, in the third period.
It contributed to New Jersey's 4-3 double-overtime victory over the Rangers.


Diet Roulette
No wonder health-conscious Americans often feel they just can't win.
After years of trying to ward off heart disease by using margarine instead of butter, they now learn that the margarine may also be lethal -- and so might other products made from solidified vegetable oils.
At least that is the contention of an analysis by Harvard researchers in the American Journal of Public Health.
The putative culprit is a type of fat, the so-called trans fatty acids, or trans fats.
These substances do not exist in nature but are created when liquid vegetable oils are partially hydrogenated, that is, heated in the presence of hydrogen, to make them solid or semisolid at room temperature.
The trans fats are found in margarine, hydrogenated vegetable shortenings, fast foods cooked in such shortening, and bakery goods such as cookies and cakes.
They impart desirable consistency and longer shelf life, at less cost than other fats.


Nuggets Come Back From 0-3 For 3-3 Tie
Nuggets 94, Jazz 91
The Denver Nuggets became the second team in National Basketball Association history to come back from a 3-0 deficit and force a seventh game, beating the Utah Jazz, 94-91, at Denver last night to even their Western Conference semifinal at 3-3.


Reforming Community School Boards
The nests of patronage and corruption in New York City's community school boards have been difficult to clean up.
Now the school system's special investigator and the teachers' union are uniting behind meaningful reforms.
Their joint effort may finally push the State Legislature to act.
Community school boards were created 25 years ago under the city's decentralization plan to run elementary and junior high schools.
Each of the 32 boards consists of nine members elected every three years.
The board members offer policy advice and hire superintendents, principals and other staff.


Burke McHugh, 77, Ex-Actor and Model
Burke McHugh, a former actor, model and restaurateur, died on May 15 at Falmouth (Mass.) Hospital.
A resident of Falmouth for nearly three decades, he was 77.
The cause was heart failure and pneumonia, said Frank Gehrecke, a friend in New York.


Art in Review
Huang Yong Ping and Chen Zhen
New Museum of Contemporary Art  583 Broadway (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Aug. 7
Huang Yong Ping and Chen Zhen, two Chinese-born artists living in Paris, have set up installations in the New Museum's large front gallery.
The works are surprisingly effective at giving shape to that awkward space and at addressing ethnic identity without resorting to polemic.


Conflicting Pressures on Clinton Mount Over China's Trade Status
As President Clinton nears a decision on whether to renew China's trading benefits, human rights groups have mounted a campaign to persuade him to revoke them, while important lawmakers in both parties have come out strongly in favor of renewing them.
In a 60-page report released today, Human Rights Watch/Asia documented nearly 500 previously unknown cases of political prisoners arrested after the 1989 crackdown in Tiananmen Square.
"Significant progress" by China in accounting for political prisoners was one human rights demand President Clinton defined a year ago as among his seven conditions for renewing most-favored nation trade benefits.


At the Bar; In a growing number of cases, defendants are portraying themselves as the victims.
The Devil-made-me-do-it excuse is probably as ancient as Old Scratch himself.
But at a time when Americans have moved from the self-absorbed Me Generation to the self-absolved Not Me Generation, the Devil is increasingly appearing in court these days as a defense with a psychological pedigree.
Just last month, Moosa Hanoukai of Los Angeles was found guilty of voluntary manslaughter, a charge reduced from murder, for beating his wife to death with a wrench.
His lawyer said Mr.
Hanoukai's wife had psychologically emasculated him -- forcing him to sleep on the floor, calling him names -- thus destroying his self-esteem, a kind of meek-mate syndrome.


Dresser Industries(DI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Lawmaker Draws the Line on Space Station Cuts
One of the biggest Congressional boosters of the proposed space station said today that he might have to abandon support of the project if Congress failed to appropriate enough money for a viable space program.
The Congressman, George E. Brown Jr., chairman of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee, said that if the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's budget was cut as significantly as a subcommittee suggested it might be, the financing would be inadequate for a balanced space program.
The House Appropriations subcommittee that is deciding next year's NASA budget is considering reducing the Clinton Administration's request by $350 million to $500 million.


The Governor's Budget Gambit
There is no known handbook to political survival in the Statehouse, but if there were, rule No. 1 might well be this: in every crisis lies an opportunity to embarrass one's foes.
So it is that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has taken to hammering the State Legislature for trying to lace the $33 billion state budget with spending euphemistically known as "members' items," "capital projects" and "legislative initiatives" but better known to the worldly wise, as Mr.
Cuomo points out, as "pork."


Navistar International Corp.(NAV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Art in Review
Fiona Rae
John Good Gallery  532 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through June 4
Despite an appearance of pending chaos, Fiona Rae's clogged, colorful abstractions are mired in self-consciousness and formula, although this may be part of the plan.
Miss Rae, who is English and is having her first solo show in New York, is something of an abstract appropriationist, part of a field of endeavor led by Gerhard Richter and Sigmar Polke and including Jonathan Lasker, Peter Halley, early Carroll Dunham and, less impressively, Fabian Marcaccio.


Clinton Spells Out Reasons He Might Use Force in Haiti
President Clinton today offered the clearest explanation yet of why his Administration is considering the use of military force in Haiti while resisting it elsewhere in the world.
"It's in our backyard," the President said at a White House news conference as he ticked off the first in a list of six reasons why he is weighing military action to oust Haiti's leaders if economic sanctions do not force them to step down.


2 Hospitals Are Accused Of Segregating by Race
New York State's top human rights official said yesterday that she was investigating charges that black and Hispanic maternity patients at Mount Sinai Medical Center and Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan were segregated by race.
The official, Commissioner Margarita Rosa of the State Division of Human Rights, announced the investigation at a legislative hearing in Manhattan at which three maternity patients accused Mount Sinai of discrimination, testifying that they were placed on a particular hospital maternity floor because of their race.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.26
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.12
4.17
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.47
4.50
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
7.01
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.23
7.26
6.99
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.12
7.52
7.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
6.02
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trail Blazers Fire Adelman
RICK ADELMAN, who coached the Portland Trail Blazers to the National Basketball Association finals twice, was fired yesterday.
The team owner, PAUL ALLEN, pledged to go after the best coach available, whether it be from the college or pro ranks.


Civilians Still Aren't Military Targets; The Gods of War
To the Editor:
The review of the sickening crimes described in "The Massacre at El Mozote" by Mark Danner (Books of The Times, May 9) arrives at the stunning conclusion that "there is no one to blame except the gods of war." The gods of war in Central America do not reside on Mount Olympus.
They are in Washington.


Stocks Up Sharply, With Dow Rising 26.09
Continuing the rally that began when the Federal Reserve raised interest rates Tuesday, the stock market rose sharply yesterday, as bond prices continued their rise.
Blue chips like International Paper and General Motors, widely held companies like AT&amp;T and Coca-Cola, technology stocks like Intel and Microsoft, which were battered for weeks, all benefited from the surge.


Company Spent $1 Million to Put Cigarettes in Movies, Memos Show
An unusual glimpse into the business of both Hollywood and tobacco companies has been afforded by internal memorandums from the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
They show that the company spent a million dollars over four years to put images of its cigarettes into movies.
The approach is called "product placement." It is legal and widely used by businesses promoting all kinds of products, but the scale and form of Brown &amp; Williamson's efforts -- the Hollywood figures accepted payment in the form of expensive gifts -- is unusual for the practice.


Coca-Cola Reaches Into Impoverished Albania
Dirt-poor Albania has hardly an economy to speak of, but as of today it has Coke.
The average wage is less than $30 a month.
Its main export is its unemployed, with an estimated 300,000 Albanians working abroad, mostly in Greece and Italy, and sending money home.


CHRONICLE
Photographs of ROD STEWART, the rock star, and his wife, RACHEL HUNTER, the model, were stolen from their Beverly Hills home and are in the possession of a celebrity photo distribution company, Mr.
Stewart charged in a lawsuit filed Wednesday in Superior Court in Los Angeles.
In the suit against the photo company, Splash News and Pictures, in Santa Monica, Calif., Mr.
Stewart is seeking $5 million in damages and a court order blocking distribution of the photos, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"Within the privacy of their home, and for their exclusive personal use and enjoyment, the Stewarts posed for and took the photographs," the suit said.
"Among other things, the photographs depict Mr. Stewart feeding his newborn child and playfully relaxing with Ms. Hunter-Stewart and depict the Stewarts in their private residence in various stages of undress."


Diner's Journal
The Genuine Herring
If you think you don't like herring, you have probably never been to the herring festival at the Grand Central Oyster Bar and Restaurant.
Forget that creamed stuff at the deli.
Don't even think about the kind that comes pickled in jars.
This is unlike any herring you have ever eaten.


Cruise Ship Operators to Plead Guilty to Dumping Oil in Sea
The operators of a 700-passenger cruise ship have agreed to plead guilty to two felony counts of intentionally dumping oil in the Atlantic off Florida and pay a $500,000 fine.
The case is the first criminal prosecution under a tough law approved by Congress after the Exxon Valdez spilled more than 10 million gallons of crude oil off Alaska in 1989.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  FORCE IN HAITI?
CLINTON EXPLAINS  Seeking to explain why he is considering using force in Haiti, President Clinton said at a news conference, "It's in our backyard." But aides said no action was imminent to oust Haiti's military leaders.
A1  VOTERS OUST MALAWI'S DICTATOR  President Hastings Kamuzu Banda, now in his 90's, conceded that he had lost Malawi's first multiparty vote.
He was the last prominent ruler in a generation of African strongmen who displaced European colonialists.
President-elect Bakili Muluzi, 51, is a businessman.
A1


Clarkstown Court Loss May Bring Trash War
Charles Holbrook says garbage has been the hallmark of his tenure as supervisor of this Rockland County town.
In nine years, he has presided over the state's forced closure of Clarktown's dump, an anxious moment when it seemed no one would take the town's garbage, the establishment of a lucrative recycling program and the curious turn of events when garbage haulers and the town began competing for trash.


Green Savors A Year's Change
In a Mets clubhouse of whiners and complainers, Manager Dallas Green was one of the loudest.
What, he often wondered a year ago, when he replaced Jeff Torborg, had he inherited?


On Stage, and Off
Too Much Barrymore?
Nicol Williamson, the actor who has played many distinguished roles but may be best known for his eccentric shenanigans on stage, was at it again yesterday.
His one-man show, "Jack: A Night on the Town With John Barrymore," opened at the Criterion Theater in London on Wednesday night, and last night, five minutes into the second performance, Mr.
Williamson suddenly faced the audience and said: "I've had enough. I'm all through. I don't think I feel like doing this anymore," whereupon he left the stage.
Audience members at first thought it was part of the show, which opens with Mr.
Williamson, as Mr.
Barrymore, announcing he has "just been fired" from the film version of "A Star Is Born." After several minutes, however, Peter Gardner, the manager of the production, came out on stage and said: "I'll go and see what's happening."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE BEST LITTLE WHOREHOUSE GOES PUBLIC," Lunt-Fontanne Theater, 205 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A sequel to the 1978 musical comedy "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas," with book by Larry L. King and Peter Masterson and music and lyrics by Carol Hall; with Dee Hoty and Scott Holmes; directed by Tommy Tune and Mr.
Masterson.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Review/Rock; Funk With Roots in the Minstrel Show
Minstrelsy is alive and louder than ever with Infectious Grooves, a band from Los Angeles that performed at the Academy on Tuesday night.
Infectious Grooves is a side project for Mike Muir and Robert Trujillo, the lead singer and bassist from Suicidal Tendencies.
Instead of Suicidal Tendencies' punk-rock and thrash, Infectious Grooves pumps out snappy, deep-bottomed funk; a few songs alternate funk and hard-rock.
The music comes directly from James Brown and from such black 1970's funk innovators as Parliament-Funkadelic, the Ohio Players and Cameo.
While hip-hop groups have sampled and recycled 1970's funk, younger white bands like the Royal Crescent Mob and the Red Hot Chili Peppers have taken up the music, and Infectious Grooves can match their technical abilities.


Executive Changes
ITT CORP., New York, promoted Richard S. Ward, its senior vice president and general counsel, to executive vice president.
MCGRAW-HILL INC., New York, appointed Frank A. Shinal senior vice president of finance and John D. Kerin senior vice president of information management.


Sell Off the Royal Mail? Is Nothing Sacred?
For Britain's Conservative Government, the post office is the final target in a 15-year crusade to put state-owned industry into private hands and unleash the forces of the market.
But selling the Royal Mail, the Tories are learning, is not like selling British Airways or British Steel.


2 Exchanges Set Uncovered Short Sales Records
Continued volatility in financial markets encouraged those betting that stock prices will fall, as short-selling activity climbed again in the month ended May 6, the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange reported yesterday.
The Big Board reported that the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered by repurchasing the shares, rose 6 percent, to a record 1.48 billion shares, surpassing the previous record 1.39 billion shares set the previous month.
Meanwhile, the Amex reported that short interest rose 1 percent, to a record 113.76 million shares, from 112.55 million in the period ended in mid-April.


INSIDE
Insurer to Offer Clinic Care
Anticipating sweeping health care changes, New Jersey's largest health insurer plans to establish a statewide system of private clinics.
Page B1.
A Long Night for the Icemen
Stephane Matteau's goal at 6 minutes 13 seconds of double overtime gave the Rangers a 3-2 victory over the New Jersey Devils.
Page B11.
Tennis Star Seeks Treatment
Jennifer Capriati, arrested Monday on a drug charge, has entered a Miami rehabilitation facility.
Page B11.


Wrist Surgery Needed for Nets' Anderson
The Nets said yesterday that Kenny Anderson, their star point guard, would undergo surgery on his left wrist next week because it was re-broken sometime during the season.
"After consultation with our medical team, it has been determined that the best course of action for Kenny and his wrist is to do the surgery," Willis Reed, the executive vice president and general manager of the Nets, said in a statement released by the team.


Observer; The Essential Mac
Mac phoned last weekend with "great news." The bank had just cut the monthly payments due on his adjustable-rate mortgage.
This was not great news, of course.
It was terrible news, but I didn't tell Mac.
The truth about his situation might drive the poor guy over the edge.
That truth is: Mac is the Federal Reserve Board's chief economic barometer.


Flyers Drop Their Coach After One Season
The Philadelphia Flyers discharged their first-year coach, TERRY SIMPSON, yesterday after missing the playoffs for a fifth straight season.
The Flyers finished with a 35-39-10 record. (AP)


No Headline
There is a real danger that if we lose the South, then that's enough to swing the balance of power.
And it would be very difficult for the party to ever reclaim it. -- NATHAN DEAL, a Democratic Representative from Georgia.  [ 10:1. ]


As Giuliani Reshuffles Agency, Head of Youth Services Resigns
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's Commissioner of Youth Services resigned last night, just hours after the Mayor announced a major reorganization of the department, removing some administrators and cutting salaries, including the Commissioner's own.
The Commissioner, the Rev.
John E. Brandon, one of Mr.
Giuliani's most prominent black supporters during the mayoral race, said his departure did not result from the sudden changes, but from his own need to resolve problems with unpaid income taxes.
The announcements came after a week of news reports about Mr.
Brandon's taxes and about the salaries and hiring practices at the department.


Job or No, Happy Mother Equals Happy Child; Why Be a Parent?
To the Editor:
Reading your Mother's Day Editorial Notebook (May 8), I find it telling that Susanna Rodell's working mother did not work in an office but in her daughter's school.
This position allowed the daughter to view the mother in a professional role but also permitted the mother to have a presence in her daughter's life with a schedule geared to vacations, snow days and class plays.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.23
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.13
4.12
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.53
4.47
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
6.94
6.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.23
7.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.20
8.12
7.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.34
5.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


2 Nominees To F.C.C. Confirmed
The Senate has confirmed Susan Ness and Rachelle B. Chong as commissioners on the Federal Communications Commission, a move that fills all five commission seats for the first time in nearly 18 months.
Ms.
Chong, 34, is a partner from the San Francisco law firm of Graham &amp; James, where she represented cellular telephone companies.
A Republican, she was nominated to fill one of the two seats on the commission that by law must go to a person who is not a member of the political party of the Administration.
From 1984 to 1986, she worked in Washington as an associate on communication issues at the law firm of Kadison, Pfaelzer, Woodard, Quinn &amp; Rossi, which is now defunct.


U.S. Fights to Stymie Iraqi Compliance
To the Editor:
Secretary of State Warren Christopher is wrong on many of the issues he addresses in "Wobbly on Iraq" (Op-Ed, April 28).
For example:


Refinancing a Veteran's Loan
Nocholas and Coleen Marcantonio bought a house in Setauket, L.I., with a fixed mortgage rate of 9.5 percent in 1991.
Like many homeowners, they though of refinancing as interest rates dropped, but put it off. the Marcantonios finally refinanced at the end of last year through a program of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The program allowed the couple to avoid virtually all upfront costs and credit requirements, like a new propoerty appraisal.
The refinancing costs were wrapped into the new loan.
"When we think of how much money were saving, we wonder why we didn't do it sooner."


Old-Liner Mead Going Off-Line
If the Mead Corporation decided to print the contents of its vast electronic data bases on paper, it would keep the company's forest products divisions busy for some time.
The computers at Mead Data Central Inc. in Dayton, Ohio, already contain more than 420 million documents, and each week the data base swells with 2.5 million more articles, including the contents of many of the nation's leading newspapers, magazines and legal publications.


Chronicle
It looked like a scene from the Academy Awards at Sarah Lawrence College's 65th commencement yesterday in Yonkers.
JOANNE WOODWARD, who won an Oscar for "The Three Faces of Eve" in 1957 and who graduated from Sarah Lawrence in 1990, presented an honorary doctorate to SIDNEY POITIER, who won an Oscar in 1963 for "Lilies of the Field" and whose daughter ANIKA POITIER graduated yesterday.


Sanitation Commissioner Is Resigning
Sanitation Commissioner Emily Lloyd, one of a handful of holdovers from the Dinkins administration, announced yesterday that she was leaving city government to become a vice president at Columbia University.
Ms.
Lloyd is leaving her department at a critical time.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has called for a reduction of nearly 1,400 jobs in the agency before July 1995, mostly through lengthening trash collection routes.
He has also proposed cutting back New York's recycling program at a time when the city is under a court order to recycle more waste.


Crimea Moves To Relax Ties With Ukraine
The regional parliament in Crimea voted today to restore its own constitution, a move that loosens its ties to Ukraine and renews tensions between Russia and Ukraine over the strategic Black Sea peninsula.
Ukrainian lawmakers, supported by President Leonid M. Kravchuk, rushed into closed session in Kiev tonight and responded by giving the Crimean parliament 10 days to bring their constitution in line with Ukraine law.


Williams Proves Double Trouble for Mets
If it had been Darren Daulton or Lenny Dykstra, it might not have been so hard to accept or hard to forget.
But Mike Williams?
That hurt.
In Mauro Gozzo's third start as a Met, two solid victories behind him, he threw a fat pitch over the plate and Williams belted it into the left-field corner for two Philadelphia runs.
The hit came in the fourth inning tonight at Veterans Stadium, but, thanks once again to Williams, it was the game-killer for Gozzo and the Mets.


Body of Infant Girl Found
The body of a newborn baby girl was found in Washington Heights yesterday morning, in an alley near an apartment building where it had apparently been thrown, the police said.
The mother of the baby was not identified yesterday, and little is known of the baby except that it was a girl and possibly Hispanic, the police said.
The Medical Examiner's Office was performing an autopsy.


All Right, Big Guy, Just Try to Get Back Up
The scene was something out of Ali-Liston, Lewiston, Me., when Muhammad Ali knocked Liston down with a phantom punch, then stood over his fallen opponent and dared him get up.
Sonny Liston never got up.
At least Patrick Ewing tried, for all the good it did him.
The Knicks, all of them, might as well have been on their backs, the way they were playing into the middle of the third quarter here last night.
They came with the notion of putting a padlock on the Chicago Stadium doors.
They went about it as if they were handcuffed.
Then came a third-quarter moment, a challenge, a show of disrespect they can take back home with them to Madison Square Garden for Game 7 of this Eastern Conference semifinal war tomorrow afternoon.


Some at Fed Wanted Rates To Rise Faster, Reports Say
Some of the Federal Reserve's top officials repeatedly pressed their colleagues this spring to raise interest rates faster than the central bank chose to do, according to summaries released today of their March meeting and a telephone conference call in April.
The disagreements show how strongly the Fed was committed this spring to higher interest rates, Wall Street economists said this evening.
"Insofar as there's division at the Fed, there are more people wanting a more aggressive stance than a less aggressive one," said Marc W. Wanshel, an economist at J. P. Morgan.


The Rangers and Devils Debate a Touchy Topic
The Devils, who do so well with the counterpunch on the ice, came back at Rangers Coach Mike Keenan today with some accusations of their own.
So this series, which has produced such superb hockey, has as its embroidery the great debate of who hit whom and why.
"It will be worse," Jacques Lemaire, the Devils' coach, predicted today with regard to the combat between the two teams, who meet here Saturday night in Game 4 with the Rangers leading two games to one.


Under Buddha's Gaze, Fellowship, Harmony and Rock-and-Roll
Shinkai Shindoh, the head priest at one of Japan's oldest and most famous Buddhist temples, says that all he knows about rock-and-roll is that it gives him a headache.
"Why do they have to wear those strange costumes and have such long hair?" said Mr.
Shindoh, whose taste in fashion leans toward clerical robes and a shaven head.
But tonight, Mr.
Shindoh found himself the host of an unusual rock concert featuring Bob Dylan, Jon Bon Jovi, Joni Mitchell and INXS among other pop notables, as well as Japanese rock musicians, the Tokyo New Philharmonic Orchestra, a traditional Japanese orchestra, taiko drummers and a chorus of about 100 chanting Buddhist monks.


Council Hears Police Budget Savings, and Says Keep Cutting
Republican and Democratic members of the City Council warned Police Commissioner William J. Bratton yesterday that he must make cuts in his proposed $2.07 billion budget or Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's overall budget would not be approved.
Mr.
Bratton told the Finance and Public Safety Committees at a joint hearing that the Mayor's budget for the police included more than $20 million in cost-saving measures intended to improve efficiency and put more police officers on the beat.


Borden Tried To Sell Itself Last Winter
The troubled food conglomerate Borden Inc. put itself up for sale last winter but found no bidders, the company's chairman said yesterday at Borden's annual meeting.
Industry analysts said the admission that no one wanted to buy the company laid bare how negatively prospective buyers viewed the chances of reviving Borden's prospects.
With its efforts to sell the entire company stymied, in December Borden tried a second tack and announced a major restructuring -- its third in three years -- to sell one-fifth of its operations by the end of 1994.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Some analysts were surprised when Mead said it wanted to sell its data base and leave the information world to return to nature by concentrating on paper, pulp and forest products.  [ Page 37. ]


George Gregory Jr., 88, Athlete And a Civic Leader in Harlem
George Gregory Jr., the nation's first black All America basketball player, who was later a New York City civil service commissioner and a civic leader in Harlem, died on May 11 at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 88.
The cause was colon cancer, said his wife, Helen Gregory.


Cash Bounties Reported at Miami
Players from the National Football League and the rap artist LUTHER CAMPBELL of 2 Live Crew paid football players at the University of Miami for making big plays in football games between 1986 and 1992.
The Miami Herald, after a two-month investigation, reported yesterday that the game-day bounties included up to $500 for a touchdown.
The report said players hid Campbell's pay-for-play offers from coaches and were usually paid at victory celebrations held at one of the performer's now-defunct nightclubs.
Campbell has denied paying players. (AP)


Macy Wins A Round In Court
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company appears to have won the upper hand, at least temporarily, in its battle to emerge from bankruptcy protection as an independent company -- and $10 million worth of gift certificates may have helped give it the advantage.
United States Bankruptcy Judge Burton R. Lifland, who is shepherding Macy through the proceedings, asked the retailer yesterday to file a plan of reorganization as soon as possible, giving the company at least a brief respite in its efforts to fend off an unwanted merger with Federated Department Stores Inc.


Man Charged in Slaying of 2 Prominent Maryland Lawyers
An unemployed handyman with a record of committing burglaries was charged by the authorities in Maryland today with two counts of first-degree murder in the shooting deaths of two prominent Washington lawyers.
Scotland E. Williams of Arnold, Md., was arrested by the police on Thursday night at his home after he had used a bank card that had belonged to one of the victims, Jose Enrique Trias, 49, the chief counsel for the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Chevy Chase, Md.


Sister Ellen Lawlor, Health Executive, 70
Sister Ellen Lawlor, president of the Mercycare Corporation, which is operated by the Religious Sisters of Mercy, died on Monday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
Sister Lawlor, who lived in Albany, was 70.
The cause was cancer, said an announcement by her order.


Sanitation Chief Quits
New York City's Sanitation Commissioner, Emily Lloyd, announced that she would become a Columbia University vice president.
Page 25


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the diagnosis and treatment of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' cancer of the lymph system misstated the month it was diagnosed in some copies.
It was January, not February.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Clinton Administration's policy on Haiti incorrectly described a remark by President Clinton about India, whose Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, was visiting the White House.
Mr.
Clinton said India was the world's largest democracy, not the second largest.


Classical Music in Review
Kiri Te Kanawa  Soprano Avery Fisher Hall
Beauty of sound and physical bearing are significant categories in any job description for the operatic diva.
Kiri Te Kanawa's recital on Wednesday night made much of both, indeed, leaned heavily on them at times when other requirements were less forthcoming.
The soprano from New Zealand has perfected a stage persona that mixes dignity with shy self-deprecation.
At 50, Miss Te Kanawa has a voice that still works beautifully, easing through music from Handel's "Giulio Cesare in Egitto" and "Amadigi di Gaula" with a technique that flowed like thick, smooth cream.


Interest Rates Move Up On Weakness in Dollar
Interest rates rose yesterday, as the dollar's weakness and rising commodity prices continued to put pressure on the prices of Treasury issues.
The Treasury's 30-year bond fell 26/32 yesterday, to 8711/32 , while its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 7.30 percent, from 7.23 percent on Thursday.


Preakness Will Have Sun But It Will Not Have Stars
It wasn't just the overcast sky, or the gloom and rain of the last week.
It wasn't the absence of superstar quality on the marquee at the Pimlico Race Course the day before the big race.
And it wasn't the prospect that no horse might sweep the Triple Crown for the 15th year in a row.
But a certain lack of zest seemed to be surrounding the 119th Preakness Stakes today.
It will be run Saturday at a mile and three-sixteenths with a field of 10 colts and a purse of $688,600, and with Go for Gin the 2-1 favorite two weeks after he won the Kentucky Derby.
And the forecast called for sunny skies at last with the temperature reaching 70 or so.


Velarde Creates His Own Excitement
The first pitch was still four hours away as Randy Velarde discussed momentum and motivation and how the Yankees must approach a crucial three-game series with the Baltimore Orioles.
Candid and confident, Velarde conceded that it is occasionally difficult to be enthusiastic about every game.
How difficult could it be?
The first-place Yankees had watched their lead shrink after two straight losses in Minnesota and needed stellar efforts against an important divisional foe.
Still, this is what Velarde uttered about Jamie Moyer, Baltimore's starting pitcher last night.


18 Stowaways Sent to Prison With U.S. Aid
Eighteen Romanian stowaways, who were being held in chains at a hotel here by a shipping company, have been moved to a county prison in Pennsylvania, after the Immigration and Naturalization Service intervened.
Immigration officials emphasized that their role in the case, which they termed "extraordinary," did not represent a change in Federal policy.
That policy requires transportation companies to detain foreign stowaways, who arrive on their ships and planes, until their legal proceedings are finished.
The Government does not monitor such detention, prompting concerns among advocates for immigrants over the potential for abuse.


4 Killed in New Jersey Turnpike Accident


Job or No, Happy Mother Equals Happy Child
To the Editor:
Two groups of mothers are on the defensive today: Full-time mothers who worry about their lapsed careers and full-time employees who worry about their children.
Discourse between them has become virtually impossible.
Mothers in each group have a troubling tendency to justify their child care decisions by making sweeping attacks on the other group.


Checking Up on Investment Sponsors
IT was the kind of bombshell an investor dreads: Federal prosecutors said last week that a California man had bilked 7,000 people of as much as $130 million in a financial scheme involving low-income housing projects.
Each investor faces not only the possible loss of principal, but also a possible bill for back taxes and interest because the investments were supposed to be tax shelters.


A Shuttle Diplomat
Secretary of State Warren Christopher returned from his Middle East trip this week able to boast about one major achievement: his success in engaging Syria and Israel in serious, detailed, though indirect peace negotiations.
But he readily admits that getting to "yes" could be a struggle.
Because of differences over sensitive issues like how fast Israel should withdraw from the Golan Heights, it is likely to take at least several months, and perhaps far longer, for the two countries to arrive at any peace settlement.


Public &amp; Private; An Era Ends
There were two people in the back of the open limousine, a man and a woman, and then there was a muffled sound like firecrackers and the man slumped.
And she came out of her seat and onto the back of the car, on her hands, on her knees, on some desperate journey never fully understood, and on film she did it again and again and again, through the decades, until you could close your eyes and see her, on her hands, on her knees.
Later, on the plane, when she stood next to the man who would take her husband's place, who would take the house where she had lived with her children, there was blood on the skirt of her suit, red faded to brown on pink.
Her husband had symbolized hope and vigor, and his death seemed like the end of an era.
But the era truly ended Thursday when she died, the embodiment of survival.


NEW YORK SHIFTING FOCUS OF WELFARE TO JOB PLACEMENT
Having rejected many of the punitive measures embraced by other states, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo says New York State is trying to reduce welfare dependency by changing welfare offices into places that push applicants to find work instead of simply processing checks.
Governor Cuomo's "Jobs First" strategy, announced in an election year when his opponents are already making welfare a major issue, would direct welfare applicants into job training and job searches even before they are approved for welfare benefits.


Job or No, Happy Mother Equals Happy Child; The Leach Approach
To the Editor:
Both Susanna Rodell's Mother's Day Editorial Notebook and the same day's news article on the changing image of American mothers chide Penelope Leach for making mothers feel guilty about going to work.
That's not what Ms.
Leach is about.


Coliseum Site Appraised at Less Than Developer's Offered Figure
A preliminary appraisal of the New York Coliseum site has found that it is worth substantially less than what Mortimer B. Zuckerman has offered to pay, a finding the Giuliani administration says bolsters its assertion that the developer's $80 million price for the site is fair.
John S. Dyson, Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, told a City Council subcommittee that an appaiser hired by the city last month put a tentative value of $57.5 million on the development rights to the site.
That figure is $22.5 million less than what Mr.
Zuckerman has agreed to pay in recent negotiations.
The appraisal is based on the development of an office building on the site between 900,000 and one million square feet in size with a small retail component.


Body of Missing 3-Year-Old Is Found
The body of a missing 3-year-old girl was discovered yesterday in the basement of the apartment building in Newark where she had been visiting relatives when she vanished last week, the police in Newark said.
The discovery of Shanelle Davis's body, which was stuffed inside a bag and left near a stairwell, came about 2 P.M. after investigators had returned to the building at 42 Tillinghast Street to question residents.


World Cup to Expand to 32 Teams in '98
FIFA, world soccer's governing body, decided yesterday in Zurich to increase to 32 the number of teams in the 1998 World Cup in France.
What regions get extra berths will be decided later this year, said FIFA's general secretary, JOSEPH BLATTER. (AP)


Citing Progress, U.S. Plans New Talks With North Korea
Deciding that North Korea has met key United States demands on inspection of its nuclear program, the Clinton Administration decided today to resume high-level talks with the North Koreans, American officials said.
The decision was made at a White House meeting of top Administration officials this afternoon against a backdrop of rising concerns about nuclear efforts, officials said.


Dismantle Armageddon
On May 30, the United States and Russia will no longer aim their strategic missiles at each other.
A missile fired accidentally and flying under its own normal motor power and guidance would fall short of its cold-war target, landing instead in the Arctic Ocean.
But the risk of such an accidental launch is low compared to other safety hazards.
And this symbolic agreement does nothing to alleviate them.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  FIRST ISRAELIS KILLED IN GAZA  Islamic militants killed two Israeli soldiers at a border crossing in the Gaza Strip.
It was the first lethal attack on Israelis in Gaza since Palestinian self-rule went into full effect, and many are asking what -- if anything -- the Palestinian police will do to catch the killers.  1  News analysis: The long road to an Israeli-Syrian settlement.  4  A RIVER OF RWANDAN DEATH  As many as 10,000 bodies from Rwanda's massacres have washed down the Kagera River into Lake Victoria in Uganda in the last weeks, creating an acute health hazard, a Ugandan official says.
In some areas, as many as 100 bodies an hour are washing ashore.  1  MEXICAN MURDER CASE UNRAVELING  Nearly two months after Mexico's leading presidential candidate was shot to death in Tijuana, prosecutors still assert that a factory worker did not act alone.
But evidence against the six men accused of complicity remains scant.  3  U.S.
TO OPEN NORTH KOREA TALKS  The Clinton Administration has decided to open its first high-level talks with North Korea, officials said.
An Administration official said inspectors had determined that North Korea has not diverted any of the fuel removed from a reactor for nuclear weapons purposes.  1  NATO SEEKS ARMS BAN IN TUZLA  At a time when NATO and the United Nations are at odds over the use of force in Bosnia, a top NATO commander is calling for a weapons-free zone around the northern city of Tuzla.
He cited a massing of heavy weapons there.  7  ILL RUSSIANS BLAME ARMS PLANT  Volsk Journal: Residents of a Volga River town say they need not look far for the cause of a rise in the local cancer rate and in the number of stillbirths.
Environmentalists say the army has been secretly destroying stores of chemical weapons in Shikhany, just four miles away.  4  CRIMEA STRIKES AUTONOMY BLOW  The regional parliament in Crimea voted to restore its own constitution.
George Gregory Jr., athlete and a civic leader in Harlem.
Harry W. Fowler, chairman of an investment company.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
Malawi, freed from its liberator.
Curing the handgun epidemic.
Toying with courtroom cameras.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: An era ends.
Russell Baker: The essential Mac.
Philip Booth: Thanksgiving 1963.
Bruce G. Blair and Henry W. Kendall: Dismantle Armageddon.
James Thurber: My insanity defense.
Bridge 16 Chronicle 22 Crossword 14


Jaeger Sympathizes With Capriati
ANDREA JAEGER can identify with JENNIFER CAPRIATI.
She, too, was a teen-age tennis prodigy whose talent took her near the top of the tennis world and to all the loneliness that goes with it.
"You have to make kids feel special," said Jaeger, who was at the New York City Health and Racquet Club on Wall Street yesterday to give six children with facial disfigurements a tennis clinic.
Jaeger, now 28, founded the nonprofit Kids' Stuff Foundation and works with groups like the National Foundation for Facial Reconstruction to give children with health problems a chance to have fun.
"Maybe that's what happened with Jennifer -- she didn't feel special any place other than the tennis court."


Stocks Mixed on Fears Of a 5th Rate Increase
Stock prices were mixed yesterday as the market focused on the dollar's sharp decline against the German mark, which raised questions about whether the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates for a fifth time this year.
Adding another shiver of anxiety to the markets yesterday was a surge in commodities prices, which could point to possible inflation.
The Commodities Research Bureau's futures price index, which has been rising this week, hit a new high for 1994 yesterday.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's severance offers for city workers misstated the amounts given to workers who left their jobs.
The offers ranged from $3,500 or two weeks pay for newly hired workers to $15,000 for employees with 30 or more years of service; they did not range up to $25,000 or a year's pay.


Editors' Note
A front-page article on May 7 reported that internal documents showed evidence of a debate among tobacco industry executives in 1963 on whether to disclose what they knew about the hazards of cigarettes.
While the documents do provide evidence of such a debate, several paragraphs of the article, including one paragraph on the front page, described part of one official's report incorrectly.


South Africa's Test Now: Grass-Roots Democracy
For years the white liberal heart of this Scarsdale-plush suburb of Johannesburg was so struck by the plight of blacks under apartheid that a chair, empty and black-shrouded, was kept at a symbolic place of honor here at City Council meetings, in sympathy for the powerless.
But that chair and more, perhaps a majority of them, will soon be occupied by the first freely elected black council members in a newly welded municipality of blacks and whites, haves and have-nots, the hopeful and -- on this side of the old race-dividing freeway -- the increasingly wary.


Paul Lenti Journalist, 45
Paul Lenti, a theatrical reporter and critic who translated "Objects of Desire, Conversations With Luis Bunuel," died on Wednesday at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Lenti, who lived in Manhattan, was 45.
The cause was complications following heart surgery, said Thomas Brown, a friend.


Democrats Fear That South Will Desert Them for G.O.P in House Races
The South is not about to secede again, but it is getting closer and closer to deserting the Democratic Party.
In an election year when Democrats are bracing for significant losses nationwide, nowhere are they more vulnerable than around the South, where Republicans have made inroads for years.


Some Municipals Offer Double-Digit Returns
THE battering of the municipal bond market has obscured some very good news for investors.
Buyers of intermediate-term issues in high-tax states like New York and California may now get after-tax returns of more than 10 percent a year.
Given the uncertainty in the financial markets, these fixed returns look irresistible to some taxpayers.
"People who have been sitting on the sidelines waiting for yields to increase are moving into the market," said George D. Friedlander, managing director and retail fixed-income strategist for Smith Barney Shearson.


Schott Apologizes. Dodgers Rub It In.
MARGE SCHOTT apologized yesterday for her latest gaffe, saying she's only trying to uphold baseball tradition by banning earrings for Cincinnati Reds players.
She also got a taste of another baseball tradition last night -- practical jokes.
The Los Angeles Dodgers donned earrings before their game in Cincinnati to have fun with Schott's woes.
The Reds owner told a gathering of Ohio county treasurers Wednesday that she doesn't allow her players to wear earrings because "only fruits wear earrings." (AP)


Goldman Given Role in South Africa
In preparation for its re-entry into the international financial community, South Africa's new Government announced yesterday that it had hired Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as an adviser in obtaining an international credit rating.
The announcement was made in Johannesburg by Derek Keys, the Finance Minister, and came a little more than a month before President Nelson Mandela's Government is scheduled to present its first budget.


G.M. Outlines Its Asian Strategy to Shareholders
The General Motors Corporation displayed its strategy today for taking advantage of rapidly expanding Asian markets by building far more cars and trucks there, especially in China.
Company executives said that they would begin production in India and Indonesia by the end of the year, and that they were in final negotiations to make mini-vans and subcompact cars in China.
These plans, set forth at the company's annual meeting, held here today, mark G.M.'s latest effort to expand its vastly profitable foreign operations even as its North American automotive units pursue the far more modest goal of showing a net profit this year after repeated losses.


Reviews/Pop; Rocking But True To the Blues
The blues guitarist Buddy Guy has had periodic career resurgences.
He's in the middle of one right now, appealing to a rock audience that helped sell out two shows at Irving Plaza on Thursday night.
Backed by G. E. Smith and his band, minor celebrities from their job on "Saturday Night Live," Mr.
Guy was being taped for the inevitable live album that accompanies a musician when he is released from the blues circuit.
The set was as erratic as he is, wildly brilliant at some moments, unbalanced at others.
Mr.
Guy brought two things to the show: a sense of play, or wit, and a sound that, as a product of blues culture, is almost lost.
The play came out in his abrupt transitions, in which he played in one register, then suddenly jumped into the next, as if the needle on a record had skipped.
And it came in his tricks, rubbing the strings with his sleeve or bending notes a handful of different ways or pulling the strings and letting them snap, all creating a vocabulary of industrial sounds: whooshing and grinding and pounding.
Mr.
Guy was sculpturing aural metal, having his guitar and its electricity move beyond notes into the realm of sound.
And he clearly took pleasure in it.


Executive Changes
COCA-COLA BOTTLING CO., Charlotte, N.C., named J. Frank Harrison 3d vice chairman and chief executive.
HONDA OF AMERICA MANUFACTURING INC., Marysville, Ohio, a unit of the Honda Motor Co., appointed Takeshi Yamada president.
REPUBLIC NEW YORK CORP., named Peter J. Mansbach chairman of the executive committee and a director of Republic National Bank of New York.


Kovalev Is Scarred, and Perhaps a Playoff Series Is Too
As a National Hockey League vice president, Brian Burke, prepared to review a tape of the Rangers-Devils playoff game to further study the cross-check the Devils' Bernie Nicholls delivered on the Rangers' Aleksei Kovalev Thursday night, Kovalev was wearing his body of evidence from the neck up.
Kovalev had a slit not far from his left eye, a series of small red marks on the left side of his neck, and a welt and cut on his left cheek.
They were reminders of a moment that has overshadowed the superb goaltending and double-overtime drama of the third game in a series between the two finest teams in the league.


Thousands of Rwanda Dead Wash Down to Lake Victoria
As many as 10,000 bodies from Rwanda's massacres have washed down the Kagera River into Lake Victoria in Uganda in the last few weeks, creating an acute health hazard, a senior Ugandan official says.
Cloaking the countryside with the stench of death, the bodies -- as many as 100 an hour -- are being washed ashore in the Rakai district of southern Uganda or onto islands in Lake Victoria and have been seen as far north as Entebbe.


Classical Music in Review
St. Bartholomew's Choir  St. Bartholomew's Church
A diverse collection of styles was represented in James Litton's concise survey of contemporary American sacred music on Wednesday evening, yet in virtually all the works, the formal and the vernacular mingled freely.
Leonard Bernstein's fetching tunefulness and overt theatricality pervade his "Chichester Psalms," yet there is also a devotional current in Bernstein's Hebrew text setting.
William Duckworth, in "Southern Harmony," and Samuel Barber, in "Wondrous Love: Variations on a Shape-Note Hymn," apply advanced (but not ostentatious) compositional adornments to a robust Southern hymn style.
And if the three hymn and psalm settings by Ned Rorem were more conventionally formal, their popular appeal is in their undaunting harmonies and pure melodic beauty.


Clinton Urges Young to Reject Pessimism
President Clinton today urged a troubled new generation of American adults to overcome pessimism and embrace an obligation to community that he portrayed as crucial to the nation's future.
In his message, an address at the University of California at Los Angeles, Mr.
Clinton served striking notice of his intent to use the Presidency to preach not just about what government should do, but also what Americans must do.


Trail Blazers Casting Covetous Clances at Daly
The Portland Trail Blazers are set to make a push to hire Nets Coach Chuck Daly as the team's general manager and may attempt to get permission from the Nets organization to contact him sometime next week, according to several people in the National Basketball Association.
Daly has one year left on his contract, and should Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager, not allow him to talk to the Trail Blazers, that would be the end of it.


Collecting Child Support. A special report.; Private Firms Help Single Parents Get What's Due
Casey Hoffman knows plenty about the difficulties of enforcing child-support orders.
He used to run Texas's child-support office, and in 1990, the year he left that job, his program was rated the most improved in the nation; indeed, Mr.
Hoffman was named the outstanding child-support manager of the year.


Classical Music in Review
Don Hulbert  Flutist Merkin Concert Hall
Along with impressive artistry, Don Hulbert showed fine generosity of spirit on Wednesday evening, in effect presenting two recitals.
He played works of Jacques Hotteterre, C. P. E. Bach and J. S. Bach on Baroque flute in the first half, and competition pieces by Robert Dick, George Enescu, Olivier Messiaen and Henri Dutilleux in the second, adding an encore by Ravel.
He rounded up first-rate collaborators, wrote informative program notes and probably stayed to sweep up afterward.


INSIDE
Mexico Murder Inquiry Stalls
Prosecutors still assert that a worker who confessed to shooting a presidential candidate in Tijuana did not act alone.
But documents indicate that evidence against the six others accused of complicity is thin.
Page 3.
Democratic Peril in South
Many Democratic incumbents, especially members of the House, are vulnerable in the South.
Party leaders fear they will lose their edge on many divisive issues.
Page 10.
Bulls Tie the Series
Upset that the Knicks beat them in Game 5, the Chicago Bulls took no chances last night.
They won handily, 93-79, to set up a decisive Game 7 in New York on Sunday.
Page 29.


Q. &amp; A.
I.R.A.'s and Distributions  Q. As beneficiaries of my mother's individual retirement account, my siblings and I decided after she died to let it build tax-deferred interest and take distributions over our life expectancies.
Is the rate of disbursement based on the life expectancy of the oldest sibling?
Some funds have placed my share in an I.R.A. rollover account in my name.
Is this correct?
PETER BENINATO, Portland, Ore.
A.
The life expectancy is based on the oldest child.
But the mutual fund should not have established a rollover account for you, said Helmut Soika, vice president and director of the retirement plans department at Gruntal &amp; Company.
"Only a spouse has the option of rolling over the I.R.A. assets of a decedent into his or her own I.R.A.," he explained.
"The mutual fund probably didn't ask the child to establish status."


For Graduation Speakers, Colleges Are Turning to the Stars of TV News
From Connie Chung and Ted Koppel to Cokie Roberts and Andy Rooney, television personalities -- most from the network news divisions -- are the speakers of choice at many college commencements this year.
"Television newscasters are role models for our students," said Dale Rogers Marshall, the president of Wheaton College, a small liberal arts school in Norton, Mass., who signed Ms.
Chung, co-anchor of the "CBS Evening News," to speak today.
"It says something about the centrality of the media in our time."


Charged-Up Bulls Force Knicks to Go the Distance
There was nothing positive for the Knicks to take from tonight's loss, except that they have another chance at the Chicago Bulls on Sunday in Game 7.
Outplayed, outhustled, and at times embarrassed, the Knicks were worked over in Game 6 by the Bulls tonight, 93-79, at Chicago Stadium, tying their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series at 3-3.
This emotional series will be decided Sunday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, a contest that will result either in the Bulls being dethroned as three-time National Basketball Association champions, or in the Knicks being eliminated by Chicago for the fifth time in six seasons.


Corrections
An obituary in some editions on May 8 about the art critic Clement Greenberg misstated the name of a magazine that published cultural essays he wrote while a customs clerk.
It was the Partisan Review.
The article also misspelled the name of a French art critic.
He was Felix Feneon.


An Old Veteran Gets an Overhaul


Piper Will Invest in Its Own Slipping Fund
In a highly unusual move, the Piper Jaffrey Companies said yesterday that it would invest at least $10 million, and perhaps as much as $25 million, in a bond mutual fund it managed that had lost nearly a quarter of its value this year.
The firm said the move was not a bailout in that the new money represented a purchase of shares of Piper Jaffrey Institutional Government Income Portfolio and would not increase the value of existing shares.
Instead, it said, it is meant as a gesture of reassurance to investors.


Review/Ballet; Leap Across the Firmament
Inspiration, otherwise known as craft and imagination, struck like lightning during the two premieres that the New York City Ballet presented on Thursday night.
The program at the New York State Theater served as both the company's annual spring gala and as the second bill in its new festival, the Diamond Project; the big guns, obviously, were reserved for this special evening.
Peter Martins, the City Ballet's artistic director, has created one of his best works in recent years with his premiere, "Mozart Piano Concerto." The same could be said of Ulysses Dove, who has become known along a very different dance circuit, beginning with his work for Alvin Ailey and more recently for the Paris Opera Ballet and American Ballet Theater.


Lehman in Control With 2-Stroke Lead
Tom Lehman will be the first to tell you that a little fame is not at all a bad thing.
Since his second-place finish at this year's Masters vaulted him from relative obscurity to semi-celebrity, he has had a taste of the heady life of autograph requests, people peeking at him over menus in restaurants and strangers stopping him in airports to wish him well.
"All of that's been nice," he said.
"I've appreciated it. But what I'd really like is to win a tournament."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Optioned Mike Trombley, pitcher, to Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Dave Stevens, pitcher, from Salt Lake City.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Steve Howe, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Mark Hutton, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Keith Mitchell, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Jerry Willard, catcher, outright to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Extended the contract of Cito Gaston, manager, through the 1996 season.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed Kevin McReynolds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jim Lindeman, outfielder, from Norfolk of the International League.
Designated Dave Telgheder, pitcher, for assignment.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Recalled Bobby Munoz, pitcher, from Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Assigned Jeff Juden, pitcher, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Activated Craig Shipley, infielder, and Tim Mauser, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Dave Staton, first baseman, to Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League and Jose Martinez, pitcher, to Wichita of the Texas League.
Basketball National Basketball Association  DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Named Brad Davis assistant coach.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Talk Sense, Play Trash
DAVID STERN had better hurry up with his Era of the Clean Mouth and the Pacifist Hands.
The Knicks went into the sixth game last night actually speaking with professional respect for the Bulls, but they promptly returned to their thuggish ways.
They started the shoving and tripping that apparently comes naturally to them -- or has been drilled into them -- but they couldn't stop the home team from rolling all over them, 93-79, and sending this unlovely but compelling series into its seventh and final game in the Garden tomorrow afternoon.


Gilbert Richards, 78, Transport Executive
Gilbert F. Richards, who retired in 1980 as chairman of the Budd Company, a manufacturer of transportation equipment based in Troy, Mich., died on Wednesday at his home in Alamos, Sonora, Mexico.
Mr.
Richards, a former resident of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., was 78.
He died of a stroke he suffered in December, the company said.


Review/Television; Amusingly Eccentric British Royal Rituals
Public television's enduring love affair with British nobs finds expression again tonight on "Days of Majesty," a colorful two-hour tour of royal ceremonies, some of ancient lineage.
Queen Elizabeth II is much seen but little heard as the program focuses on the people who make the regal world go round.
This highly specialized and rather peculiar labor force may not contribute much to British productivity, but it does bring in the tourists.
On display are:


G.O.P. Race For Governor Is Narrowed
After saying for weeks that he was about to announce his gubernatorial candidacy, J. Patrick Barrett, a Syracuse businessman, said today that he would not vie for the nomination at the state Republican convention next week.
Mr.
Barrett, a former chairman of the state Republican committee and a former chief executive officer of Avis, said in a statement that he realized he could not win the support of 25 percent of the delegates to the convention.
That is the threshold needed to get on the ballot for the Sept. 13 primary.


European Funds Gain in Dismal Period
Almost no one has made money in mutual funds in 1994.
Among the 19 categories of stock funds tracked by Morningstar Inc., the sole gainer is the European group, which has been helped by a weaker dollar and falling German interest rates.
Most telling is the lack of a theme in 1994.
If domestic interest rates are rising because of inflation fears, why is gold, supposedly a hedge, the year's biggest loser so far?


Chronicle
ANNA AYALA, an East Harlem community leader, had been looking forward for months to receiving the Environmental Action Coalition's Green Star Award from ROBERT F. KENNEDY JR., an environmental lawyer.
"His father came to my humble home in 1960 when he was campaigning for his brother," Mrs.
Ayala said yesterday.
"My seven children met him, and we were photographed together."


Mexico's Economy Grows Ever So Slightly
After intense political and social pressure to reverse the last two consecutive quarters without growth, the Mexican economy managed to eke out a five-tenths of 1 percent increase in its gross national product in the first quarter of 1994.
Mexican Treasury officials offered the slim growth figures on Thursday night as proof that an economic recovery had begun.
Their openness was in sharp contrast to their hesitation to disclose the negative figures from the end of last year that officially put Mexico into a recession.


At a New York High School, Chernobyl Is a Continuing Course
Eight years ago, a frightened group of Ramapo Senior High School students returned early from a trip to the Soviet Union after the Chernobyl nuclear power plant explosion in Ukraine on April 25, 1986.
Since then the school here, whose popular Russian student exchange program was established long before the accident, has devoted itself to helping the Belarussians who, because of the wind that blew the radioactive cloud from Ukraine, are believed to have suffered the worst consequences of the explosion.


A Cinema Century
To the Editor:
Your article on the symposium on and screening of "The Birth of a Nation" at the Library of Congress April 25 notes that the film was excluded from our fall 1993 survey of early films (arts pages, April 27).
The showing was simply postponed to coincide with the symposium.
The screening was arranged at the Kennedy Center to accommodate a large audience; our Mary Pickford Theater seats only 64.


Mexico Inquiry Into Candidate's Killing Falters
Nearly two months after the man expected to become Mexico's next president was shot to death as he left a campaign rally here, the Government's case against his accused killers has begun to unravel.
Prosecutors still assert that the 23-year-old factory worker who confessed to shooting the governing party candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, did not act alone.
At least six other men helped to trap Mr.
Colosio for his killer, they said, identifying four of the purported accomplices as members of a security team assembled by the local branch of the governing party.


Malawi, Freed From Its Liberator
Few things have better become President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi, currently Africa's longest-serving leader, than the way he is to leave office.
After losing a free and fair election on Tuesday, he will (barring surprises) hand over power to a competent and democratically chosen successor, Bakili Muluzi.
It is an example that will, regrettably, almost surely be ignored by other third-world liberators-for-life, most especially Cuba's Fidel Castro, North Korea's Kim Il Sung and Zaire's Mobutu Sese Seko.
Most of Malawi's eight million people were not even alive when the former British colony, which was then called Nyasaland, attained independence in 1964.
A physician given to vehement oratory, Dr.
Banda led Malawi's liberation struggle and served as its first Prime Minister.
In what became a pattern in post-colonial Africa, he then promoted himself to President, instituted one-party rule and in 1971 enthroned himself President-for-life.
And as elsewhere, a cult of personality flourished and political dissenters were silenced, jailed or killed by security police.


Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis
By now the image is burned into the American memory: a young woman in widow's weeds standing between two small children.
One of them, a little boy who is not yet 3 years old, has his hand raised to his forehead in salute.
He is honoring, of course, his father's coffin, which, borne on a caisson and followed by a riderless horse, is on its way to Arlington National Cemetery.
There are other photographs, thousands of them, and this week many of them showed up in newspapers and on television.
They will continue to do so for years.
Because the young woman in widow's weeds, who became the 64-year-old grandmother who died on Thursday, had an extraordinary hold on the American public.
Other Presidential wives have captured the nation's respect; a few have captured its love.
But Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis did something else as well: she captured its imagination.


Executive Close to John Gotti Admits Lying to a Grand Jury
To those who ask him about his relationship with the mobster John Gotti, Lewis Kasman, a wealthy young executive in the garment district, says with intensity, "He's like a father to me." And Mr.
Gotti, the imprisoned head of the Gambino crime family, is reported to regard Mr.
Kasman, nearly two decades his junior, as a son.
But in 1990, when Mr.
Kasman appeared before a grand jury investigating the mob kingpin, he insisted that despite his deep 15-year personal relationship with Mr.
Gotti, he knew of the term "Gambino organized-crime family" and other phrases referring to the Mafia only because he had seen them in the newspapers or heard them broadcast.


Migrant Oasis; Central American Day Laborers Are Drawn to a Suburb
Journeying across nations in search of work, Lazaro Chinchilla arrived here about a month ago to share a run-down bungalow with seven other men in a rugged settlement of migrants like himself.
"Hunger brought us here," Mr.
Chinchilla, an immigrant from Guatemala, said the other day as he wandered along one of the dusty roads that lace the settlement, called El Petencito by its residents.
"But it feels like we have come to the edge of the earth."


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP, Newark, raised its stake in Baltimore Bancorp, Baltimore, to 17.5 percent and now holds 3.5 million shares.
KEYCORP, Albany, announced that its board had approved the repurchase of up to two million of Keycorp's 241.9 million common shares outstanding.


Some Original Beatniks On a Trip To the Past
The audience at Town Hall on Thursday night punctuated the performance by applauding, laughing and shouting requests.
There wasn't a rock band on stage, though, just a jovially disheveled, white-maned, 64-year-old poet, Gregory Corso.
He was part of an all-star poetry reading connected with "The Beat Generation," a conference at New York University celebrating 50 years of Beat literature and ideas.
With readings by Mr.
Neither the formal setting nor the academic trappings could extinguish the Beats' vitality, ambition and sheer spunk.


When Play And Work Are One
IF any of the children who went on class trips to the Hayden Planetarium during the last three days had darted past no-admittance signs to peer into the Guggenheim Space Theater, they would have seen Lou Boselli and three French technicians working hard to build a half-scale model of an Apollo moon landing console entirely out of Erector set parts.
Mr.
Boselli, who is 57 years old and is Erector's master builder, was supervising the operation, checking his own plans and the actual Grumman blueprints for the moon voyage vehicles: the pod that took Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin to the lunar surface on July 20, 1969, the module that lifted the astronauts back to their orbiting rocket, and the jeeplike rover used on later moon missions.


Corrections
Two articles on April 13 about the award of a Pulitzer Prize to Edward Albee for his play "Three Tall Women" and an article on April 30 about Myra Carter, a star of the play, misidentified the Viennese theater where the work had its premiere.
It was Vienna's English Theater, not the American Theater.


Hiring Welfare Recipients and Making Them Management
Isabel Cruz's life used to revolve around the 7th and 27th day of each month.
Those were the days the welfare checks came.
Then her caseworker handed her a flier from a South Bronx company whose business is attending to the elderly and ill in their own homes.
After 11 years on public assistance, Miss Cruz, 34, got a job.
After four years with the company, she is running for its board.


NATO Commander Askes Arms-Free Zone at Bosnia City
At a time when NATO and the United Nations are at odds over the use of force in Bosnia, the top NATO commander with responsibility for Bosnia is calling for a weapons-free zone around the northern city of Tuzla, citing a massing of heavy weapons there.
In a confidential letter on Thursday,Adm.
Leighton W. Smith Jr., the American Navy officer who commands NATO's southern flank, recommended the move to Gen.
Bertrand de Lapresle, the United Nations commander in the Balkans.


Bridge
The world's most successful charity game, and apparently the longest-running, hit the jackpot again Thursday evening.
Competing at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, in the 31st annual U.J.A.-Federation game, a gathering of experts and amateurs, playing mainly in a Pro-Am format, raised more than $50,000 for charities in this country and Israel.
The top finishers were: 1st, Diana Schuld of Glen Head, L.I., and Edith Sacks of Manhattan, 151.65 match points (69 percent); 2d, Amy Treitel and Harry Apfel, both of Manhattan, 147.65; 3d, Madeline Bloom of Brookville, L.I., and Martin Hoffman of Lauderhill, Fla., 147.55; 4th, Laury Vogel and Gail Greenberg, both of Manhattan, 146.


Art Blooms in New York City's Sculpture Garden


Charles Hoens, 72, Partner in Law Firm
Charles H. Hoens Jr., a law partner in the firm of Lum, Hoens, Conant, Danzis &amp; Kleinberg in Roseland, N.J., died on Monday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 72 and lived in Basking Ridge.
He suffered a brief illness, said a spokesman for Gallaway &amp; Crane Funeral Home.


Onassis Burial To Be Monday At Arlington
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis will be buried on Monday at Arlington National Cemetery beside the body of President John F. Kennedy, who she decided 31 years ago should be buried there because, she said, he belonged to the people.
The burial, which will be private, will be preceded by a private service on Monday morning at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan.


Classical Music in Review
Musicians Emergency Fund Showcase Concert  Alice Tully Hall
From her first, burly bow stroke in Haydn's C-major Cello Concerto on Tuesday evening, Wendy Warner made it clear that she was not a typical young string virtuoso, interested chiefly in a pure tone, however small.
Not that her intonation faltered often, although she did slip at several crucial junctures for the best of reasons: she did not play safe.


Two Israeli Soldiers Are Killed In Gaza Strip by Arab Militants
Islamic radicals killed two Israeli soldiers at a border crossing today, the first lethal attack on Israelis in the Gaza Strip since Palestinian self-rule went into full effect, and also the first important test for the new Palestinian police force here.
In a separate incident, two Israelis riding a garbage truck were shot and wounded near the Jewish settlement of Morag, in the southern part of the Gaza Strip.


Classical Music in Review
Jeffrey Kahane Pianist  Walter Reade Theater
Jeffrey Kahane did not hesitate to be interpretively aggressive on Monday evening when he took on two giants of the German Romantic piano repertory: Schubert's Sonata in A (D. 959) and Schumann's Fantasy in C. In the Andantino of the Schubert, he laid out the first section in dry, clipped tones before throwing himself vehemently into the mad neo-Baroque runs and trills of the middle section.
In the Schumann, he seemed to undercut the great forward surge of the opening measures deliberately, with brusque articulations in the left hand.


Viacom Has Quarterly Loss After Taking Big Write-Offs
Viacom Inc. yesterday reported a loss for the first quarter of 1994 of $431.6 million, compared with a profit of $81 million in the quarter a year earlier.
Revenues for the company, which included one month's performance of Paramount Communications, rose to $878.4 million, compared with $470.7 million a year earlier.
Analysts were still trying to decipher the complex report yesterday and cautioned that Viacom had taken extensive write-offs related to the buyout of Paramount.
Because of those write-offs, and the fact that Paramount's earnings are included for only a single month, the results are not comparable with those of any previous period, nor are they indicative of future performance.


West to Cut Its Field in Half
The Phoenix Suns have come back from a 2-0 deficit and are tied with the Houston Rockets.
The Denver Nuggets have come back from 3-0 deficit and are tied in their series against the Utah Jazz.
After today, two of those teams won't be coming back until next season.
It's Game 7 this afternoon for the Suns and Rockets in Houston at 1 o'clock and for the Nuggets and Jazz at 3:30 in Salt Lake City.
"Everybody's got a fear of playing Game 7," Rockets forward Otis Thorpe said today.


Stop Toying With Courtroom Cameras
Cameras in the courtrooms of 47 states are bringing the justice system home to the public that pays for that justice and deserves to know its workings.
Oddly, New York, a major media center and a source of fascinating trials, has allowed cameras only on an experimental basis -- three experiments covering seven years.
It is time for the State Legislature to stop toying with courtroom photography, recognize the success of the program and make it permanent.
A special state commission prudently recommends pressing for permanent authority even though the current law contains some needless hindrances to full coverage.


Harry Fowler, 73, Chairman of Board Of Money Manager
Harry Winthrop Fowler, a retired president and chairman of Fiduciary Trust Company International, an investment management concern based in Manhattan, died on Thursday at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London, Conn.
A former resident of Katonah, N.Y., he was 73 and lived in Stonington, Conn.
He had been ill for a long time, his family said.


Jacques Ellul, French Critic Of Technology, Is Dead at 82
Jacques Ellul, a French Protestant theologian whose pessimistic assessment of modern technological society found a receptive American audience in the late 1960's, died on Thursday at his home in Bordeaux, France.
He was 82.
From 1946 to 1980, he was a professor of law and history at the University of Bordeaux's law school and its Institute of Political Studies.


Governor Made a Promise of Funds for Transit Repair Program
To the Editor:
"A Mixed Message From City Hall" (editorial, May 7) is right: Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed capital budget shortchanges transit repairs.
If his cut goes through, many subway stations will remain in miserable condition, and transit riders all over New York City will suffer.
Fortunately, Mr.
Giuliani needs the approval of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for part of his plan.
And that's a step that would require Mr.
Cuomo to break a 10-year promise to subway and bus riders.
Here's why:


Curing the Handgun Epidemic
Nearly one million handgun crimes take place each year in America, according to a new Justice Department report.
Crimes involving handguns in 1992 rose by almost 50 percent over the average for the previous five years.
And more people are being killed with such weapons; handgun homicides for 1992 were up 24 percent over the five-year average.
Interestingly, the handgun epidemic has spread even as non-fatal violent crime declined.
The rate of violent crime peaked in 1981 and is today the same as it was in 1973.
But while fewer people are being attacked, more of the attacks that do occur involve handguns.


Health Care Prognosis: Cost Cuts Will Count
DO health stocks give you a headache?
The cure is simple.
Just remember that the future of the industry is all about costs: cutting costs, helping its people learn how to cut costs and -- ideally -- shielding it from the need to cut costs.
For investors, reform may dominate the news in the short run, but in the long run it is just a me-too.
Whatever happens on Capitol Hill, the industry, which will reach $1 trillion in spending in 1994, must slash those expenses considerably.


On Macedonia Border Neighbors Grow Cool
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a trip to Skopje, Macedonia, I would like to add to your May 11 "Kriva Palanka Journal," about the United States troops participating in the United Nations peace patrol in the Balkans:


Japan Spares No Expense in Effort to Control Yen
Japanese officials have contended for months that they cannot accept the Clinton Administration's demands for guaranteed increases in imports because the measures would amount to interference with the free play of the markets.
Yet, in another realm, the Japanese Government has engaged in one of the heaviest waves of market intervention in memory in an attempt to manage the value of the yen and keep Japan's exports flowing.
Data on Japan's foreign exchange reserves show that since the beginning of last year, the Bank of Japan has used more than $35 billion in an effort to brake a sharp rise in the value of the yen against the dollar, one of the most sustained and costly campaigns to control currency values ever attempted.


Making Sense of Cash-Back Card Plans
For some time, credit card issuers have bombarded prospective customers with promises of rebates on everything from cars to groceries to airline miles.
So, it should come as no surprise that the issuers would eventually hit on the most valued gift of all -- cash.
Last week, Chase Manhattan introduced a Cash Builder Visa card, which rewards card holders by paying them a percentage of their annual charges and finance fees in cash.
Also last week, the GE Rewards Card started giving cash back on purchases.
And in January Mellon Bank introduced a Cornerstone Mastercard, which refunds part of the finance charges to card holders.
The grandfather of the cash-rebate programs is the Sears Discover card.


Chronicle
GAYFRYD STEINBERG and CAROLYNE ROEHM, leaders of 1980's nouvelle society, have banished ball gowns from a benefit they are organizing for Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, on June 8.
"We wanted to attract a broader constituency than would normally come to one of our benefits," said Ms.
Roehm, the fashion designer.
Instead of black tie, the invitations suggest that guests wear anything appropriate to a "summer block party." The evening of rhythm-and-blues performances at the Manhattan Center on West 34th Street will benefit Amfar's clinical trials program, which involve 500 doctors and 50,000 people with AIDS.


Cuomo Opposes a Pool Design for 1998 Goodwill Games
It was supposed to be one of the centerpieces of the 1998 Goodwill Games, a $25 million aquatic center with three swimming and diving pools and seating for about 2,000, to be built in a Nassau County park.
The event's organizers, who awarded the games to New York on the promise that a swimming venue would be built, were thrilled.
Nassau County officials, seeing it as a major advance in their efforts to lure sporting events to the county, were ecstatic.
But suddenly, there are objections from an unexpected quarter, opposition that could jeopardize plans for the state-financed indoor aquatic center.


Reviews/ Pop; Neo-60's From Georgia
Collective Soul, a band from Stockbridge, Ga., got lucky.
"Shine," from its homemade 1993 debut album, was picked up by a college radio station in Atlanta, then by radio stations across the South.
The album, "Hints Allegations and Things Left Unsaid," was reissued by Atlantic Records and has reached No. 30 on the Billboard album chart.
The song is a throwback to the Allman Brothers and Lynyrd Skynyrd, with major-key guitar riffs carrying lyrics about spiritual longing: "Heaven let your light shine down." Its timing catches the commercial resurgence of neo-1960's bands like the Spin Doctors, Blind Melon and Counting Crows.
Ed Roland, Collective Soul's singer and songwriter, seemed slightly dazed to face a cheering full house so far from home at the Grand on Wednesday night.
But he's eager to make the most of his sudden ascent.
As if to show its depth, the band opened its set with five songs not on the album.
And it played with the fervor of a band that has something to prove.


METRO DIGEST
SHIFTING EMPHASIS FROM WELFARE TO JOBS
Having rejected many of the punitive measures embraced by other states, Governor Cuomo says New York State is trying to reduce welfare dependency by changing welfare offices into places that push applicants to find work instead of simply processing checks.
Page 1.
YOUTH CHIEF QUITS AMID REORGANIZATION
Mayor Giuliani's Commissioner of Youth Services resigned just hours after the Mayor announced a major reorganization of the agency, removing some administrators and cutting salaries, including the Commissioner's own.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  BRATTON IS TOLD TO TRIM SPENDING
Republican and Democratic members of the City Council warned Police Commissioner William J. Bratton that he must cut his proposed $2.07 billion budget or Mayor Giuliani's overall budget would not be approved.
Page 25.
SANITATION COMMISSIONER LEAVING POST
Sanitation Commissioner Emily Lloyd, one of a handful of holdovers from the Dinkins administration, announced that she was leaving city government to become a vice president at Columbia University.
Page 25.
WHEN PLAY AND WORK ARE ONE
If any of the children who went on class trips to the Hayden Planetarium during the last three days had darted past no-admittance signs to peer into the Guggenheim Space Theater, they would have seen Lou Boselli and three French technicians working to build a half-scale model of an Apollo moon lander's console entirely out of Erector set parts.
About New York, Page 25.
EX-WELFARE RECIPIENTS NOW RUN COMPANY
Isabel Cruz's life used to revolve around the 7th and 27th day of each month, when the welfare checks came.
Then her caseworker handed her a flier from a South Bronx company whose business is attending to the elderly and ill in their own homes.
After 11 years on public assistance, Miss Cruz, 34, got a job.
After four years with the company, she is running for its board.
Page 26.
EXECUTIVE CLOSE TO GOTTI ADMITS LYING
To those who ask him about his relationship with the mobster John Gotti, Lewis Kasman says with intensity, "He's like a father to me." But in 1990, Mr.
Kasman told a grand jury that he knew of phrases referring to the Mafia only because he had seen them in the newspapers or heard them broadcast.
Well, not quite.
Page 28.
COLISEUM APPRAISAL IS LESS THAN OFFER
A preliminary appraisal of the New York Coliseum site has found that it is worth substantially less than what Mortimer B. Zuckerman has offered to pay, a finding the Giuliani administration says bolsters its assertion that the developer's $80 million price for the site is fair.
Page 28.
REGION  A COURSE IN HELPING OTHERS
Eight years ago, a frightened group of Ramapo Senior High School students returned early from a trip to the Soviet Union after the Chernobyl nuclear power plant explosion.
Since then the school has devoted itself to helping the Belarussians who are believed to have suffered the worst consequences of the explosion.
Page 27.
BUSINESSMAN WILL NOT RUN IN G.O.P.
RACE
After saying for weeks that he was about to announce his gubernatorial candidacy, J. Patrick Barrett, a Syracuse businessman, said that he would not seek the nomination at the state Republican convention next week.
Page 27.
BODY OF MISSING GIRL IS FOUND
The body of a missing 3-year-old girl was discovered in the basement of the apartment building where she vanished last week.
Page 27.


Religion Notes
Extra Meaning of Shavuot
In the shadow of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian ultranationalist political leader, 100 Jews celebrated the festival of Shavuot here this week -- a holiday that few Jews in Yaroslavl even knew existed until recent years.


Bulls' Fans and Stadium Take Seats on the Bench
Chicago Stadium is 65 years old, built when Herbert Hoover was President of the United States and Al Capone was mayor of Chicago.
And as soon as the Bulls' season is over, it will be demolished and all of the sweaty performers will move across Madison Street to the new stadium.
And so the fans, some of whom were surely going to save their ticket stubs as collectors' items one day, came tonight and filled up the old barn.
It was yet another capacity crowd of 18,676, and they brought with them, as usual, their lung power, which is famous throughout the National Basketball Association.


Review/Opera; A 'Medee' That Turns Antiquity Into Life
When Medee calls upon the evil phantoms of the underworld to serve her will in Marc-Antoine Charpentier's opera, when she slowly allows a magical cloak to release its poison and watches her romantic rival writhe in agony and when she declares that she has even murdered her own children in her desire to wreak revenge on her unfaithful husband, Charpentier doesn't raise his voice.
He doesn't abandon the dance forms and gracious manners of French Baroque opera.
The singing doesn't explode in Lucia-like extravagance.
The remarkable expressions are contained, restrained; the sense comes through subtle shifts in texture, and through the clearly articulated French text, which is almost always set with one note for each syllable.
But by now, William Christie and his early-music group, Les Arts Florissants, have shown how large a universe of emotion lies compressed in this musical style, how a supple sense of pulse governs these declamations, how violence, jealousy and tenderness can be revealed in the ways in which lines are sung and text pronounced.
And that is exactly what was accomplished in the much-awaited production of "Medee" that Mr.
Christie conducted at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Thursday night; an antique language was turned into a living tongue, its every nuance brought to life.


Houseboating Through a Realm of Rock
LAKE POWELL, on the border of Utah and Arizona, has some splendid neighbors: the Grand Canyon and the Painted Desert to the south, Zion National Park and Bryce Canyon to the northwest.
But on a four-day houseboating trip last summer, our group of four Washingtonians decided the lake could hold its own against the majesty of the Grand Canyon or Bryce's red-rock spires.
A part of Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, Lake Powell also offers something that the expansively resplendent Bryce and Grand Canyons do not -- intimacy.
For us it offered the chance to touch pink and red canyon walls, wander under precipices of striped sandstone and shale, and explore endlessly changing rock formations, all from the comfortable deck of a rented houseboat.


East Village Others
SELF-RELIANCE By Michael Brownstein. 305 pp.
Minneapolis:  Coffee House Press.
Paper, $12.95.


School Board's Maze A Factor in Scandal
As 30 law-enforcement agents moved in before dawn, Thomas D. Thacher 2d listened to the action on his two-way car radio.
One by one, half a dozen building contractors were arrested at their homes.
Then Mr.
Thacher, the inspector general of the School Construction Authority, drove from his Bronx offices to board headquarters in Brooklyn to brief Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
It was 6:15 A.M. on Thursday.
Hours later, Federal prosecutors brought racketeering, fraud and bribery charges against 18 men, among them a former senior lawyer at the board, three other former board officials and the owners of four companies that had done $500 million in construction business with the board over 15 years.


Defending the Travelers Umbrella
To the Editor:
Michael Quint accused me of mixing "fact and half-truths," yet he attended a Thursday meeting at my office in Smithtown, L.I., claiming he had been "in real estate" and was in search of employment.
He left before finishing the first Saturday training session, with very little information and without making an effort to meet me or verify any statements attributed to me and my associates.


Weddings; Silvia De Weer, Brian Murphy
Silvia Johanna De Weer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul De Weer of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Brian Arthur Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell Murphy of Portland, Conn.
Msgr.
Russell Davis performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Woods Hole, Mass.
The bride, 26, is a manager of the Children's Re-Source Center, a nonprofit arts and crafts center in Belmont, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University.


Commercial Property/Midtown South; Funky Area Lures Not-So-Funky
LAST December, when Mark J. Berman moved his six-person marketing communications company, Townsend Consulting Group, down to 5 West 19th Street, he did it for one reason only: Economics.
He was getting twice the space for half the money he was paying at 1633 Broadway, at 50th Street.
He figured his clients would turn their noses up at the area, but that was an easy fix: He'd simply go meet them uptown.


Weddings; Corinne Schiff And David Gold
Corinne Schiff, the daughter of Alison and John Schiff of New York, is to be married today to David Gold, a son of Billie and Martin Gold of New York.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein is to officiate at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Schiff, 27, will keep her name.
She coordinates a teen-age pregnancy prevention program for the Family Planning Council of Southeastern Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a principal in Mayers &amp; Schiff, architects in New York.


Whose Fight Is It?
What is the responsibility of United Nations members for disasters like Rwanda and Bosnia that do not directly affect their national security and other interests?
In fact, is there an international responsibility that arises from membership in the U.N.?


Weddings; Ginger Fairman, David A. Kelson
Virginia Marshall Fairman was married last evening in Evanston, Ill., to David Andrew Kelson.
The Rev.
John McCausland, an Episcopal minister, and Rabbi Daniel Friedman officiated jointly at the Woman's Club.
Mrs.
Kelson, 25, is known as Ginger.
A graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, she is a human-resources analyst in Weehawken, N.J., for Paine Webber.
She is the daughter of Ann M. Searles of Evanston and Hugh S. Fairman of Sparta, N.J.
The bride's father is a scientific consultant.


POSTINGS: Landmark East Side Complex; Long-Running Fight Comes to an End
Since 1984, the City and Suburban York Avenue Estate, a 14-building complex on the Upper East Side, has been the scene of a bitter dispute over tenant rights, development interests and historic preservation.
The final chapter was played out last month when four buildings were bought by 78/79 York Associates of Mount Vernon, N.Y., a development partnership, in a bankruptcy reorganization; it acquired the others last August at a foreclosure auction.


Weddings; Lucinda Karter, Timothy Bent
Lucinda Dickinson Karter, a foreign-rights associate at the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, was married yesterday to Timothy David Bent, a trade book editor at Arcade Publishing.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Margot C. Gross performed the Unitarian ceremony at the University Club in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Joan D. and Jerome Karter of New York.
The bride's father is the president and chief executive of Scor U.S., a reinsurance company in New York.


Edward J. Meade Jr.; Education Specialist, 63
Edward J. Meade Jr., an educational expert at the Ford Foundation who sought for almost 30 years to improve the quality of public schools, died on Friday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
Mr.
Meade was 63, and lived in Montclair.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Miriam.


Bringing Up Baggie
FLOUR BABIES By Anne Fine. 178 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Trying to Keep the U.N. United, Within City Borders
Although the United Nations has been wedded to New York for nearly 50 years, intense competition erupted in the 1990's to lure prized agencies like Unicef and the United Nations Development Program to the suburbs and even overseas.
City officials, fearing the diplomatic equivalent of losing the Brooklyn Dodgers, redoubled efforts to keep the agencies firmly rooted on the banks of the East River.
Now those efforts are starting to pay off, local officials say.
The city has found a new home for Unicef, which wanted to relocate, and is pursuing other footloose agencies.
City officials are also encouraged by renewed real estate activity around the United Nations complex.


Shades of Florida Style
CAFE BOCA, a sunny pink-and-teal restaurant with a Florida aura, plans to open in about three weeks.
The 130-seat site at 1 South Middleneck Road, Great Neck (487-2622), will feature 1990's American regional cooking with an emphasis on fresh ingredients, grilled dishes, pastas, seafood, chicken and sourdough deep-dish pizzas.
The name Cafe Boca stems from the fashionable Boca Resort in Boca Raton, Fla., and a 40-by-50 mural of that hotel covers one wall at the new restaurant.
Backlighted etched-glass renderings of flamingos, palm trees and other symbols of the Sunshine State also help set the mood.


Nicholls Suspended And Misses Game 4
Bernie Nicholls of the Devils was given a one-game suspension by the league and was forced to sit out Game 4 tonight of the Eastern Conference finals against the Rangers.
Nicholls was suspended today by Brian Burke, the National Hockey League's disciplinarian, for cross-checking forward Aleksei Kovalev on the neck in the first period of Game 3 on Thursday night.
The Devils center, who said after the game that he had made sure the officials weren't looking, was not penalized.
He then shot the puck into Kovalev's face.


When It Comes to Rights, Dogs Are Not Children
To the Editor:
I was confused by the May 15 letter, "For the Good of the Dogs, Make Dog Runs Childless." Just where in our laws does the writer find this "right" she refers to for dogs to "exercise in a place designed especially for that purpose"?


To Prevent Paint Injuries, Safety Is Crucial With Some Sprayers
SPRAY painting walls and other large surfaces is fast and produces even coatings without brush marks.
But spray equipment can be expensive, some practice is needed and preparation and cleanup are usually more demanding than with brushes and rollers.
Yet for several rooms, the cost of a moderate spray system, $100 to $175, may be justifiable.
For exterior painting, renting professional equipment at $250 to $350 a week can save substantially, compared to hiring painters or investing a summer of weekends painting with hand tools.


Old Photographs Give Children Taste of History
WALTER DEAN MYERS, a children's book author, has found a way to unite his career with his hobby of collecting pictures of children.
His home here is reminiscent of an art museum, with photographs of black, Japanese and European children lovingly framed and hung about the house.
Cuff links with a picture of a little girl inside are displayed atop a piano.
Photographs of adults and older children are preserved in large portfolios and stored in file cabinets.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Travel Advisory column on May 8 about the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh misstated the museum's affiliation.
It is a part of the Carnegie Institute, not of Carnegie Mellon University.


Bogosian Takes a Trip to the Dead End in 'Suburbia'
WHEN HE WAS A YOUNG man, Eric Bogosian -- whose new play "Suburbia" is about the stubbornly stultifying life of a group of young people who hang out on a suburban corner next to a 7-Eleven -- used to hang out on a suburban corner, except there was no 7-Eleven.
There was a deli, a doughnut shop and a barbershop.
There was a lot of chugging of beer, and there was a lot of standing around.
"Where I grew up is where most people grew up," he said.
"Crest toothpaste in the bathroom. This aspiration toward bourgeoisie as it's cited in the beginning of 'Steppenwolf,' where Hesse talks about cleanliness."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MENTAL HEALTH  BEDLAM  Greed, Profiteering, and Fraud  in a Mental Health System Gone Crazy.
By Joe Sharkey.
Thomas Dunne/St.
Martin's, $22.95.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Stich Stops Sampras's Winning Streak In a warm-up for the French Open, Michael Stich snapped Pete Sampras's winning streak at 29 matches with a 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 6-2 victory yesterday at the World Team Cup in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Sampras and Stich are seeded No. 1 and No. 2 at the French Open, which begins tomorrow.
Germany went on to complete a 3-0 sweep of the United States, including Bernd Karbacher's 6-4, 6-2 victory over Michael Chang.
The Germans will play Spain for the title today. (AP)


Anais Nin's Kindred Photographic Spirit
"AND she danced; she danced with the music and with the rhythm of earth's circles; she turned with the earth turning, like a disk, turning all faces to light and to darkness evenly, dancing towards daylight."
Anais Nin's first novel, "House of Incest" (1936), ends with this verbal image of release.
A later edition of the book, published in 1958, does not, however, end with words, but rather with a visual image, a photomontage by Val Telberg of Sag Harbor.
The picture portrays a nude dancer, her wide-flung arms solarized into torches.
Superimposed on her torso are blades of grass, and behind the dancing figure is a beckoning doorway.


Wearable Phrase Books
Rob Wilson was tired of lugging around a phrase book when he traveled, so Mr.
Wilson, a New York graphic designer, devised a wearable one.
Stumped by the language on a trip to Mexico, he scribbled a few key phrases with a Magic Marker on his T-shirt -- and penned everything, from "Que hora es?" to "Donde esta el museo?," upside down so he could consult his chest before speaking.


A Spa Without a Regimen
ISAT on the double bed in my tiny, airless room feeling tired and cranky.
After the long flight from New York to Mexico and an hour's ride in a taxi, much of it over bumpy, barely paved roads, I'd finally arrived for a five-night stay last month at Rio Caliente, a spa and hot spring about 25 miles northwest of Guadalajara.
At first glance, the place looked dry, dusty and deserted.
The registrar, a pleasant woman named Soledad, led me to my room in a modest adobe casita, casually entering through an unlocked screen door.
When I asked her about activities -- the brochure promised hikes, yoga and aerobics -- she explained there weren't any that day; it was the activity director's day off.


t's Root, Root, Root For 2 Teams
Roaming the halls before tonight's Devils-Rangers playoff game, the Rev.
Bob McCourt couldn't have been happier.
He used to love the Rangers.
Now, he's a Devils advocate.
But there were probably hundreds, if not thousands, of fans of split loyalty tonight.
The Rangers, after all, are Megalopolis's team.
They evoke cheers in the Nassau Coliseum, Madison Square Garden and here at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Most Dangerous
To the Sports Editors:
I found Gerald Eskenazi's assessment of Lennox Lewis ("Lewis Gets Little Support for Effort," The Times, May 8) to be misleading.
"Too bad he doesn't know how to fight," Eskenazi concluded.


Special Solutions on the Antibug Detail
THEY are beginning to appear -- bugs, pests, creepy crawlers or whatever gardeners prefer to call them.
The insect population is on the march and will gradually increase during the next few months.
There inevitably follows the complaint, "DO something!"
This "do something" response has changed a great deal in the last few years.
Rather than rush out to the toolshed or the garden center's pesticide shelves for a quick cure, many of us who work outdoors now avoid the broad-spectrum pesticides that kill everything in sight.
Too many have learned that these "cures" kill beneficial insects that feed on the pests.
Alternatives are finding a place, the primary one being to first identify the pest and, knowing the insect's habits, adopting a narrow-spectrum antidote.


'Made in New York' Meant a Quilt Of Distinction
HOW DO NEW YORK QUILTS compare with the most desirable of the craft -- the checkerboard-patterned Album coverlets of Baltimore and the color-pulsing patchworks of the Pennsylvania Amish?
They do better than you might think: New York wins for urbanity on two counts -- exquisite stitchery and simplified imagery -- on quilts made, for the most part, by women before 1940.


ARISTIDE, INNOCENT ABROAD
Catherine S. Manegold's article "Aristide, Innocent Abroad" (May 1) shows what has happened to our sense of justice and idealism.
In the 1930's, American volunteers risked their lives and traveled thousands of miles to fight the thugs of Franco.
Today we block the escape of Haitian refugees and look the other way while barbaric gangsters rape that nation next door.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
New York Jewelers Unite To Be More Competitive
The streets of New York may not be paved with gold, but 47th Street and the surrounding jewelry district come close -- and, in the face of growing domestic and global competition, the jewelers want to keep it that way.
Last week, merchants joined forces with Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, the Fashion Institute of Technology and the Gemological Institute of America to form the Diamond and Jewelry Industries Development Corporation.


Devils Get Off to Fast Start and Draw Even
Almost everyone around these parts seems to think the Rangers have the best team in these Eastern Conference finals against the Devils.
The Rangers also seem to have clout in the National Hockey League office, which today obeyed a demand of the Ranger coach and suspended a key Devils player.
But, after four games in a four-of-seven-game series, the Rangers and the Devils have the same number of victories, two apiece, following tonight's 3-1 New Jersey triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


The World; Haiti? Oh, We've Been There
President Clinton spelled out conditions last week under which the United States might lead an invasion of Haiti.
But if the Marines are sent in, it wouldn't be the first time.
The longest occupation in American history was in Haiti, and the history has resonance today.
The catalyst for the invasion in July 1915 was a gruesome event, the slaying of Vilbrun Guillaume Sam, Haiti's seventh President in seven years.
After a frenzied mob paraded pieces of his body through the streets of Port-au-Prince, Woodrow Wilson dispatched 330 Marines and sailors to the capital.


Weddings; Christina Ittleson, Sean P. Smith
Christina Bee Ittleson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Anthony Ittleson of New York, was married yesterday to Sean Patrick Smith, a son of Patricia Smith and Dennis Smith, both of New York.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Smith is a volunteer teacher at the Family Academy, an alternative elementary school in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the chairman of Travel Ventures Ltd. in New York, a company that books bicycle tours.


Maintaining a Soft Top Doesn't Require Hard Labor
Caring for a convertible top need not be daunting.
Some basic, commonsense procedures will generally keep a convertible looking good, top up or top down.
Archie Sibilia, the upholsterer at Hibernia Auto Restorations in Hibernia, N.J., advises convertible owners to "watch where you park," avoiding tree sap, bird droppings and strong sunlight.
And wash the entire top. 'Don't spot-clean," Mr. Sibilia said. "When you spot-clean the top, you get rings."


May 15-21; Britain Gives The Bobbies Guns
Well, actually only a handful of London's police officers will now be armed.
Scotland Yard changed the rules last week to allow members of "armed response vehicles" to pack Smith and Wesson revolvers on their hips.
Before the change, guns were kept inside the vehicles in a locked metal box.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Summer Arts Festivals/Section 2A  Special Today: Children's Books/Section 7 Children's Best Sellers: For the first time since 1978, in a pullout section, the Book Review reports on what children read.


Brave New World
To the Editor: Thanks for the funny article by Melvin Landsberg about the airlines taking over the Postal Service ("Brave New World," April 3).
As both a 14-year postal worker and a frequent Florida flier, I found the article was able to distill the deregulation experience to a pure goof.
The illustration by Matthew Martin complemented the fun.
VINCENT M. AMATRANO  Phoenicia, N.Y.


His First Was His Sunniest
To the Editor:
While I enjoyed Peter Kaufman's article on Marshall Crenshaw, "Oh, How the Critics Raved! Why Didn't the Masses Follow?"  [ April 17 ] , it is not fair to leave readers with the impression that Mr.
Crenshaw has enjoyed widespread critical acceptance throughout his career.
It would be fairer to say that his self-titled debut was greeted with a shower of superlatives and likely set the stage for some of the critical blasts he took in subsequent years.


Mending Fences in Chinatown


Weddings; Nancy A. Kopans, Michael Johnson
Nancy Aline Kopans, a daughter of the late Drs.
Sondra and Albert Kopans, is to be married today to Thomas Michael Johnson, the son of Dolores Williams of Lynbrook, L.I., and a stepson of Richard Williams of Lynbrook.
Terry Koldys, a justice of the peace in Stockbridge, Mass., will officiate at Chesterwood, a historic home in Stockbridge.
The bride, 30, and the bridegroom, 25, are associates at Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.A. in English and a master of philosophy in English from Columbia University.
The bride received her law degree from Georgetown University.


Weddings; Shrevie Hooker, James Shepherd
Katherine Shreve Hooker, the daughter of Mrs.
Richard Prosser Mellon of Ligonier, Pa., was married yesterday to James Christopher Shepherd, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Shepherd of Horsham, West Sussex, England.
The Rev.
James B. Simons performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's of the Valley Episcopal Church in Rector, Pa.
Mrs.
Shepherd, 30, is known as Shrevie.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is now studying for a master's degree in liberal studies at New York University.
Her stepfather is a trustee of the Richard King Mellon Foundation, a private philanthropy in Pittsburgh.


Mayor Approves Sale of Park
Mayor Giuliani has approved the sale of a small park in Cobble Hill to Long Island College Hospital to build a parking garage, but a lawsuit threatens to delay the sale.
The site, Upper Van Voorhees Park, is now being assessed so a price can be agreed on.
If the sale goes through, it will bring to an end a long dispute that set the hospital and Cobble Hill residents against residents of nearby Brooklyn Heights.


Joined at the Hip
Monday.
I am going to have hip replacement surgery.
Elizabeth Taylor is also going to have a hip replacement.
Like Liz, I will not divulge the date of the operation.
Like Liz, I am going to have the surgery in an undisclosed hospital.
Perhaps we will have our surgery on the same undisclosed date in the same undisclosed hospital.
Liz and I have so much in common: an early, girlish enthusiasm for collies and horses; and we're both Jewish, of course.
Now this -- identical prostheses.
Tuesday.
I hope Liz and I won't have to have any bone grafts.
In the pamphlet the hospital sent me, it says they sometimes take bone for bone graft from some part of your own body, which sounds counterproductive; or they "harvest it from other sources." Harvest has a nice folksy autumn ring to it.
But I think the other sources from which they harvest it are cadavers.
Wednesday.
Had to give blood to be stored up in case I need it during the operation.
I was asked a lot of personal questions.
A funny nurse told me about the time she swallowed her contact lenses in college, couldn't afford a new pair and had to retrieve them.
I ate some Oreos and it was over.
If I don't use the blood, it goes into the blood bank.
What if Liz ended up with my blood?
We'd be linked for life, though I would never presume to mention it.
I would remain anonymous.
Thursday A.M.
It said in the paper that patients with living wills, who leave instructions to have the plug pulled when they're brain dead, have lower hospital bills.
I have a living will, and was very excited about this at first.
Then I realized they probably had lower hospital bills because they died earlier than people who don't have living wills.
I'm sure Liz has a living will.
I read a biography about her that said she'd had 32 operations, and that was years ago.
Who knows how many she's had by now?
She's a pro.
Was Liz given a packet of Betadine and told to wash herself with it at home the night before her operation, the way I was?
What about the Fleets?
It gives the whole experience a nice do-it-yourself feeling.
My bathroom smells like Betadine now, just like the hospital.
I saw an ad for Elizabeth Taylor's perfume.
"Fragrant Jewels," it said.
When you buy a bottle, there's a bonus: a pair of 3.2-carat cubic zirconia earrings.
I don't have zirconia earrings of that size, or any size, yet.
I do have a little cabochon emerald ring that I bought from Christopher Walling before he became a jeweler to sheiks and movie stars.
It doesn't seem to have a fragrance, actually.
I love jewelry; and if I had a lot of it, I'd have that in common with Liz, too.
I once read in The New York Post that Liz might have been the anonymous bidder who paid $104,000 for Christopher's rose diamond earrings.
The resemblance is getting uncanny.
P.M.
Better start packing.
Tomorrow is the big day.
What do you wear in the hospital?
More to the point -- what will Liz wear?
Probably her 3.2 zirconia studs.
I think I will pack nothing.
The hospital provides suitable attire, and you get those plastic basins and a personal bottle of mouthwash.
Towels are included.
Green foam-rubber slippers with a happy face embossed on the front.
It will be a relief, actually, not to have think to about how I'm dressed.
A vacation.
Liz must feel the same way -- even more so.
For a moment I find it difficult to picture her.
Then I see her beautiful shoulders draped with the thin cotton gown, the hospital's undisclosed name printed across the front, and, pinned proudly above it, a bright red AIDS ribbon.
Friday, Saturday, Sunday.
Thirty-two of these?
I can't keep up.
I don't want to keep up.
I think 32 operations is showing off.
Isn't it enough to have the biggest eyes, the biggest diamonds, the most husbands?
She has more husbands than Tonya Harding's mother.
Why does she have to be so competitive?
And my friend who lives in L.A. called to tell me she read that Larry Fortensky (No. 8 for Ms. Matrimony Maven) has not picked up $684.37 in vacation pay.
The rich are so careless.
He worked 555 hours last year driving a water truck at constructon sites and watering down the dirt.
The rich are so thoughtless.
He took that work away from someone who might actually need it.
And about those perfume bottles with the rhinestone bows -- tacky, tacky, tacky.
I hate perfume anyway.
I'm allergic to it.
It should be against the law in public places and magazines.
Elizabeth Taylor is a public menace and a health hazard.
And when my collie got lost in New Hampshire, he never came home.
And she didn't even star in "Lassie Come Home." She had a minor role.
Monday.
I woke up this morning thinking Elizabeth Taylor was married to Arthur Miller.
Then I remembered that was the other one -- the tragic, self-destructive icon.
Liz is the indestructible survivor icon.
Can't remember much from the last few days.
Must have been a little dopey.
I have a computerized pump that releases just the right amount of morphine whenever I need it.I'm feeling much better now.
I'm really feeling like myself.
I did have a bone graft.
I wonder whose bone I got.
Hey!
John Candy died recently, didn't he?


Clinton Focuses on Military in Advance of Anniversary of D-Day
Two weeks before he will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the allied invasion of Europe, President Clinton went out of his way today to put his own stamp on Armed Forces Day, a holiday first set aside by President Harry S. Truman.
Last year, Mr.
Clinton neglected to issue a proclamation officially designating the holiday, something each of his nine predecessors had done.
But he made amends today in a celebratory appearance at McClellan Air Force Base here, an installation barely spared from the latest round of base closings.


THE BUSINESS OF BEGGING
The anti-begging posters in subways have been criticized by some riders as stupid or harsh, but alternatives require many more dollars than an advertising campaign that seeks to empower riders ("The Business of Begging," by Nicholas Dawidoff, April 24).
What makes this campaign so startling is its audience -- middle-class New Yorkers.
The message is clear: New Yorkers themselves will have to do more in this year of less to maintain standards in city life.
There are no billions from Albany or Washington.


Viewpoints; AT&amp;T, MCI, Sprint: Cozy Competitors
YOU won't hear it from the celebrities pitching for AT&amp;T, Sprint and MCI on television, but long-distance phone calls are not getting cheaper.
In fact, rates are rising, at least for some consumers, and the only cure is more competition.
Consider basic rates -- those outside MCI's "Friends and Family" program and the other highly touted discount plans.
Twice in the last six months, AT&amp;T raised its per-minute charges for basic long-distance calls.
Last Aug. 1, prices rose almost 4 percent and, on Jan. 1, they were increased 6.3 percent.


An English Pleasure Dome
AS you enter the front door of Chewton Glen, stepping off the flagstone circular drive into the warmly decorated vestibule, there is a reassuring sight off to one side -- green wellingtons, lined up like sentinels, ready to be donned by guests for a hearty hike through the woods or perhaps down the ravine to the crashing sea.
The touch is typical of English country hotels in the best tradition -- thoughtful, inviting, cozy.
It tells you right away what you need to know: you can relax here if you simply treat the place like home.
Chewton Glen, presided over by Martin Skan, a confectioner turned hotelier, and his Swiss wife, Brigitte, is a country hotel set in 70 wooded and landscaped acres in southern Hampshire, on the edge of the New Forest (that is, dating from only the 11th century).
The hotel is prim and elegant, rather than grand and imposing: an 18th-century manor house restyled in the Palladian fashion, a sturdy three-story brick structure with creeping ivy, white wood gables and distinctive bright green shutters.
It sits on a rounded ridge in a sea of lawns the color of billiard table felt and about as deep.


P.L.O. Condemns Attacks on Israeli Soldiers in Gaza
The Palestine Liberation Organization today denounced the killing of two Israeli soldiers in the Gaza Strip as a threat to Palestinian security in new areas of self-rule and to the peace accord signed last year with Israel.
The comment, issued in Tunis by the P.L.O. press agency Wafa, was its first unconditional condemnation of a Palestinian terrorist act against Israeli soldiers.


Weddings; Rebecca Morison, Andrew Schaefer
Rebecca Dulany Morison, a special-events coordinator at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, was married yesterday to Andrew Craig Schaefer, a vice president of Refco Inc., a futures brokerage.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Robert Davenport performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Upperville, Va.
Mrs.
Schaefer, 26, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is the daughter of Alice A. Morison of San Mateo, Calif., and Nathaniel H. Morison 3d of Middleburg, Va.


Weddings; Rebecca Banks, Charles Zakin
Rebecca Banks, the editor of House Beautiful's Houses and Plans magazine, is to be married today to Charles Steven Zakin, a media supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Steven Kane is to perform the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
The bride, 25, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Nan and Allen Banks of Ossining, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York.


Mr. Babbitt Needs Mr. Clinton, Now
Bruce Babbitt became Secretary of the Interior with hopes of reversing not only 12 years of Republican indifference to the environment but also a century of federally sponsored exploitation of the public lands.
He specifically wanted to get tough with loggers, ranchers and miners who, encouraged by generous subsidies, a pliant Congress and a captive bureaucracy, had been allowed to develop the West without paying fair prices or giving much thought to environmental values.
In the last year, Mr.
Babbitt has suffered disappointments.
His proposal to reduce subsidized logging in national parks was torpedoed by the White House during the 1993 budget battle after complaints from Western Democratic senators.
Ditto his efforts to require better land management practices and to increase the low fees ranchers pay to graze livestock on 260 million acres of public property.


The Littlest Pharaoh
TUTANKHAMEN'S GIFT Written and illustrated by Robert Sabuda.
Unpaged.
New York: Atheneum. $15.95. (Ages 6 to 9)


Grieving for Man Who Died in Police Custody


Board Dates in the Bronx
DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven.
Last Thursday of month; next June 30; 6:30 P.M.; Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
DISTRICT 2: Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of month; next May 25, 6 P.M.; Feldco Building, 1029 East 163d Street (corner of Southern Boulevard); (718) 328-9125.


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; Saving Face, and Fur
Have a mink in the closet?
Worried about being splattered with blood or paint if you wear the hide in public?
Who are you going to call?
Fur Busters!
Actually, the company is called Krazi Krafts.
It's in Long Beach, Calif., and if you give the proprietor, Kathy Brown, your fur, she will turn it into a less virulent form -- a stuffed animal.


Superannuated Or Just Super?
To the Editor:
In her article about the Chicago Symphony, Ms.
Miller writes: "Now that mandatory retirement ages have been declared illegal, the Chicago Symphony has an abundance of superannuated musicians, an audible problem in the upper strings." In fact, the orchestra is enjoying a substantial influx of young players and is on the whole much younger than it was when I joined the viola section 10 years ago.
In my section, for example, only half of my present colleagues were already in the orchestra when I arrived.
Indeed, we have been contending with so many openings in recent years that our audition process has been strained in an effort to fill them.


Defending the Travelers Umbrella
To the Editor:
While there are undoubtedly some agents who lack the integrity and knowledge to counsel clients effectively on life insurance, the ultimate responsibility falls on the customer to make intelligent buying decisions.
No one should rely on a salesperson when it comes to such a costly, critical purchase as life insurance.
The problem is that many people view insurance as a dreaded necessity that's boring to boot.
Americans' aversion to educating themselves about insurance leads many of them to place their families' financial futures in the hands of a commission-driven agent.
MOREY STETTNER  Beverly Hills, Calif., May 2  The writer is the author of "Buyer Beware: An Industry Insider Shows You How to Win the Insurance Game."


BENEFITS
Supporting Theater  TODAY -- In its 25-year history, the Theater Development Fund has subsidized 500 plays, rented costumes at minimum fees and maintained TKTS booths in Times Square and the World Trade Center selling cut-rate tickets to Broadway performances.
The group will hold an anniversary celebration honoring Hal Prince, the theater impresario, starting with a 6 P.M. black-tie reception under a tent in Shubert Alley, followed by a celebratory performance by many Broadway personalities at 7 in the Broadhurst Theater.
After that, guests will return to Shubert Alley for dinner.
Tickets, $500, or $50 for the performance alone, from (212) 221-0885, extension 230.


Weddings; Marci I. Karetnick, Adam J. Taub
Marci Iris Karetnick, a project manager at Smith Barney Shearson in New York, is to be married today to Adam Jesse Taub, a programmer and analyst at Lehman Brothers in New York.
Rabbi Howard Jaffe is to officiate at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Taub graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in counseling from Montclair State College.
She is a daughter of Arlene Karetnick of West Orange, N.J., and the late Harold Karetnick.


Allia Zobel and Desmond Nolan
THERE are two things Allia Zobel clearly dislikes.
One is revealing her age, which she discusses in the style of a street vendor eager to make a deal -- she's over 40, around 40, just under 40.
The other is the "what's wrong with you" stigma that many single women have to endure.
To combat that, four years ago she wrote "The Joy of Being Single" (Workman Publishing), a humorous, illustrated book for women without wedding plans.
In it, she listed dozens of reasons why living alone is a dream come true, like "You can play the same record over and over again," "You can eat cold pizza for breakfast, jelly beans and a Coke for dinner," and "When it comes to the telephone, you have carte blanche."


Weddings; Patti R. Haiman, Richard W. Wold
Patti Rose Haiman, an account manager at Premiere magazine in New York, was married last evening to Richard William Wold, a manager at Rashba &amp; Pokart, an accounting firm in New York.
Rabbi Irving Bloom officiated at the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Wold, 27, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Barbara Lefcourt and Barry Haiman, both of Miami.
The bride's mother is a vice president of Prudential Securities in Miami.
Her father is the president of Affordable Housing Solutions in Miami.


Jackie, New Yorker; Friends Recall a Fighter for Her City
On a weekend of nationwide mourning and tributes from around the world, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was remembered by her colleagues and friends closer to home yesterday as, after all, a New Yorker who loved and enjoyed and fought for her glittering, frustrating city.
All over town -- at a Grand Central Terminal she helped to save, outside her Fifth Avenue apartment building, in Central Park where she jogged, in comments from those who had known and worked with her -- people recalled her campaigns for treasured buildings, her work as a book editor, her affection for art, her quiet presence in church, and mostly her friendship.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 22, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
2
4
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
3
3
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
4
2
SURRENDER MY LOVE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) Wrongly branded a spy, a ninth-century viking finds revenge and romance.
5
14
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
6
5
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
7
4
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
8
3
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
4
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her reputation.
10
3
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
11*
9
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
12
20
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
13
2
CHRISTY, by Catherine Marshall. (Avon, $5.99.) A 1967 novel about a young schoolteacher in the Tennessee hill country.
14
1
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer and a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
15
3
PRIMAL FEAR, by William Diehl. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A singular lawyer defends a young man charged with murdering an archbishop.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
19
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
3
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
3
550
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
19
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
66
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
2
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
7
5
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
8*
4
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
9*
8
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
10*
29
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
11
51
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12*
136
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13
150
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
14
1
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
15*
149
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
16*
11
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
166
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
173
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
3
THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $6.99.) Health and fitness advice for women.
4
31
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 7, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


F.Y.I.
Head Full o' Nuts
Q.
I find the smell produced by nut vendors unbearable.
At noon each day, a vendor parks outside our office window, and the smell rises up from his cart and fills the office.
Have I any recourse?


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; What to Listen to Under a Knife
Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel" is filling the theater once again.
And Richard Rodgers's daughter, Linda Rodgers, is also working in musical theater -- the operating theater.
Rodgers, a social worker and classically trained musician, has developed a series of tapes to ease patient anxiety before, during and after surgery.
The tapes are opening in Manhattan, but way off Broadway, in a study at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and a pilot program at Maimonides Medical Center.


Evening Hours; A Rose in Harlem
The annual spring benefit for the Harlem Children's Storefront, at Pier 88, May 11.


Pequot Indians' Casino Wealth Extends the Reach of Tribal Law
A customer of the Foxwoods Casino slipped, fell and gashed his head recently, leaving a scar near his eyebrow.
At the Mirage, or Caesars, or Circus Circus, that could have been bad news for the casino, with lawyers seeking large damages for the victim's pain and suffering.
But the forum for the Foxwoods case was Tribal Court, created by the sovereign Indian nation of the Mashantucket Pequot tribe and operated under rules that severely restrict how much an accident victim can collect.
In this instance, even tribal officials admit that the man got next to nothing because the rules link compensation to the cost of treatment, and his was cheap.
The case is now under appeal before an appellate panel, which like the Tribal Court is composed of judges hired by the tribe.


Corrections
A map last Sunday with an article about bicycle riding in New York City misstated the number miles of a recommended tour in the South and East Bronx.
It is about 13, not 28.


Weddings; Diane Frizalone, Stephen R. Hoody
Diane Frizalone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Frizalone of Hackensack, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen R. Hoody, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Steve Hoody of Omaha.
The Rev.
Jack D. Wangerin, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 33, is a sales and marketing coordinator for Sunbury Textile Mills in New York.
She graduated from Pratt Institute.


Bowne Park's New Splendor: Beyond Grass
After 10 years of delays, Bowne Park, an 11-acre site bordered by pricey colonial and ranch-style houses, is being restored.
The one-year, $800,000 reconstruction of the park, once the summer estate of Mayor Walter Bowne of New York, entails building a modern playground with new equipment, refurbishing lawns, draining the one-acre freshwater pond and restoring the surrounding stone wall, said JoAnne Armagrande-Savarese, chief of staff for the Parks Department's Queens borough office.
In addition, foot and bike paths will be re-layed and benches replaced.
Sections of the park will be closed for several months starting in the fall.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Mustang GT vs. Camaro Z28; Topless Style With American Muscle
LEE A. IACOCCA, who was about to leave the top job at the Chrysler Corporation, was shaking his head.
This was a couple of years ago, in his sumptuous office in Chrysler's sumptuous New York headquarters, and he was talking about the electric van I had just driven, which didn't work very well.
The problem, of course, was the battery technology, ancient and not ready for an unpolluted brave new world in which everyone will drink Perrier and will have stubbed out the final cigarette.


Frequent Fliers Being Squeezed
MOST of the domestic airlines are devaluing their frequent flier miles, effective next year.
The most conspicuous change, first by United, then by American, USAir and Continental, is an increase in the "price" of a domestic coach ticket, probably the most popular offering, to 25,000 miles from 20,000.
Varied explanations for the devaluations are given by three monitors of these programs, who are editors of newsletters for the high-mileage crowd.
But the three agree raising the hurdles will shake out those with small balances.
People who have accumulated 20,000 miles on one airline and 12,000 on another will want to cash in before the devaluation, unless they plan to travel a lot more to stay in the game.


The Production Is the Thing
To the Editor:
In his essay "Two Stage Magicians Reinvent a Drama"  [ May 8 ] , Vincent Canby notes that although J. B. Priestley's play "An Inspector Calls" is indeed slight, the production, particularly the set design, is marvelous, and he considers the revival an enormous success.
The star is clearly the spectacle, the production design itself.


Round Table Remembered
Reviewing a play, Dorothy Parker once wrote, "If you don't knit, bring a book." No doubt she first floated that and other barbs past fellow members of the celebrated Algonquin Round Table, the original power lunch of New York's literary set.
With a core of nine members, among them Robert Benchley, Alexander Woollcott and Edna Ferber, the Round Table held its first go-round 75 years ago in June in the Algonquin Hotel's Oak Room. (Eventually the group landed a larger table in the spiffier Rose Room.)


Setting Things Straight on Philanthropy
To the Editor:
I was very pleased to see Paul Sweeney's article devoted to the numerous changes in corporate giving ("Corporate Giving Goes Creative," May 15).
Much as I appreciated the citation of The Chronicle of Philanthropy's survey of giving by big companies, I was quite concerned by the quotation that was attributed to me.


In Recycling of Greenbacks, New Meaning for Old Money
Talk about a "green" movement.
For decades, the Federal Reserve has disposed of its old, worn-out currency by shredding it and burying the multibillion-dollar confetti in landfills.
But as the number of available landfills declines and concern over the environment grows, Federal Reserve banks across the country are trying to find companies that can recycle the 7,000 tons of tired bills -- enough to fill 1,750 dump trucks -- that are shredded each year.


On Broadway, They Choose The Sunny Side of the Street
To the Editor:
I read the May 15 article, "Broadway Business Blues? Well, Cross the Street," with interest because I lived on the West Side of Manhattan from the time I was born in 1932 until 1980, and in all those years the east side of Broadway was always referred to as "the other side."


BILLION-DOLLAR BARBIE
Your Sunday feature "Billion-Dollar Barbie" (March 27) contained an inaccuracy.
The late Jack Ryan was not Barbie's creator.
My husband, Elliot, and I were the founders of Mattel Toys, and I was the creator of the Barbie doll.


Weddings; Elizabeth Yawitz, David A. Sehring
Elizabeth Rose Yawitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton L. Yawitz of Lords Valley, Pa., and New York, was married yesterday to David Alexander Sehring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dewey A. Sehring of Bexley, Ohio.
The Rev.
Donald A. Drewett, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Lords Valley Country Club.
Mrs.
Sehring, 31, is a writer and producer for the USA Network, the cable television service, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Becoming Adept at Public Speaking
In today's competitive marketplace, those who survive and thrive are apt to be those who master the skill of communicating effectively.
Yet, one corporate manager said, the fear of public speaking is so deep rooted that when employees are offered a choice "between taking a course in public speaking or death, guess what they choose?"
Florio Rugova, the maitre d'hotel at Il Brunello Ristorante in New Rochelle, was braver.
Of his own free will he recently paid to attend a one-day seminar on "The Art of Powerful Persuasion" at the Rye Town Hilton because, he said, he believed it would help him strengthen skills he knew he needed in his work.


Shouldn't the Fed Act in the Public Interest?; No Time for Stalling
To the Editor:
As a mutual fund investor, I was pleased with "The Fed Goes Ghostbusting" by Lester Thurow (Op-Ed, May 6).
He points out the lack of any inflation signs and recommends that the Federal Reserve Board should stop raising interest rates.
But his arguments seem to have little effect.


Don't Jump!; The Fear Is Old, The Economy New
There is something perverse about reading the business news these days.
Every month the Labor Department comes out with a new set of statistics about how unemployment is down and thousands of jobs are being created.
But these stories always contain the same caveat, like the warning on a pack of cigarettes, that this news is bad for the health of the economy.
The stories always go on to say that these great employment statistics triggered panic among Wall Street investors and led to a sell off of stocks and bonds.
Hey, what happened to the good old days, when movies were a quarter, Coke was 5 cents a bottle and people on Wall Street jumped out of windows because the economy was crashing, not booming?


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Shouldn't the Fed Act in the Public Interest?
To the Editor:
In "The Fed Goes Ghostbusting" (Op-Ed, May 6), Lester Thurow makes a formidable critique of the Federal Reserve and the premature fear of inflation that led it to a threefold raise of interest rates.
Real wages have declined, productivity has risen, prices are competitively geared against an inflation spiral, United States companies are running nowhere close to their production limits, the economy is not overheating.


Oppressed Haitians Deserve Better Than a Bay of Pigs Fiasco
To the Editor:
William Safire's proposal in "For a Haitian Legion" (column, May 9) seems to have been concocted with minimal knowledge of military combat, civil war and Haiti's squalor and violent history.


If This Is the Knicks' Year, Then Today's the Day
So much will be at stake for the Knicks today -- their season, the franchise's 21-year quest for another championship, the team's belief that 1994 will be the year.
It has come down to Game 7 this afternoon at Madison Square Garden, to decide the winner of the emotional, intriguing playoff series between the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls.
It will be a pressure-packed game, a defining moment that will have a direct impact both on the Knicks' immediate and long-term future.


Recitals Give Way To Festivals
IN days past the concert season was concluded by the end of April; now there's hardly a break between the end of spring recitals and the start of summer festivals.
Indeed the week is bracketed by several finales and what might just be the first outdoor program of the year.
The Chamber Music Society of Westport, or Concorde for short, functions along the lines of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, its core group of eight musicians joined by guest artists as programing requirements dictate.
For the third year in a row, however, the last concert, at 7 this evening in the Westport Arts Center, is symphonic, with Glen Cortese conducting the Manhattan Chamber Orchestra in Brahms's "Academic Festival Overture" and Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.


Filled With Girlish Greed
THE HOUSE ON R. STREET By Sheila Kohler. 144 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Thank You, Fresh Air Fund, for Picnics and Peace
Twelve-year-old Isaiah Gadsden remembers heading to a house "where a lot woods are." And Henry Pimentel, 12, said he best remembers "beef cows -- but they run away from you."
Despite the timidity of the cows, Henry has nothing but fond memories of his trip last year to a farm he visited through the Fresh Air Fund, which helps arrange summer vacations in the countryside for inner-city children.


Histories of Prejudice
To the Editor:
I have several criticisms of David Klinghoffer's review of my father's book "A Scapegoat in the New Wilderness." My opinion, of course, is not impartial; yet my objections have less to do with Mr.
Klinghoffer's review of the book (which was favorable, though unanalytical) than with his conclusions regarding the causes of anti-Semitism in America.


Seduction or Virtue?
In a town where all socializing is ultimately political, cynics might be forgiven for wondering about dinner at the Huffingtons'.
In less than two years, Representative Michael Huffington, Republican of California, and his wife, Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington, a biographer and television talk-show host, have been the hosts of 20 dinners with what they call "critical mass."


Plan for a Synagogue Divides a Neighborhood
A proposal to build a synagogue for an Orthodox congregation here has divided this community, which prides itself on its tolerance and diversity.
No one disputes that the congregation, Young Israel of New Rochelle, has outgrown its current home, a former church on North Avenue.
Membership has grown to nearly 200 families from about 40 families in 1978.


Weddings; Ms. Metzler, Mr. Mittel
Stephanie Maria Metzler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Metzler of Huntington Station, L.I., is to be married today to Robert John Mittel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Mittel of Levittown, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
David R. Adamovich of the Shuang Xi Christian Ministry is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Roslyn Country Club in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The bride, 34, and bridegroom, 32, work for the Dime Savings Bank, she as an assistant vice president and training officer in Uniondale, L.I., and he as a vice president and director of sales and service in Port Washington, L.I.


Weddings; Julia Constable, David W. Allen
Julia French Constable, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter D. Constable of Washington, is to be married today to David Warren Allen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Allen of Gaithersburg, Md.
Judge Rufus King of the Superior Court in Washington is to officiate at Oxon Hill (Md.) Manor.
The bride, 26, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in social work from Catholic University in Washington.
Her father, who is retired, is a former Director General of the Multinational Force and Observers and a former United States Ambassador to Zaire.
Her mother is the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and Environmental and Scientific Affairs and is a former United States Ambassador to Kenya.


Habitats/Cops and Addicts No More; Compromises on 75th St.
BEFORE Sherri Eisenpress and her friend Janel Radtke moved into the rusticated brownstone and brick apartment house at Columbus Avenue and West 75th Street, there were people "running a drug and prostitution ring in here," Ms.
Eisenpress said.
"The front door had a big battering-ram mark on it," she said.
"We asked the managing agent what it was and they said that was where the cops broke down the door."


Business Diary: May 15-20
THE ECONOMY Rates Rise, Stocks Plunge; Rates Rise More, Stocks Soar.
Go Figure.
At last we see what the financial markets wanted!
It clearly wasn't the water-drip torture of the Federal Reserve raising interest rates a quarter point at a clip, as it did earlier this year, always hinting of more to come.
But last week it moved decisively, not only raising the Federal funds rate by half a point, but also lifting the discount rate the same amount after leaving it unchanged for nearly two years, and banks quickly lifted prime rates, too.
The markets loved this decisiveness, with the Dow industrials soaring 95 points in four days and long-bond yields falling.
Perverse?
Not really.
If short-term rates reach a level the markets can live with, the thinking goes, then investors won't worry about long-term inflation.
"We have gotten the dark cloud of uncertainty from over our heads," said one economist. (If the winds change, of course, economists will be glad to come up with some seemingly opposite rationale.)


Maintaining a Soft Top Doesn't Require Hard Labor
Caring for a convertible top need not be daunting.
Some basic, commonsense procedures will generally keep a convertible looking good, top up or top down.
Archie Sibilia, the upholsterer at Hibernia Auto Restorations in Hibernia, N.J., advises convertible owners to "watch where you park," avoiding tree sap, bird droppings and strong sunlight.
And wash the entire top. 'Don't spot-clean," Mr. Sibilia said. "When you spot-clean the top, you get rings."


Spies &amp; Thrillers
One of the first novelists to take on the Persian Gulf war, Frederick Forsyth combines fact and fiction in THE FIST OF GOD (Bantam, $23.95).
Many old friends and enemies are present: George Bush, Margaret Thatcher, Yitzhak Shamir, Brent Scowcroft, Saddam Hussein, James Baker, Norman Schwarzkopf, Colin Powell.
It is against the backdrop of the gulf war that Maj.
Mike Martin, a British special services officer, operates.
Mr.
Forsyth, who is best known for "The Day of the Jackal" and "The Odessa File," breaks no new ground here.
Nor does he have to.
His formula, consisting of well-researched backgrounds, technical detail and a dispassionate reportorial approach to fiction, almost always works well, and this book is no exception.
There is general excitement without hysteria and plenty of credible action.


Retooling the 'People Skills' of Corporate America
IT was the late 1970's and early 80's, and many capital-intensive American industries were in the doldrums.
Profits were down, technology was sliding toward obsolescence, international competition was intensifying.
A few companies were beginning to realize competitors abroad weren't going to settle for the role of a fly that could be swatted away.
The Union Camp Corporation, a maker of paper, packaging and paper-related products, assessed its future and made a critical decision.
"It had been felt that people issues weren't important in a capital-intensive industry," said Russell W. Boekenheide, a senior vice president based at Union Camp's headquarters in Wayne, N.J.
"We have a lot of common technology in the paper industry. You get your edge through improved efficiency." Union Camp decided it would -- and could -- compete on its people, a radical departure in an industry not known for innovation.


It Is Time to Be Old
SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND By Dennis McFarland. 287 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


In Russian Education, Growing Class Distinction
Down the road from the grand dachas that once belonged to Molotov and Stalin's daughter and Gorbachev lies Zhukovka Humanities School, one of Russia's most expensive private schools.
Founded last year, Zhukovka offers Latin, tennis and etiquette.
Beneath sweet-scented birch and pine trees, armed security guards in camouflage jackets patrol the playground.


Weddings; Candice White, J. L. LaBombard
Candice Elizabeth White, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Rohde White of Albany, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Louis LaBombard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald LaBombard of Glastonbury, Conn.
The Rev.
John Hudson officiated at Caldwell Presbyterian Church in Lake George, N.Y.
Ms.
White, 24, is keeping her name.
She is the director of special projects at The Atlantic Monthly magazine in Boston.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the president of White Management, a restaurant management company in Albany.
Her mother, Mary Carol White, is an interior decorator in Albany.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Enter RU-486, Exit Hype
In the early 1980's, when the French abortion pill RU-486 appeared on the horizon, it was hailed as having the potential to change the landscape of women's reproductive health care.
Now, with its arrival in the United States expected by 1996, the optimism is tempered, and the pill seems destined to alter the landscape in ways not anticipated.
Although advocates are delighted that women will have an alternative to surgical abortion, euphoria has yielded to caution.


Weddings; Andrea Sepulveda, Michael Ianzito
Andrea Patricia Sepulveda, the advertising manager at the Equitable Life Assurance Society, was married in New York yesterday to Michael Leonard Ianzito, a vice president of Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn, the advertising agency.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Nicholas Morcone performed the ceremony at St.
Monica's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Ianzito, 27, graduated from Bentley College.
She is the daughter of Carmen and Carl Dobbs of Forest Hills, Queens.
The bride's parents legally changed their name.


Weddings; Sarah Chapman, Barry Bohrer
Sarah Northrop Chapman, an assistant United States attorney in New York, was married yesterday to Barry Bohrer, a partner in the law firm of Morvillo, Abramowitz, Grand, Iason &amp; Silberberg in New York.
Judge John S. Martin Jr. of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated at Caramoor, the arts center in Katonah, N.Y.
Ms.
Chapman is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Chapman of Carmel Valley, Calif.
Her father retired as the director of the Belle Bonfils Memorial Blood Center in Denver.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Rye; Charm to Spare, but at a Price
THE City of Rye, one of Westchester County's most appealing communities, has abundant open space, well-regarded schools, an attractive business district, a blend of housing styles and easy commuting to Manhattan.
The city, with eight miles of beach and marshland on Long Island Sound, seceded from the Town of Rye in 1942 to become the smallest city in Westchester.
The move was begun by residents seeking distance from their less affluent neighbors in the village of Port Chester, also part of the Town of Rye.


ARISTIDE, INNOCENT ABROAD
Fifty years ago, while his country was being overrun by fascists and opportunists, Charles de Gaulle fled alone across the water to lay claim to the leadership of France.
The American foreign-policy establishment considered him, like Aristide, "intractable, unstable, vengeful, unrealistic, megalomaniacal." And like President Clinton, Franklin Roosevelt kept at arm's length a difficult and proud torchbearer.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  A four-legged friend is a friend indeed, providing moments of cheer at hospices, rehabilitation centers and nursing homes.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Future Barry Dillers and Michael Ovitzes learn the smoke-and-mirror trade in the William Morris mailroom.


An English Pleasure Dome
AS you enter the front door of Chewton Glen, stepping off the flagstone circular drive into the warmly decorated vestibule, there is a reassuring sight off to one side -- green wellingtons, lined up like sentinels, ready to be donned by guests for a hearty hike through the woods or perhaps down the ravine to the crashing sea.
The touch is typical of English country hotels in the best tradition -- thoughtful, inviting, cozy.
It tells you right away what you need to know: you can relax here if you simply treat the place like home.
Chewton Glen, presided over by Martin Skan, a confectioner turned hotelier, and his Swiss wife, Brigitte, is a country hotel set in 70 wooded and landscaped acres in southern Hampshire, on the edge of the New Forest (that is, dating from only the 11th century).
The hotel is prim and elegant, rather than grand and imposing: an 18th-century manor house restyled in the Palladian fashion, a sturdy three-story brick structure with creeping ivy, white wood gables and distinctive bright green shutters.
It sits on a rounded ridge in a sea of lawns the color of billiard table felt and about as deep.


Mediators Invite Bosnia Factions to Talks
Leaders of the warring Muslim, Serbian and Croatian factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina have been invited by international mediators to peace talks in southern France early next week, officials said today.
The mediators, Lord Owen of the European Union and Thorvald Stoltenberg of the United Nations, plan to meet Tuesday in Geneva with representatives of Britain, France, Russia, the United States and Germany, which make up the so-called "contact group" trying to end the fighting in the former Yugoslavia.


Weddings; Alissa Marshak, Jeffrey Reich
Alissa Beth Marshak, a daughter of Evelyn and Morton Marshak of Monroe, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
Jeffrey David Reich, the son of Joan and James Reich of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Garry A. Loeb is to perform the ceremony at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Weddings; Dina M. Foster, Selvin Osbourne
Dina Maria Foster, the organist at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York, was married yesterday to Selvin Roy Osbourne, a financial director at Weston United Community Renewal Inc. in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Calvin O. Butts 3d officiated at Abyssinian Baptist, and the Rev.
Dr.
Samuel D. Proctor took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 35, is also the director of the Maria Lawton Senior Center in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Hunter College, where she is a candidate for a master's degree in social work.
She is the daughter of Curley E.Foster of New York and the late Charles W. Foster.
Her mother retired as a supervisor at the Human Resources Administration in New York.


Don't Fudge on China
By the end of next week, President Clinton must decide whether China has met the modest human rights conditions he set last year for renewal of its favorable access to American markets.
He should face up to the reality that these conditions have not been met and propose targeted economic sanctions to Congress.
These should be designed to send a strong political message while limiting the economic damage to both sides.
Some damage is inevitable, but it is a cost worth paying for principle and consistency.
Chinese leaders plead that this has been a difficult year -- uncertainty over who will succeed Deng Xiaoping, problems with economic reform, inflation, new pressures for democracy, peasant and labor unrest.
They ask the U.S. to suspend its human rights concerns and accept repression for the sake of stability and growth.


Weddings; Lisa F. Kaplan, Gregory Gordon
Lisa Faye Kaplan, a national features correspondent for the Gannett News Service in Arlington, Va., was married last evening to Gregory Lee Gordon, a Washington correspondent for The Minneapolis Star Tribune.
Rabbi Julie Gordon, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 41, graduated from Manhattanville College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Kaplan of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Weddings; Nancy Y. Augustine, Mark W. Gardner
Nancy Yolanda Augustine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald Cooper Augustine of Takoma Park, Md., is to be married today to Mark Wayne Gardner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Gardner of Fredricksburg, Va.
The Rev.
Steven Bird is to perform the Methodist ceremony at Renaissance Manor in Stafford, Va.
The bride, 28, is an urban planner for the Stafford County Planning Office.
She graduated from George Washington University and received her master of planning degree from the University of Virginia.


Church to Build Housing Project
"You can't just build houses without the social services," says the Rev.
Fred A. Lucas Jr., a pastor of the Bridge Street African Wesleyan Methodist Episcopal Church, "and you can't provide the social services without housing."
For many years, the church has been providing services for Bedford-Stuyvesant's needy, rescuing widows and orphans in the 1890's, feeding the homeless in the 1990's.
Now it is going to provide the housing.


A WRINKLE IN TIME
Once the nemesis of plastic surgeons and dry cleaners, wrinkles are now being celebrated -- by designers who are taking the starch out of fashion, by visionaries capable of finding beauty in imperfection.


Little Town Faces a Big Dilemma
Mayor Lillian Clayman describes Hamden, Conn., as "a picturesque little community."
But Hamden, a New Haven suburb with 53,000 residents, has a problem: what to do about its school superintendent.


Weddings; Lucy E. Kehoe, James E. Buggy
Lucy Elizabeth Kehoe, a daughter of Anne Glazebrook Kehoe of Todt Hill, S.I., and Francis J. Kehoe of Grymes Hill, S.I., was married yesterday to James Edward Buggy, a son of the late Mary and Martin Buggy.
The Rev.
John H. Walsted performed the service at Christ Episcopal Church in New Brighton, S.I.
Mrs.
Buggy, 30, is the manager of the conference division of CMC, trade show and conference producers, in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.


Northwest Morels, the Fragrant Delicacy
MORELS arrived a little late this year, but they are now at their peak, and cooks are happy.
They come from Washington State and Oregon, and the season runs through July.
Highly prized, these fragrant mushrooms have a delicate flavor, which is best brought out when they are simmered in stock or light cream or sauteed in butter.
They go well with pasta, risotto and light meats like chicken and veal.
American morels don't have the pungency of French ones, so I like to mix in a few dried ones to enhance the flavor.


May 15-21; Out of the Lab, Into the Grocery Store: Gene Therapy for Tomatoes
Consumer surveys suggest that 80 percent of food shoppers do not like the tomatoes they find on the shelves most of the time, particularly during winter.
Knowing that consumers too often face a choice of green and hard or soft and mushy, both equally tasteless, the budding biotechnology food industry decided to provide an alternative -- a firm, red fruit that developers say has that fresh-from-the-garden taste all year round.
The Food and Drug Administration said last week that genetically engineered tomatoes developed by Calgene Incorporated of Davis, Calif., are just as safe as the ordinary garden variety, clearing the way for their sale in some grocery stores in the West and Midwest this week and nationwide within a year.
The industry says Calgene's Flavr Savr tomato, altered to ripen longer on the vine, heralds a new era in custom food production, with more than 50 other food items, including potatoes that absorb less fat when fried and vegetables that require less water and fewer pesticides, posed to flood the market soon.


Packaging America's Killing Fields
Before they faced each other in the rolling farm country of Virginia, the soldiers may have had lofty visions of preserving the Union or of starting a new nation, depending on whether they wore blue or gray.
Once the shooting started, they probably just thought about staying alive.
They certainly weren't worried about an amusement park or traffic jams, which hadn't been invented in 1861 and 1862, when the two battles of Bull Run were fought at Manassas.


A New San Francisco Is Growing Downtown
EVERY morning on the Yerba Buena Gardens Esplanade, a block south of Market Street and four blocks from San Francisco's financial district, dozens of elderly people from a neighboring apartment complex, most of them Chinese, can be seen performing tai chi exercises.
They are a fitting symbol of how San Francisco has succeeded in its attempt to retain its multicultural heritage while redeveloping decaying neighborhoods.


Fantasy Land


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
HISTORY ON FIRE: Big scare on Irving Place.
Greasefire destroys the kitchen and part of the upstairs dining room at 130-year-old Pete's Tavern.
Rebuilding required but the show goes on for the bar and sidewalk cafe, and the kitchen may reopen this week . . .
GROUNDWORK: Parents, volunteers and the Sterling Foundation begin renovating dangerous and decrepit playground at Chinatown's P.S. 124 . . .
LAST CALL: After many complaints about disturbances, the Mill, at York and 83d Street, closes.
Neighorhood leaders want to keep it that way and are asking the state to deny the bar's previously filed application to renew its liquor license . . .
BRUSH WITH THE LAW: Robert Bery, arrested for selling his sketches and paintings on the streets of the Financial District without a vendor's license, wins case.
Criminal Court Judge Laura L. Jacobsen rules that the free-speech exemption for sellers of written material covers him, too.
District Attorney weighs appeal.


The Many Faces Of Goya, In Miniature
ALMOST EVERY AGE HAS wanted Goya for its own.
The Romantics saw him as a kindred spirit, which he was.
Then the Realists adopted him as Everyman's champion, which he was, too, up to a point.
The Symbolists embraced him.
The Surrealists claimed him for obvious reasons, the Existentialists for less obvious ones, even the fascist Franco because Goya was Spanish and patriotic and the servant to a succession of rulers.
Most recently, a major traveling exhibition in 1989 served up Goya the liberal, a figure more in tune with post-Franco Spain.
Goya is too complex an artist to fit neatly into any of these slots, and it comes almost as a relief that "Goya: Truth and Fantasy," here at the Royal Academy, doesn't try.
It celebrates him simply as a brilliant painter.
The show, organized by Norman Rosenthal of the Academy, Manuela Mena Marquez of the Prado and the Goya scholar Juliet Wilson-Bareau, is one of the most pleasurable exhibitions in a long time. (It remains on view through June 12, then travels to the Art Institute of Chicago in July.)


THE Q GENE
If Sarah Bird should have a daughter, she might be surprised when the recessive QP gene (as in Kewpie doll) rears its ugly head.
Even those of us who grew up in the 1960's become somewhat socially irresponsible when we peruse the aisles of Toys "R" Us.
BARBARA GREENGART Oceanside, L.I.


To Cure the Soul, an Ear to the Ground
THE JUNKIES are squabbling on the corner; every fourth word is "milligram," and the high school boys are kick-boxing while the girls are cheering them on and the construction workers in their pathetically piratical ponies and hoop earrings are shouting about the Knicks and the Rangers over their clattering gutter crunchers.
Some days this is the symphony of the streets and some days it is an edgy energy of the city that drives me crazy and turns me defensive and mean.
Those are the days when the routine shards of city life seem like darts to your heart, when it seems as though everybody out there trying to get through his or her day is really trying to unmake yours.
My wife calls them "Uzi Days," when you fantasize sweeping the streets clean, as if that would purge your own poisoned soul.
Fortunately, I have no Uzi.


Time to Widen the Tony's Scope
Broadway theater is about to honor itself with Tony awards for this year's "best." Millions watching on television three weeks from tonight, or reading the winners' publicity blurbs thereafter, will be given the impression that these are the best there are.
That may be -- or may not.
Tony awards go only to shows in 35 big houses in or near the midtown theater district of New York City.
That is a mistake.
The Tony was established almost 50 years ago, when "Broadway" meant American theater.
Times have changed.
It is time the Tony changed, too -- to include Off Broadway stages which, along with regional theater, have become consistently lively and creative.


May 15-21; Volcano Erupts in Chile


A Business That Makes the Good Times Look Good
IN the cap-and-gown business hazards can lurk under every tassel.
"Take mortarboards," said Peter Covell, who has provided those and graduation gowns to thousands of Long Islanders over a 30-year career.
"The mortarboard can be a dangerous piece of equipment.
"When the graduation is over the kids throw them up in the air. They come back down point first. That can cause a good gash in the head."


In Venice, Architecture From the Renaissance
The Palazzo Grassi in Venice is playing host until Nov. 6 to one of the most exhaustive exhibitions ever held on Renaissance architecture.
The centerpiece of the exhibition, "Renaissance -- From Brunelleschi to Michelangelo," is the wooden model for St.
Peter's, which Julius II commissioned in the early 16th century to replace the original fourth-century structure.
The model was executed in 1539 based on designs by Antonio da Sangallo.
The model, measuring 26 feet by 19 feet and standing nearly 16 feet high, was recently restored and is displayed in the central courtyard.
In addition to Sangallo's original model, the exhibit features virtually all the extant wooden architectural models built in the 15th and 16th centuries, 31 in all, including those for the cathedrals of Florence, Pavia, Como and Vigevano, as well as Michelangelo's model for the dome of St.
Peter's, on loan from the Vatican Museums.


Q and A
India's Palace on Wheels
Q.
I have heard about a luxury train called the Palace on Wheels that makes the rounds of several cities in India.
My travel agent cannot find out about it.
Can you help? -- Linda Kendall, Pepper Pike, Ohio


14 Hits Are Not Enough for Saberhagen as the Mets Slip Below .500
Dallas Green wanted offense.
He got offense.
He got lots and lots of offense: 14 hits, to be precise.
All that meant little, though, after his best pitcher fell apart on the mound.
In a most uncharacteristic performance, the Mets piled up an early lead and battered the Phillies' pitchers tonight at Veterans Stadium, but got killed by their own ace.


LISTINGS/British Television; Forget 'Middlemarch.' Bring on the Nun With the Nudes
For the "Masterpiece Theater" set, it seemed like a dream come true.
The British Boradcasting Corporation announced this month that it hopes to establish cable and satellite networks in the United States and around the world.
At last, hope for an oasis in the 500-channel cultural wasteland of the airways.
"Middlemarch" instead of "Married with Children."
But if British television enjoys a highbrow reputation in the rest of the world, its standing at home is considerably less exalted.
Yes, the BBC does period dramas and in-depth documentaries better than just about anyone, and some people even watch them.
Commercial television here is capable of producing top-notch series like "Prime Suspect" and attracting the likes of Helen Mirren to star in them.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about patients at Schneider Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park omitted a word in referring to the caseload at the hematology-oncology clinic.
Those with malignancies represent more than 80 percent of the outpatients.


POSTINGS: South Bronx Transformation; From Fake Windows to Real Rehabilitation
Throughout much of the 1980's, the five-story buildings that stand along the west side of Crotona Park in the South Bronx were festooned with six-pane windows, half-open shades and louvered shutters -- all fake.
The large decorative decals were a well-intentioned but much-ridiculed attempt to give life to what was then a strip of abandoned city-owned apartment houses.
These days, though, the apartments have real windows, shades and shutters.
They were rehabilitated by Phipps Houses of Manhattan into Crotona Park West, a 20-building development providing 563 units for 2,200 low- and moderate-income New Yorkers.
Monthly rents range from as low as $328 for a studio for a family earning $14,200 to $17,040 a year to $680 for a three-bedroom unit for a family earning $28,760 to $34,510 a year.


For Yanks, Everyone's Getting In the Act
Be ready.
The message extends to the farthest end of the Yankee dugout and the most distant seat in the bullpen.
The execution of the message from Manager Buck Showalter throughout his clubhouse can separate good teams from better and better from best.
The length of the Yankee bench produced a 5-4 victory over Baltimore yesterday, the 28th in 40 games, the most successful start to a Yankee season since Casey Stengel was pushing buttons 36 springs ago.


LISTINGS/British Television; Forget 'Middlemarch.' Bring on the Nun With the Nudes
For the "Masterpiece Theater" set, it seemed like a dream come true.
The British Boradcasting Corporation announced this month that it hopes to establish cable and satellite networks in the United States and around the world.
At last, hope for an oasis in the 500-channel cultural wasteland of the airways.
"Middlemarch" instead of "Married with Children."
But if British television enjoys a highbrow reputation in the rest of the world, its standing at home is considerably less exalted.
Yes, the BBC does period dramas and in-depth documentaries better than just about anyone, and some people even watch them.
Commercial television here is capable of producing top-notch series like "Prime Suspect" and attracting the likes of Helen Mirren to star in them.


To Prevent Paint Injuries, Safety Is Crucial With Some Sprayers
SPRAY painting walls and other large surfaces is fast and produces even coatings without brush marks.
But spray equipment can be expensive, some practice is needed and preparation and cleanup are usually more demanding than with brushes and rollers.
Yet for several rooms, the cost of a moderate spray system, $100 to $175, may be justifiable.
For exterior painting, renting professional equipment at $250 to $350 a week can save substantially, compared to hiring painters or investing a summer of weekends painting with hand tools.


Following Waves, Choice Fish Choices
MAIN STREAM looks much like Waves, but it is not the same.
The imposing shiplike building in Port Washington shows little change.
But that is O.K., for big, bold, nautical good looks were among the delights of the former restaurant.
The interior still shines with wood-planked floors edged in neon, brass railings and metal-trimmed wood columns.
Yet, there has been a major shake-up.
The staff is now led by Brian King, general manager, and Tommy White, executive chef.
Mr.
King's youthful dining room crew is well trained and personable, from the effervescent waitresses to the ever-present busboys' refilling water glasses.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on May 8 about garden tours from London misstated the telephone number of the organizer, Garden Day Tours.
It is (44 71) 431 2758.


'Echoing of Trumpets' Can Still Be Heard
THE CHANGE OF ONE WORD IN A title can make a subtle but significant difference.
When Antony Tudor created a new work for the Royal Swedish Ballet in 1963, it was called "Ekon av Trumpeter," which was translated into English as "Echoes of Trumpets." But Tudor soon came to prefer "Echoing of Trumpets," and it is under this title that the piece will be revived at the Metropolitan Opera House by American Ballet Theater, beginning on Tuesday.
The British-born choreographer was associated with Ballet Theater from the troupe's inception in 1940 to his death in 1987.


'A Department Store of Music'
LEONARD BERNSTEIN By Humphrey Burton. Illustrated. 594 pp. New York: Doubleday. $25.


Tabasco Cat Outduels Go for Gin In Preakness
Go for Gin came to the end of his quest to sweep the Triple Crown today when he was outrun in a stirring stretch duel by Tabasco Cat, who won the 119th Preakness Stakes and redeemed two and a half years of personal misfortune for his trainer, D. Wayne Lukas.
It was two weeks after Tabasco Cat had run sixth in the Kentucky Derby in a rainy, roughhouse race won by Go for Gin.
But this time, no rain and no roughhouse.
And after riding Tabasco Cat home in front by three-quarters of a length, Pat Day said with appreciation: "We had to pitch a perfect trip, and we did."


Weddings; Lisa H. Eaton, Gilbert Fleitas
Lisa Hutchinson Eaton, a daughter of Mrs.
William Mellon Eaton of New York and the late Mr.
Eaton, was married on Friday to Gilbert Fleitas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert L. Fleitas of Guayama, P.R.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Fleitas, 27, is a sales associate at Brown, Harris, Stevens, a real estate company in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father was the founder and a senior partner of Eaton &amp; Van Winkle, a New York law firm.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Carolyn Mellon and Dr.
Ernest Risley Eaton.


Downtown Views, Italian Food and Style
WHEN we first reviewed Gaetano's in Hartford almost 14 years ago it was relatively new.
At that time it specialized in Italian and French cuisines.
Since then it has narrowed its focus, concentrating on Italian fare.
It was clearly the right choice inasmuch as the restaurant is owned by Carbone's, a longtime Italian standby on the Hartford scene.
Gaetano's is on the second floor of the Hartford Civic Center, in a vast space divided into a dark bar-cafe and a softly lighted two-tier dining room.
The lower level has tables, upholstered chairs and booths beside large windows with commanding views.
The raised dining area is punctuated by three glassed-in gazebos that seat 8 to 10 diners each and are used mostly by business groups at lunch.
Muted blue-greens and browns are offset by a wine-color carpet.
An entrance wall is lined with pictures of 19th-century Hartford.


Weddings; Lynn A. Scotti, W. E. Kassar Jr.
Lynn A. Scotti, the retail manager at Harper's Bazaar, was married yesterday to William E. Kassar Jr., a stockbroker at the Hanover Sterling Company, a securities brokerage.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Donald Brouillard performed the ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Kassar, 31, graduated from Villanova University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Scotti of Congers, N.Y.
Her father is the director of corporate engineering for Sealand Services Inc., a shipping company in Elizabeth, N.J.


British Labor Leader Is Buried


IN SHORT: FICTION
CRIME NOVEL  CRIMINAL CONVERSATION  By Evan Hunter. Warner, $21.95.


Examining Cultural Mores in a Lehman College Exhibition
Physical Evidence" comes to Lehman College Art Gallery from the Procter Art Center, at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson. It was organized at the exhibition there by Molly Sullivan, an independent curator.
On the face of it, this gathering of objects and installations by eight contemporaries differs little from others of its kind to be seen in SoHo and other hip milieus.
That is, the works tend to be allusive rather than self-explanatory.
Some are impressive spectacles, a few have esthetic appeal and all are open to interpretation.


IN GEORGIA, A CHATEAU OF HEALTH
IF the Spa at Chateau Elan did not exist, Southern Living magazine would have had to invent it.
But even Southern Living, famous for its relentlessly cheery vision of a convivial, suburban South of backyard wine tastings and world-class azaleas would have had a tough time coming up with anything quite like the spa-French Chateau-winery-golf-equestrian resort incongrously popping out of the cow pastures off Interstate 85 down the road from Braselton, the crumbling north Georgia hamlet the actress Kim Basinger bought a few years back.
This is definitely not a place for someone looking for an austere, Teutonic health regimen.
But despite its grab bag of attractions, more Martha Stewart than Susan Powter, you could do far worse than to be babied, pampered, kneaded and catered to at this two-year-old, 14-room spa a half-hour north of Atlanta.


Face to Face With Bergman
Ingmar Bergman once described to the critic Charles Thomas Samuels a passion "to create light: light and faces surrounded by shadows." The great director told John Simon that he wanted audiences just "to sit down and look at the human face." Many of these all-too-human faces -- often tragic, sometimes comic; often tormented, sometimes at peace -- are on display in INGMAR BERGMAN: Film and Stage (Abrams, $45).
The subtitle is misleading: Robert Emmet Long's sensible text briefly summarizes and analyzes every film Mr.
Bergman has written or directed, but only those stage productions that have traveled to New York in recent years receive more than a polite nod.
The book contains plenty of shots of Mr.
Bergman at work, though most of the more than 200 photographs are taken from his movies.
"Fanny and Alexander" and "The Magic Flute" are amply illustrated, in color as well as in black and white, while masterpieces like "Winter Light" and "The Passion of Anna" are slighted.
There is a splendid two-page reproduction of the dance of death from "The Seventh Seal," yet turn the page to "Wild Strawberries" and you won't find a single image from the opening dream sequence.
"Now About These Women," which Mr.
Long says "is commonly considered Bergman's worst film," gets more picture space than "Persona," which is possibly his best.
The captions are occasionally instructive and occasionally erroneous (if that's Erland Josephson on page 119, I'm August Strindberg).
Mr.
Long, the author of "The Films of Merchant Ivory," writes about Mr.
Bergman's "intense preoccupation with women, perceived with a ripe sensuousness." Thus it is no surprise that the stars of this book are remarkable actresses like Liv Ullmann and the magnificent Anderssons, Harriet and Bibi.
Ingmar Bergman's God may be silent, but those three deities are pure eloquence.
DAVID KELLY


Political Notes; An Interested Guardian Of Utility-Tax Revenue
To many New Jersey mayors, one of the best political equivalents of the fox guarding the henhouse is the way Trenton watches over tax revenue meant for the cities.
Public utility companies pay the state millions of dollars each year in lieu of local taxes on certain properties.
The state forecasts the revenue, collects the tax and then distributes the nest egg to the municipalities to help them balance their budgets and relieve property taxes.


Mutual Funds; A Gleam in Closed-End Muni Funds
MILLIONS of investors who flocked to closed-end municipal bonds funds last year looking for tax-free income have been sorely disappointed this year.
The funds lost an average 8.3 percent of their value in the first four months of the year, compared with a 6.3 percent drop in taxable bond funds.
People looking for a silver lining will find that closed-end municipal funds are now selling at the lowest prices in years.
Closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares and trade like common stock on major exchanges.
They usually trade at prices that represent a discount or a premium to the underlying value of their holdings.


Weddings; Emily Eisenberg, Jonathan Harris
Emily Zoe Eisenberg, a daughter of Ethel Eisenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Barney Eisenberg, was married last evening to Jonathan Richard Harris, the son of Marilyn Harris of Great Neck, L.I., and Sidney Harris of New Haven.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman performed the ceremony at the Loft in New York.
The bride, 29, is the senior product developer in the special publications department of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL  $1.1 million
21 East 90th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 30-ft. entrance gallery, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, 3 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $1,990, 47% tax deductible; listed at $1.15 million, 22 weeks on market (Brokers: Douglas Elliman; Jean-Marc Levet)


Weddings; Judith A. Neugroschl, Ari M. Melnick
Dr.
Judith Aviva Neugroschl, a resident in psychiatry at Yale University, is to be married today in Ridgefield, Conn., to Dr.
Ari Matthew Melnick, a resident in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
Rabbi Paul Golumb is to officiate at the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Slote, the bride's aunt and uncle.
The bride, 28, graduated from Harvard University and received her medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seth Neugroschl of New York.
Her father retired as a strategic planner for the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.
Her mother, who uses the name Geraldine Slote professionally, is a clinical psychologist in New York.


Why This Eerie Renewal After Carnage
To the Editor:
Tsk, tsk.
At least part of the headline "Sarajevo Spring Brings Lilacs Out of Dead Land" (May 15) should have been in quotation marks.


At Work; Unhealthy Prospects for Women
MEN and women are affected differently by their access -- or lack of it -- to the American health care system.
Women use health care more, spend a greater portion of their income on it and are more likely to come into contact with the health care system than other family members, according to a study released earlier this month by the Institute for Women's Policy Research in Washington.
The study found that women are "chronically uninsured," because their life-cycle and labor participation patterns often preclude coverage by an employer.
Three-quarters of the nation's 12 million uninsured women are employed but do not receive insurance at work, the study found.


That Paragon of Porkers: Remembering Freddy the Pig
THE moral center of my childhood universe, the place where good and evil, friendship and treachery, honesty and humbug were defined most clearly, was not church, not school and not the Boy Scouts.
It was the Bean Farm.
The Bean Farm, as all right-thinking children of my generation knew, was the upstate New York home of Freddy the Pig and his fellow animals.
They were the subject of 26 books by Walter R. Brooks, a New York advertising man and a staff writer for The New Yorker, that appeared between 1927 and Brooks's death in 1958.
One of Brooks's many triumphs of tone was that his human characters were surprised, but only mildly surprised, that the animals talked.
Mr.
Bean, whose farm they lived on, barely said a word, so he appeared the unusual one.


Savoring a View From His Bridge
His elbows on the living-room window sill, Jim Fortunato would watch day after day as the towers of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge inched heavenward, and as strands of steel, like strings on some monumental harp, were woven into a structure built to defy the strictures of nature.
Fascinated though a boy of 8 could be, he did not know back then -- 32 years ago -- that those two 69-story-high towers had to be built one and five-eighths inches farther apart at the top than at bay-bottom to account for the curvature of the Earth.
Neither did he know that the towers would be gripped by three million rivets and one million bolts, or that enough concrete would be poured in the bridge's construction to pave a one-lane highway from New York to Washington.


Weddings; Ellen Rosenthal, Theodore Ferguson
Ellen Anne Rosenthal, the daughter of Mary and Allan Rosenthal of Bronxville, N.Y., is to be married today to Theodore Zuelzer Ferguson, the son of Barbara Kusko and Robert Ferguson, both of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman will officiate at the West Park (N.Y.) Winery.
The bride, 29, is a Ph.D. candidate in English at Washington University.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Cornell University, and she received a master's degree in Anglo-Irish literature from Trinity College in Dublin.
Her father retired as the director of product design at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, also retired, was a senior systems engineer at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.


The World; More Than One Way to Squeeze China
China's best-known political prisoner may not be Ren Wanding, a human rights campaigner with Coke-bottle glasses and a Jeffersonian vision, or even Wei Jingsheng, whom the police last month tossed back in the jails where he had already spent more than 14 years.
Instead, it may be Bill Clinton.
A year ago, the President demanded that China improve its human rights situation and warned that otherwise he would cut off the desirable tariff treatment known as "most favored nation" trade status.
Now the deadline is less than two weeks away, and China has made only modest concessions.
And the secret police have been extending a crackdown on democracy sympathizers and Christian organizers, so it may strain credulity for Mr.
Clinton to claim his conditions have been met.


Weddings; Michael A. Holt and Alice W. Maggin
Alice Winter Maggin, the daughter of Jane C. Maggin and Donald L. Maggin, both of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Anthony Holt, a son of Carolyn A. Jehner of Lansing, Mich., and Jerry L. Holt of Dewitt, Mich.
The Very Rev.
James P. Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Ms.
Maggin, 24, is keeping her name.
She is the planning editor on the assignment desk for Channel 2 News at WCBS-TV in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is an author.
Her mother is a senior vice president of Audits and Surveys Inc., a market research company in New York.


Weddings; Cindy A. Levine, Bradley Settleman
Cindy Anne Levine, an account executive at Jaffe &amp; Parisi, a marketing communications company, was married in New York last evening to Bradley Alan Settleman, an associate at C S First Boston, the investment bank.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Settleman, 30, graduated from American University.
She is a daughter of Arlene and Arthur Levine of Old Brookville, L.I.


Buyers Move In, Transforming a Brownsville Street
IT did not take long for the buyers of new condominiums in a handsomely rehabilitated strip of buildings on Hull Street in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn to take management and investment matters into their own hands.
What they wanted was iron gates, the better to protect their front stoops from after-school loungers.
So at only the second meeting of the Hull Street Condominium Association on May 12 they voted to spend $11,000 to install gates in front of the 10 mostly contiguous four-story buildings, which house 40 condominium apartments.
Each owner was assessed $275.


Canada Acts To Cut Fishing By Foreigners
Canada has given itself the legal authority to seize foreign fishing boats outside its 200-mile limit in the North Atlantic in an attempt to stem the depletion of cod, flounder and redfish.
The law, enacted by both houses of Parliament this month, focuses on an area about half the size of New York State, known as the Nose and the Tail of the Grand Banks, fish-breeding grounds on Canada's continental shelf, southeast of Newfoundland.


Weddings; Wendy R. Victor, Hardin A. Pantle
Wendy Rockwell Victor, the daughter of Alice Victor and Royall Victor 3d, both of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Hardin Attwood Pantle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
David Pantle of Denver.
The Rev.
Sydney A. Woodd-Cahusac performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Pantle, 27, and her husband, 28, are cum laude graduates of Middlebury College.
Her father is a managing director of Chemical Securities Inc. in New York.
Her mother is the executive assistant to David Rockefeller in New York.


Weddings; John H. Halpern, Gabrielle Chen
Gabrielle Yan-Yang Chen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jun-Yan Chen of Beijing, is to be married today to Dr.
John Haim Halpern, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham L. Halpern of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Rothman is to officiate at the Mamaroneck Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Halpern, 20, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is the general manager and chief representative in Beijing of the Lummus Overseas Corporation, a subsidiary of ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., the engineering company with headquarters in Zurich.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ON-THE-WALL BOOKS
Books that will never be on the shelves of your local bookstore nor available at the library, make up the exhibition called "Out of Bounds: Books as Art/Art as Books" at the Creative Arts Workshop in New Haven through June 25.
They may, however, be hung on the wall or displayed in some other fashion.
Juried by Richard Minsky, founder of the Center for Book Arts in Manhattan, the 75 pieces were selected from 345 entries.
Some are contemporary versions of tablets and scrolls, harking back to the earliest forms of non-verbal communication.
One piece is a spin-off of the medieval monk's "girdle" book, or leather waistband from which a book, presumably a prayer book, was suspended.
But most of the works were created by artists and craftspeople who were clearly unbound by any such traditions.


Technology; For Mac Users, Software for Typing in Tongues
PHILIP PAYNE says he didn't shout "Eureka" that day in 1984.
But after a decidedly amateurish labor amid bytes, bits and pixels, the apparition of the Greek letter rho on the black-and-white screen of his Macintosh computer came pretty close to an epiphany.
"There was this moment of ecstasy seeing that first Greek letter on the screen and to print it out," he said.
"I remember looking at that rho. That's what launched the company."


A Big Drop in Flower Sales May Prompt an Industry Recount
At a time when homeowners everywhere are planting flowers, a statistical mystery about a phantom $106 million loss in sales is growing in the field of floriculture, a thriving industry in New York that produces flowering plants in greenhouses.
If Federal statistics are correct, the wholesale value of floriculture crops in the state dropped from $250 million in 1992 to $144 million in 1993.
Agricultural economists said the figures were obviously wrong.


A Lawyer's Lament
THE BETRAYED PROFESSION Lawyering at the End of the Twentieth Century.
By Sol M. Linowitz with Martin Mayer. 273 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $25.


Put Labor Law Investigators on the Case
To the Editor:
As Congress pondered legislation to increase the Federal crime-fighting role, a bill was quietly introduced in the House of Representatives whose modest goal is to restore some enforcement power to a Federal agency that has been fighting workplace crime more than 55 years.


Resort Expansion In Vernon
Re: "Vernon Resort Expansion Plan Meets Criticism," a recent article by Joanne Kadish:
Many readers already know my feelings about the dangers of converting farmland to housing from an article in The Vernon News of March 17.
However, the issue that seems more immediate is the appearance of "grapevine" comments made by Vernon's elected, who serve all the people of Vernon.
The profile that has begun to emerge from Town Hall is that of a government within a government, the "us and them" phenomenon, a political process that excludes the majority, and power for the sake of power.


Lehman, In a Flash, Finds His Confidence
Most pro athletes can point to a moment in their career, a signal moment during their struggle to become what they are, when they realized they had what it takes.
For Tom Lehman, 35, that moment was framed by events that could, to the casual observer, be viewed as failure.
It was 1990, and Lehman, who has a four-stroke lead today after three rounds of the Memorial Tournament here at Muirfield Village Golf Club, was a well-traveled but very obscure golf professional from Minnesota.
Then, he was trying for the fifth time to earn his PGA Tour playing privileges at qualifying school, and things were not going at all well.
He had shot 78 in the first round at PGA West in La Quinta, Calif., and was four over par in the second round and he was on his way to an early exit.


A Pulitzer Winner In Revival
IF curiosity were all, the Rainbow Theater production of "They Knew What They Wanted" in Stamford would be an event.
If passionate performances and inventive direction propelled the production, it could be a near event.
Given the reality of all-around perfunctoriness, it is a most hapless non-event.
Sidney Howard's play makes its claim as a curio by having won the Pulitzer Prize in 1925 and fading into oblivion.
The story of Tony (the aging portly grape grower and bootlegger), Amy (his young and pretty mail-order bride) and Joe (his handsome foreman) became the source of the 1956 musical, "The Most Happy Fella."


A Girl's Own Story
ONLY OPAL The Diary of a Young Girl.
By Opal Whiteley.
Selected by Jane Boulton.
Illustrated by Barbara Cooney.
Unpaged.
New York: Philomel Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Aiming for the Nationals, 50 Meters at a Time


Histories of Prejudice
To the Editor:
As the national director of the Anti-Defamation League, I would like to respond to David Klinghoffer's review of two probing histories, Leonard Dinnerstein's "Antisemitism in America" and Frederic Cople Jaher's "Scapegoat in the New Wilderness: The Origins and Rise of Anti-Semitism in America" (April 17).
One becomes confused by Mr.
Klinghoffer's dismissive overview -- to wit: "To find evidence of serious anti-Semitism in America for much of the time Jews have lived here, you need to put on kneepads and go searching in the nooks and crannies of history."


Party Hopping
A week of celebrations, with benefits, presentations of awards and other events held for a wide spectrum of groups, from foundations to dance companies;


A Conductor as a Violin Recitalist
Elliot Magaziner, conductor of the Westchester Conservatory Orchestra, leaves his baton behind today at 4 P.M. and takes his rare Niccolo Amati violin (made in 1656) to the Downtown Music at Grace Series at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
With the pianist Barbara Blegen, he will play sonatas by Bach and Brahms and the premiere of the "Sonata for Ell," written for him by Fred Katz.
Lyn Christie will be assisting on the double bass.
Last Sunday Mr.
Magaziner led the Westchester Conservatory Orchestra in a White Plains concert, and his other podium duties include the directorship of the Manhattanville College Community Orchestra.
Mr.
Magaziner, in fact, is so busy as a conductor that his earlier career as a concert violinist is often overlooked.
He was first violinist of the Guilet, Metropolitan and Claremont Quartets and soloist with such orchestras as the New York Philharmonic and l'Orchestre Symphonique de Paris.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PHILOSOPHY  ESSAYS IN UNDERSTANDING, 1930-1954  By Hannah Arendt.
Edited by Jerome Kohn.
Harcourt Brace, $39.95.


Weddings; Kiki Schore And James Rees
Kerith Paige Schore, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Schore of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Fitzgerald Rees, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. Rees of Midlothian, Va.
The Rev.
Louis A. Padovano performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church.
Mrs.
Rees, 27, is known as Kiki.
She is a media supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Iona College.
Her father is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at New York Hospital and a psychoanalyst at the Columbia University Psychoanalytic Center for Training and Research.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WINE TASTINGS
Dan Berger, wine editor of The Los Angeles Times, will conduct two tastings for connoisseurs this week at Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook.


Shouldn't the Fed Act in the Public Interest?; Inflation Signs
To the Editor:
Lester Thurow's "Fed Goes Ghostbusting" (Op-Ed, May 6) states that "Sophisticated investors including George Soros, Citicorp and Bankers Trust took huge losses because of the Fed's action" to support his criticism of Fed tightening.


The Nation; Judged In the Shadow Of Ghosts From the Past
Nobody's perfect, it seems.
Not even a Supreme Court nominee with impeccable credentials and such strong bipartisan support that there was talk in the Senate last week of holding Judge Stephen G. Breyer's confirmation hearing as early as next month -- before Justice Harry A. Blackmun's final Court term ends.
The dissent from the general acclaim for President Clinton's second Supreme Court nomination is largely muffled, but it is there and it is instructive, reflecting not so much on Judge Breyer himself as on the unhealed wounds from battles over Supreme Court nominees past.
Judge Breyer's enemy, to the extent that he has one in what appears to be a waltz to near-unanimous confirmation, is not any human adversary but history.


An Impartial Insider Gives Bulls the Edge
Friend to Patrick Ewing, friend to B. J. Armstrong, Trent Tucker says he is incapable of rooting for the Knicks or the Bulls.
He does not duck the question of who he thinks the next opponent for the Indiana Pacers will be.
Not at all.
"The Knicks are the ones with the pressure to win the series, to win the championship," said Tucker.
"No one expected the Bulls to do anything. But you can see; the Bulls have character. They have been in big moments. Nothing seems to be hanging over their heads the way it is for the Knicks. The Knicks are at home, so of course they have a good chance. But it's them carrying a burden.


'Change Can Be Good'
To the Editor:
Sarah Bryan Miller's article about the difficulty of Daniel Barenboim's succeeding Georg Solti as music director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra  [ "Three Years After His Departure, Solti Remains a Hard Act to Follow," May 8 ]  was a bit of deja vu.
The same could have been said for Jean Martinon when he succeeded Fritz Reiner in the same position.
What about Pierre Boulez's tenure after that of Leonard Bernstein?
Or John Barbirolli following Arturo Toscanini?
I imagine music critics were harsh on those successors because of their predecessors' charisma.


From Classics to Salsa At Caribbean Festivals
Chamber music, jazz and salsa will lure visitors to the Caribbean next month in the form of two music festivals, one each on Puerto Rico and Aruba.
The Casals Festival in San Juan, Puerto Rico, will be held from June 4 to 18, with 11 concerts of chamber music, opera and instrumental recitals and orchestral works.


Defending Federal Aid for Small Companies
To the Editor:
"Washington Growing as a Financial Angel to Industry" (May 1) expresses concern about possible pork barrel projects and says that accusations of special-interest awards have already surfaced in the case of a $50 million award by the Advanced Research Projects Agency to OIS Optical Imaging Systems Inc., makers of active-matrix flat panel displays.


U.S. BACKING WORK ON CZECH REACTORS BY WESTINGHOUSE
In a plan that is drawing diplomatic protests from abroad and political objections at home, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation intends to use its own technology to complete two Soviet-designed nuclear reactors in the Czech Republic with the backing of the Clinton Administration.
In support of the first attempt to graft American technology onto a Soviet reactor, the Administration rebuffed Congressional and environmental opponents to approve $317 million in loan guarantees to finance the work.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Evening Hours; A Friend of Film and Video
For Sony's American unit, a special award from the Whitney, May 9.


At 75, Ted Williams Battles On
He is 75, and as a result of a stroke in February, his vision and his movement are impaired.
When Ted Williams, one of the greatest hitters in the history of baseball, goes from one room to another in his Florida home he needs the assistance of a metal walker.
For Williams, who broke into the major leagues in 1939 as a skinny 20-year-old and then proceeded to batter baseballs for more than two decades with the most splendid of swings, life is not what it was.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ROOSEVELT ISLAND  A Concert Series Chooses A Little-Explored Locale
Eine Kleine Tram Music.
That was one of the names Robin Russell briefly considered, he says, before settling on "River Music on Roosevelt Island" for a concert series he has organized on the island, the first such series in local memory.


Weddings; Dana S. Gershon, Jonah D. Pesner
Dana Samantha Gershon, the daughter of Drs.
Anne and Michael Gershon of New York, is to be married today to Jonah Dov Pesner, a son of Carole Pesner of New York and the late Robert Pesner.
Rabbi Eric Gurvis is to officiate at the Joseph Eisner Camp Institute for Living Judaism in Great Barrington, Mass.
Ms.
Gershon, 24, will keep her name.
She is a second-year law student at Columbia University.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of anatomy and cell biology at Columbia.
Her mother is a professor of pediatrics there.


Symbolism Against AIDS


Weddings; Lorna Wallach, Michael Kalet
Cantor Lorna Sue Wallach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Wallach of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Michael Kalet, the son of Morton Kalet of Jackson Heights, Queens, and the late Celia Kalet.
Rabbi Alvin Kass and Rabbi Laurence A. Sebert are to perform the ceremony at the East Midwood Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
The bride, 30, is the cantor at Town and Village Tiffereth Israel Synagogue in Manhattan.
She graduated summa cum laude from the Conservatory of Music at Brooklyn College and was invested as cantor at the Jewish Theological Seminary.
Her father is a stockbroker at Gruntal &amp; Company, a brokerage firm in Manhattan.
Her mother, Roberta Wallach, is a lawyer.


Weddings; Eric Grubman and Stephanie Green
Dr.
Stephanie Green, the daughter of John R. Green Jr. of Lake Forest, Ill., and the late Audree Green, is to be married today to Dr.
Eric Grubman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Grubman of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Victor A. Mirelman is to officiate at the Four Seasons Hotel in Chicago.
The bride, 30, graduated from Duke University.
She and the bridegroom received M.D. degrees from Georgetown University, and both expect to begin fellowships in July at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, she in infectious diseases and he in cardiology.
Her father retired as the president of Magic Chef Inc., an appliance manufacturer in Chicago.


Weddings; Cara A. Testa, Peter Conniff
Cara Augusta Testa, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Rene B. Testa of Demarest, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Martin Conniff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Conniff of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Kenneth J. Boller, the president of Xavier High School in New York, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Demarest.
Mrs.
Conniff, 25, graduated from Barnard College and is a candidate for a master's degree in international affairs at Columbia University, where her father is a professor of civil engineering.
Her mother, Joan Testa, teaches prekindergarten at St.
Joseph's School in Demarest.


Discovering the Food Chain by Fly-Fishing


The Birds, the Bees and the Coolidges
THE RED QUEEN Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature.
By Matt Ridley. 405 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $25.
THE SEX IMPERATIVE An Evolutionary Tale of Sexual Survival.
By Kenneth Maxwell.
Illustrated. 324 pp.
New York: Plenum Press. $24.95.
THE EVOLUTION OF DESIRE Strategies of Human Mating.
By David M. Buss. 262 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $22.


Weddings; Lauren Solanko, Peter Koniaris
Lauren Stephanie Solanko, a daughter of Carolyn Carilli of Franklin Lakes, N.J., and the late Robert L. Solanko, was married last evening to Peter George Koniaris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Koniaris of Astoria, Queens.
The Rev.
Ernest Blougouras officiated at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St.
John the Theologian in Tenafly, N.J.
The bride, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she expects to receive an M.D. degree next month.
She plans to begin an internship in July at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She is a stepdaughter of Dr.
Albert D. Carilli.


Beastly Beatitudes and a Blessing of the Land at Stroll Garden
It was an egalitarian gathering attended by the lowly worm and the majestic horse, the squealing piglet and the squawking parrot, the fidgety rabbit and the caged cat.
Ribboned and fluffed, dogs waited in line with an uncommon patience, as if aware that a special communion lay ahead.
The event was the recent 29th Interfaith Blessing of the Animals and the Land, which took place under blue skies and in an aura of beatitude at the Hammond Museum and Japanese Stroll Garden here.


Sprucing Up Some of the Subway System's Hidden Amenities
At last, an image makeover for that most seedy of city institutions: the subway toilet.
Most subway riders probably believe all the restrooms closed years ago.
In fact most were shut in 1982, because of vandalism and other crime.
But transit officials say toilets have remained open at 109 stations -- a fourth of the stops.


Dog Soldiers
THINK Rin Tin Tin.
Or Lassie.
Or any of those canine characters who always stood at the ready to rescue and comfort humans.
These days, with the spirit of volunteerism resurging, even household pets are being enlisted to provide moments of cheer at places like hospices, rehabilitation centers and nursing homes.


Children's Best Sellers
First
Published
Picture and Story Books
1
1986
LOVE YOU FOREVER, by Robert Munsch.
Illustrated by Sheila McGraw.
Firefly.
Cloth, $12.95.
Paper, $4.95. (Ages 2 and up) A mother and son vow eternal devotion as they move through different stages of their lives.
2
1947
GOODNIGHT MOON, by Margaret Wise Brown.
Illustrated by Clement Hurd.
HarperCollins.
Cloth, $13.
Board, $6.95.
Paper, $3.95. (Infant to 5) It's bedtime in "the great green room." Good night.
3
1969
THE VERY HUNGRY CATERPILLAR, written and illustrated by Eric Carle.
Philomel.
Cloth, $15.95.
Board, $7.95.
Miniature, $4.95. (Ages 2 to 5) A caterpillar munches through the life cycle to become a butterfly.
4
1940
PAT THE BUNNY, written and illustrated by Dorothy Kunhardt.
Golden/Western. $6.95. (Infant to 3) The original touch-feel-and-poke book for babies.
5
1992
THE RAINBOW FISH, written and illustrated by Marcus Pfister.
North-South. $16.95. (Ages 2 to 5) The most beautiful fish in the sea learns about friendship.
6*
1991
POLAR BEAR, POLAR BEAR, WHAT DO YOU HEAR? by Bill Martin Jr.
Illustrated by Eric Carle.
Holt. $14.95. (Ages 2 to 5) One animal calls to another, who appears when you turn the page.
7
1990
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! written and illustrated by Dr.
Seuss.
Random House. $14. (All ages) A graduation gift endorsing optimism and high spirits.
8
1942
THE RUNAWAY BUNNY, by Margaret Wise Brown.
Illustrated by Clement Hurd.
HarperCollins.
Cloth, $13.
Board, $6.95.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 2 to 5) A little bunny runs from his mother and hides in the garden.
9
1964
THE GIVING TREE, written and illustrated by Shel Silverstein.
HarperCollins. $13. (Ages 8 to 12) A boy and a tree; one gives as the other grows.
10
1993
TIME FOR BED, by Mem Fox.
Illustrated by Jane Dyer.
Harcourt Brace. $13.95. (Ages 2 to 5) Many loving mothers tuck in their babies and softly say good night.
11
1993
STELLALUNA, written and illustrated by Janell Cannon.
Harcourt Brace. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) A baby fruit bat's adventures in a bird's nest gently demonstrate species-specific behavior.
12*
1922
THE VELVETEEN RABBIT, by Margery Williams.
Many editions.
The story of the toy that so loved its boy that it became real appears in many versions and formats suitable for different ages.
13
1993
GRANDFATHER'S JOURNEY, written and illustrated by Allen Say.
Houghton Mifflin. $16.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Grandfather traveled from Japan to the United States and back again, never quite at home. (CM) (NYT)
14
1902
THE TALE OF PETER RABBIT, written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter.
Warne.
Cloth, $5.95.
Paper, $2.95. (Ages 2 and up) The original story about the naughty rabbit who ventured into Mr.
McGregor's garden.
15*
1963
WHERE THE WILD THINGS ARE, written and illustrated by Maurice Sendak.
HarperCollins.
Cloth, $15.
Paper, $4.95. (Ages 2 to 5) When Max returns from his travels, his supper is still hot. (CM) (NYT)
16*
1972
ALEXANDER AND THE TERRIBLE, HORRIBLE, NO GOOD, VERY BAD DAY, by Judith Viorst.
Illustrated by Ray Cruz.
Atheneum.
Cloth, $13.95.
Aladdin.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 5 to 8) Life's frustrations.
First
Published
Chapter Books
1
1994
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic.
Viking. $16.95. (Ages 12 and up) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 to 1993.
2
1993
THE GIVER, by Lois Lowry.
Houghton Mifflin. $13.95. (Ages 8 to 12) For his life's work assignment, Jonas is chosen at the age of 12 to become the conscience of the cult community in which he has been raised. (NM)
3
1911
THE SECRET GARDEN, by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Many editions. (All ages) The transformation of sickly Mary Lennox; available with full text and illustrations as well as abridged, and in many formats.
4
1952
CHARLOTTE'S WEB, by E.B.
White.
Illustrated by Garth Williams.
Harper Trophy.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 8 and up) Wilbur the pig is rescued by Charlotte, a spider, who proves a true friend and good writer. (NH)
5
1985
SARAH, PLAIN AND TALL, by Patricia MacLachlan.
HarperCollins.
Cloth, $12.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 8 to 12) Sarah is the mail-order bride who comes from Maine and saves a grieving farm family on the Plains. (NM)
6
1991
SHILOH, by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor.
Atheneum.
Cloth, $12.95.
Yearling/Dell.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) Marty loves the dog he calls Shiloh and will do almost anything to protect and keep the pet. (NM)
7
1977
BRIDGE TO TERABITHIA, by Katherine Paterson.
Illustrated by Donna Diamond.
Harper Trophy.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 8 to 12) Jess and Leslie shared a powerful friendship and a secret hiding place. (NM)
8*
1960
ISLAND OF THE BLUE DOLPHINS, by Scott O'Dell.
Yearling/Dell.
Paper, $3.50.
Laurel-Leaf/Dell.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) A young Indian girl grows up alone on a Pacific island.
Based on a true story. (NM)
9
1976
ROLL OF THUNDER, HEAR MY CRY, by Mildred D. Taylor.
Dial.
Cloth, $15.
Puffin.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 10 to 14) The first novel about the Logan family and their struggles in rural Mississippi in the 1920's. (NM)
10*
1962
A WRINKLE IN TIME, by Madeleine L'Engle.
Yearling/Dell.
Paper, $3.99.
Laurel-Leaf/Dell.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) In order to rescue their father, Meg and Charles Wallace Murry must do some time-tripping. (NM)
11*
1994
SKYLARK, by Patricia MacLachlan.
HarperCollins. $12. (Ages 8 to 12) The sequel to "Sarah, Plain and Tall" finds the family leaving a drought for Maine.
12
1987
HATCHET, by Gary Paulsen.
Puffin.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) Brian alone survives a plane crash in Canada and is armed only with a hatchet. (NH)
13
1989
NUMBER THE STARS, by Lois Lowry.
Houghton Mifflin.
Cloth, $13.95.
Yearling/Dell.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 10 and up) A novel about the Danish Resistance in World War II. (NM)
14
1961
JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH, by Roald Dahl.
Illustrated by Nancy Ekholm Burkert.
Knopf.
Cloth, $15.
Puffin.
Paper, $4.50. (Ages 8 to 12) James must escape from those two dreary aunts.
15
1961
WHERE THE RED FERN GROWS, by Wilson Rawls.
Bantam.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 8 and up) The story of a fine pair of coonhounds.
16*
1992
MISSING MAY, by Cynthia Rylant.
Jackson/Orchard.
Cloth, $13.95.
Yearling/Dell.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) Summer and Uncle Ob miss Aunt May, who died. (NM)
First
Published
Series Books
1
1993
GOOSEBUMPS, by R.L.
Stine.
Apple/Scholastic.
Paper, $2.95 and $3.25. (Ages 8 to 12) Modestly scary mystery stories about middle-class kids in familiar suburban settings.
2
1942
THE BOXCAR CHILDREN, by Gertrude Chandler Warner.
Whitman.
Paper, $3.50. (Ages 7 to 10) Four plucky orphans establish their first home together in a railroad car.
3
1988
THE AMERICAN GIRLS COLLECTION.
Various titles.
Pleasant Company.
Cloth, $12.95.
Paper, $5.95. (Ages 8 to 12) The stories about five fictional American girls in historic settings accompany real mail-order dolls.
4
1992
FEAR STREET, by R.L.
Stine.
Archway/Pocket.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 10 to 14) These mystery adventures involving middle-class teen-age protagonists and their friends promise more chills than they actually deliver.
5*
1980
THE BERENSTAIN BEARS: First Time Books and Big Chapter Books, written and illustrated by Stan and Jan Berenstain.
Random House.
Paper, $2.25 and $2.99. (Ages 3 to 5) More bear family adventures.
6
1987
REDWALL, by Brian Jacques.
Philomel.
Cloth, $16.95 and $17.95.
Avon.
Paper, $4.99.
"Salamandastron." Ace.
Paper, $4.99. (Ages 8 to 12) These British fantasy novels are set in a mythic land and feature heroic badgers.
7
1986
THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB, by Ann M. Martin.
Apple/Scholastic.
Paper, $3.50. (Ages 8 to 12) It began with four friends starting a club, and grew and grew.
8
1981
THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD, by Lynne Reid Banks.
Avon.
Paper, $3.99. (Ages 8 to 12) A modern English boy visits the American Wild West.
9
1986
THE MAGIC SCHOOL BUS, by Joanna Cole.
Illustrated by Bruce Degen.
Scholastic.
Cloth, $14.95.
Paper, $3.50. (Ages 5 to 9) Ms.
Frizzle is the world's best-dressed and most imaginative science teacher.
10
1957
BEGINNER BOOKS.
Random House. $6.95. (Ages 3 to 6) The 53 classic early-reading titles, beginning with Dr.
Seuss' "Cat in the Hat."
11
1950
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA, by C.S.
Lewis.
Illustrated by Pauline Baynes.
Collier/Macmillan.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 8 and up) "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" is the best-known novel.
12
1939
MADELINE, written and illustrated by Ludwig Bemelmans.
Viking.
Cloth, $13.99 to $15.
Puffin.
Paper, $3.99 to $4.99. (Ages 2 and up) An independent girl's Parisian adventures.
Other titles have different prices.
13
1932
THE LITTLE HOUSE BOOKS, by Laura Ingalls Wilder.
Illustrated by Garth Williams.
HarperCollins.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $3.95. (Ages 7 and up) The Ingalls family moves west; Laura grows up.
14
1986
DISNEY CLASSICS.
Various titles.
Mouse Works and Gallery Books. $6.98. (Ages 3 to 8) The stories of the animated films are set out in large-format books.
15
1991
THE TIME WARP TRIO, by Jon Scieszka.
Illustrated by Lane Smith.
Viking.
Cloth, $11.99.
Puffin.
Paper, $3.50. (Ages 8 to 12) Fred, Sam and Joe share impossible and hilarious time-tripping adventures.
16*
1991
FIRST DISCOVERY BOOKS.
Twenty titles.
Cartwheel/Scholastic. $11.95. (Ages 2 and up) Early science books with distinctive clear-plastic overlay illustrations.
First
Published
Activity Books
1
1993
MAGIC EYE: A New Way of Looking at the World, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises.
Andrews &amp; McMeel. $12.95. (Ages 5 and up) Stare deeply into computer-generated 3-D images and be surprised.
2
1992
BRAIN QUEST, by Chris Welles Feder.
Workman. $9.95 and $10.95. (Ages 4 and up) These curriculum-based quiz cards are organized by age and grade level and can be played alone or by teams.
3
1993
CAT'S CRADLE: A Book of String Figures, by Anne Akers Johnson.
Klutz Press. $8.95. (Ages 7 and up) Diagrams show how to play traditional string games from around the world.
String included.
4
1993
THE BUCK BOOK, by Anne Akers Johnson.
Klutz Press. $10.95. (Ages 7 and up) Make amazing origami from a dollar bill.
Information tidbits and dollar included.
5
1994
MAGIC EYE II: Now You See It ..., by N.E.
Thing Enterprises.
Andrews &amp; McMeel. $12.95. (Ages 5 and up) Keep staring; it's a second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
6
1992
KNOT NOW!
The Complete Friendship Bracelet Kit, written and illustrated by Margaret A. Hartelius.
Grosset &amp; Dunlap. $6.95. (Ages 8 and up) Instructions for many kinds of bracelets.
String included.
7*
1992
BRAIDS &amp; BOWS, by Anne Akers Johnson and Robin Stoneking.
Klutz Press. $17.95. (Ages 3 and up) Basic girls' hairstyles suitable for toddlers to teen-agers; plus ornaments, ribbons and clasps.
First
Published
Poetry Books
1
1974
WHERE THE SIDEWALK ENDS, written and illustrated by Shel Silverstein.
HarperCollins. $15.95. (Ages 8 and up) A collection of poems and drawings that ranges from silly to sad and back again.
2
1981
A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, written and illustrated by Shel Silverstein.
HarperCollins. $15.95. (Ages 8 and up) Poems beloved by children and adults.
3
1885
A CHILD'S GARDEN OF VERSES, by Robert Louis Stevenson.
Many editions. (All ages) The best-known edition of these much-loved poems was illustrated by Jessie Wilcox Smith, but there are many others.
4
1993
THE DRAGONS ARE SINGING TONIGHT, by Jack Prelutsky.
Illustrated by Peter Sis.
Greenwillow. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) A wry collection of verses about dragons is illustrated with great style.
5
1993
SOUL LOOKS BACK IN WONDER.
Illustrated by Tom Feelings.
Dial. $15.99. (Ages 5 and up) The illustrator commissioned an anthology of original poems, and added one by Langston Hughes.
6*
1993
BROWN ANGELS: An Album of Pictures and Verse, by Walter Dean Myers.
HarperCollins. $16. (All ages) Original poems are used to illustrate historic photographs of black American children.
7
1993
THE NEW ADVENTURES OF MOTHER GOOSE: Gentle Rhymes for Happy Times, by Bruce Lansky.
Illustrated by Stephen Carpenter.
Meadowbrook. $15. (All ages) Scrubbed, tidy and polite versions of the rhymes that were raucous and rude for centuries.
CM: Caldecott Medal; NM: Newbery Medal; NH: Newbery Honor; NYT: New York Times Best Illustrated Book.


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; 99.44 Percent Pure What?
The pages of a magazine for professional chemists have been all abuzz recently with conflicting reports on one of the pressing issues of quality control in the industry.
Is Ivory Soap 99.44 percent pure?
And pure what?
Various contributors to the weekly Chemical &amp; Engineering News sent in old Procter &amp; Gamble advertisements and folklore, stories heard from someone who knew someone.
One old ad had original Ivory as 82.48 percent "true soap." One story had it that the whole percentage purity thing was an accident.
An ad man came into the lab and found a chemist at work whose analysis of the soap showed that all the ingredients added up to 99.44 percent of the whole.
Before he rounded it off, the slogan maker seized on the number.


BEST SELLERS: May 22, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
4
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
2
1
12
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
5
2
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
4
3
5
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
5
6
5
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder, stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
6
4
93
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
7
11
14
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
8
10
58
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
9
7
6
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
10
8
6
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
11
14
3
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
12
12
29
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
13
13
4
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart transplant operation, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
14
9
18
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
15
2
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
54
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
3
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
3
3
22
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
11
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5
5
6
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
6*
1
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (Zondervan/HarperCollins, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
7
1
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
8
9
25
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
13
5
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
10
6
12
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
11
14
33
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
12
7
5
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
13
15
39
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
14
10
19
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
15
8
10
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
4
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
3
3
18
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
52
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 7, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ANNUNCIATION, by David Plante. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A taut, lyrical novel in which the quest for a lost Baroque painting of the Annunciation is intertwined with the story of a suicide's widow and her pregnant daughter.
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) Three previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.
CONQUEST: Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico, by Hugh Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) This British historian's encyclopedic and nuanced retelling of Mexico's conquest is imbued with the sensibilities of a new generation and informed by the scholarship of the last 150 years.
THE EYE IN THE DOOR, by Pat Barker. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $20.95.) The sequel to "Regeneration" renders memorably the shame, bewilderment and self-disgust of young men who broke down in the trenches during World War I. A FISH IN THE WATER: A Memoir, by Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A bitter and fascinating memoir of Mr.
Vargas Llosa's ill-fated bid to become president of Peru in 1990.
THE FORCE, by David Dorsey. (Random House, $23.) Fearless and far from uplifting, this piece of reportage follows a Willy Lomanesque team of Xerox salesmen in Cleveland as they trudge through air-conditioned hell.
JAMES BALDWIN: A Biography, by David Leeming. (Knopf, $25.) With Baldwin's blessing and a nearly boundless reservoir of anecdotes from Baldwin's brother and friends, Mr.
Leeming has produced a most revealing portrait.
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Here the "vertically challenged" Rumpelstiltskin tries to interfere with the reproductive rights of Esmeralda, and Cinderella achieves solidarity with her "differently visaged" stepsisters.
REMEMBERING SATAN, by Lawrence Wright. (Knopf, $22.) This stunning story about the perils of recovered memory concerns a man who, when charged by his daughters with sexual abuse, proceeded to summon up what he assumed were blocked memories of the events.
SUGGESTIONS OF ABUSE: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma, by Michael D. Yapko. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A simple explanation from an expert on hypnosis about why recovered memories, dredged up with the help of abuse therapists, are so unreliable.
UNCHAINED MEMORIES: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found, by Lenore Terr. (Basic Books, $22.) With a cinematic sensibility, a psychiatrist relays tales of lost memories, including that of Eileen Franklin Lipsker, who recovered the memory of her father murdering her childhood friend 20 years before.


New Tenants, New Dispute At Esplanade
When the 14-story Esplanade hotel changed owners in August 1993, tenants were relieved.
The residential hotel, at West End Avenue between 74th and 75th Streets, had been poorly run for years, they said, with repairs left undone and a chaotic atmosphere caused by transient residents.
Now, most say that the corridors of their grand prewar building are cleaner and quieter.
But the reason behind the improvements has angered some tenants: new owners are converting parts of the hotel into an assisted-care residence for the elderly.
So far, the elderly have moved into 52 apartments and are being provided with meals, nursing and medication supervision.
Regular tenants live in 50 of the building's 181


Weddings; Susan H. Klann, D. Roger Glenn
Susan Hunt Klann, an associate at the law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, was married in New York yesterday to D. Roger Glenn, the deputy general counsel at K-III Communications.
Both work in New York.
Judge Laurie L. Lau of Civil Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the Box Tree Restaurant.
Mrs.
Glenn, 35, graduated from Yale University.
She received a law degree from the University of Denver and a Master of Laws degree in taxation from New York University.


Night-Tripping With the Good Doctor
Dr.
John HAS WRITER'S CRAMP.
For the past hour, the legendary New Orleans-born pianist, singer, songwriter and, now, author has been signing copies of his new autobiography "Under a Hoodoo Moon," in the shade of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival's book tent, for almost 200 fans.
An hour ago, he was doing the same thing at Tower Records in the French Quarter, and it is taking a toll on his wrist.
An ursine man with a round face, a beard and a long ponytail, he smiles and nods reassuringly at fans who approach him, all the while exchanging greetings and jokes in his trademark weathered, grainy voice with the many other friends and admirers who cluster around.


Italy Inquiry Asks Andreotti's Trial on Mofia Ties
Investigators in Sicily have decided to press for the trial of former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on charges of associating with the Mafia, judicial officials in Palermo said today.
The decision is the most serious step yet in the authorities' effort to substantiate assertions that Mr.
Andreotti, who is 75, had acted as the Mafia's protector in Rome.


The Executive Life; Companies Are Getting Into the Balancing Act
JUGGLING, Peter Staley firmly believes, "is one of the great business metaphors."
And so he found himself recently, along with 11 of his colleagues at Everett Studios, a marketing and creative services company in White Plains, earnestly trying to toss and catch three mushy beanbag-type balls.
Jumping about in a company conference room with Mr.
Staley, Everett's promotion coordinator, were the company's president and owner, Robbie Everett, and people from accounting, production and sales.
Giving directions was Iain McInnes, a juggling, pony-tailed Brit: "O.K., now then. When you throw the balls up this time, say out loud to yourself, 'Throw, throw, catch, catch.' "


Polls in Brazil Show Leftist Well in Front
Suggesting a major shift leftward in Brazil, a political bellwether for Latin America, opinion polls give a commanding lead to the Workers Party candidate in the presidential election scheduled for October.
Four opinion polls in the last two weeks showed support of 36 to 42 percent for the candidate, Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, a Socialist.
That is far more than the totals for his rivals.


Residents Win on Motel . . .
A judge has ruled that the city was wrong to move 20 homeless families into a Wakefield motel last year without going through the sometimes lengthy public review process.
The city has appealed the decision, which was written by Justice Luis A. Gonzalez of State Supreme Court in the Bronx on April 8.
Sam Szurek, a spokesman for the Department of Homeless Services, said the ruling could have a serious impact on the city's policy of placing homeless families in hotels.
He said that although the city had pledged to remove homeless families from the hotels by the summer of 1995, it was still putting them in 15 establishments.


Special Solutions on the Antibug Detail
THEY are beginning to appear -- bugs, pests, creepy crawlers or whatever gardeners prefer to call them.
The insect population is on the march and will gradually increase during the next few months.
There inevitably follows the complaint, "DO something!"
This "do something" response has changed a great deal in the last few years.
Rather than rush out to the toolshed or the garden center's pesticide shelves for a quick cure, many of us who work outdoors now avoid the broad-spectrum pesticides that kill everything in sight.
Too many have learned that these "cures" kill beneficial insects that feed on the pests.
Alternatives are finding a place, the primary one being to first identify the pest and, knowing the insect's habits, adopting a narrow-spectrum antidote.


State Pays Homage To Its Sports Stars
FAY VINCENT, Calvin Murphy, Dorothy Hamill and Bruce Jenner have each pursued successful careers in sports.
And the four are to be among the first 14 inductees into the fledging Connecticut Sports Museum and Hall of Fame in a ceremony on Tuesday night at the Aqua Turf County Club in Southington.
Joining them in being honored are the golfer Julius Boros, of Fairfield; Walt Dropo, of Moosup, who excelled in baseball, football and basketball; the football players Floyd Little, of New Haven, and Andy Robustelli, of Stamford; the track stars Jan Merrill-Morin, of Waterford, and Lindy Remigino, of Hartford; the boxers Willie Pep and Marlon Starling, both of Hartford, and Bob Steele, of Wethersfield, a sportscaster and radio personality.
Walter Camp, the Yale coach from the late 1800's who is considered the father of American football, is being inducted posthumously.


The Age of Extravagance
EDITH WHARTON An Extraordinary Life.
By Eleanor Dwight.
Illustrated. 296 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams. $39.95.


Michael Ovitz, Michael Ovitz, Michael Ovitz
DRESSED in a $2,000 Giorgio Armani suit, wearing a $5,000 Rolex watch, sporting a handmade blue pin-stripe shirt with French cuffs held closed by 18-karat-gold initialed cuff links, Glenn A. Gulino pushes a mail wagon down the corridor of the William Morris Agency, throwing envelopes into cubbyholes.
Not too long ago, Mr.
Gulino, 30, pulled down a six-digit salary as an associate at the prestigious New York law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Green &amp; MacRae.
He now earns $300 a week.


RECORD BRIEFS
Susato: 'Danserye'  New London Consort directed by Philip Pickett.
L'Oiseau-Lyre 436 131-2; CD.


Are Choreographers Indifferent to War?
IT HAS BEEN MORE THAN TWO years since the war in Bosnia began, and yet barely a handful of American choreographers have been moved to create works about this continuous cataclysm.
By contrast, the Spanish Civil War from 1936 to 1939 galvanized virtually the entire dance community in the United States; rarely has any era seen so many works choreographed on a single political theme.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.30
105.09
110.40
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6470
1.6715
1.6265
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3795
1.3786
1.2643
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5065
1.4984
1.5430
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$385.60
$380.50
$377.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Upper Crust in East Softened by the Twins
If the East is the American League's toughest division, the toughest team for the division is the Minnesota Twins.
"The best break we got was playing Minnesota two games instead of three or four," Buck Showalter, the Yankees' manager, said yesterday.
"You could see they were getting hot. People make so much about this division or that division. But when you get in a competitive situation, it can change in a heartbeat."


An English Pleasure Dome
AS you enter the front door of Chewton Glen, stepping off the flagstone circular drive into the warmly decorated vestibule, there is a reassuring sight off to one side -- green wellingtons, lined up like sentinels, ready to be donned by guests for a hearty hike through the woods or perhaps down the ravine to the crashing sea.
The touch is typical of English country hotels in the best tradition -- thoughtful, inviting, cozy.
It tells you right away what you need to know: you can relax here if you simply treat the place like home.
Chewton Glen, presided over by Martin Skan, a confectioner turned hotelier, and his Swiss wife, Brigitte, is a country hotel set in 70 wooded and landscaped acres in southern Hampshire, on the edge of the New Forest (that is, dating from only the 11th century).
The hotel is prim and elegant, rather than grand and imposing: an 18th-century manor house restyled in the Palladian fashion, a sturdy three-story brick structure with creeping ivy, white wood gables and distinctive bright green shutters.
It sits on a rounded ridge in a sea of lawns the color of billiard table felt and about as deep.


In Defense of a Vegetable
To the Editor:
It's disappointing to read Linda Gray Sexton, in her review of Meg Wolitzer's novel "Friends for Life" (April 10), refer to a character as "about as sexy as a plate of mashed potatoes" in a tone of potato denigration.
HANK HAINES  Murfreesboro, Tenn.


Weddings; Janet C. Dickerman and Mark A. Pearl
Dr.
Janet Carol Dickerman, an intern at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston, is to be married there today to Dr.
Mark Andrew Pearl, an associate in New York for the health care group at Smith Barney Shearson, the investment bank.
Rabbi Cary C. Yales is to officiate at the Four Seasons.
The bride, 29, graduated from Harvard University and received her M.D. degree from Columbia University and a master's degree in health planning and financing from the London School of Economics.
She is a daughter of Sandra and Allen Dickerman of Boca Raton, Fla.
Her parents own Belmont Properties, a commercial real estate company in Boca Raton and Lexington, Mass.


Wall Street; Lately, There's No Telling Where You'll Find Gold
IT'S hard to figure gold these days.
While the bond market tanked in early April because of inflationary fears, the price of gold was falling, which seems the reverse of what the precious metal should have done.
And now, after the Fed seemed to calm these inflationary fears with four short-term interest-rate hikes capped off with its half-point increase last week, the price of gold is moving higher.
As of Friday, the price of gold in New York was at $386.30 an ounce, up $4.50 on the day and $4.80 for the week.


POP BRIEFS
Rodney Crowell: 'Let the Picture Paint Itself' MCA MCAD-11042; CD and cassette.


Seducified by a Minstrel Show
WHO WAS YOUR FAVORITE character on "Amos 'n' Andy"?
Mine was Lightning, the ineffably witless house painter.
"Which way did he go, Lightning?" a policeman, hot on the track of some malefactor would shout, and Lightning would point to the right with his left forefinger and to the left with his right forefinger, expel some raspy syllables ("Ah . . . " "Well . . . " "Dat is . . . "), then cross his eyes and expire in puzzlement.
One day Lightning got stuck in a garbage can.
He banged about the room futilely for some moments, trying to get out.
Then, realizing that this was not to be, he sank gently down, placed his chin mournfully in his hand and murmured, "Oh, me."
Oh, me, indeed.
I'm not surprised that I liked the show: seeing episodes recently at the Museum of American Broadcasting, I saw how funny it had been.
But why was I so attached to Lightning (the producers spelled it Lightnin'), the figure who most embodied what an aunt of mine called, in sorrow and disdain, "the type of the ignorant Negro"?


The World; Foreign Policy: Florida Has One
To the dismay of Florida's 14 million residents, the American system of government does not give states a formal role in determining foreign policy.
But with Haiti descending deeper into chaos and Cuba's future more in doubt than ever, Gov.
Lawton Chiles and other state officials are insisting that they will not sit by and merely watch as another administration in Washington stumbles in the Caribbean and then expects Florida to pay the price of its failure.
So Florida in recent years has tried to have its own foreign policy -- including the sorts of panels and policy wonks usually more characteristic of a sovereign nation.
Even before the current Haiti crisis (last night a tighter United Nations embargo was scheduled to take effect in the effort to restore democracy there), Florida's foreign policy objectives were essentially twofold: encourage the flow of foreign trade and investment and limit the flow of illegal immigrants and political refugees.
Constitutional impediments notwithstanding, Mr.
Chiles has had some success in reminding the Federal Government that it can ill afford to ignore Florida's interests and concerns.
Just last month he filed a lawsuit in which he argued that since foreign affairs are a Federal responsibility, so is the care of the immigrants who flock here as a result of Washington's decisions.


To Prevent Paint Injuries, Safety Is Crucial With Some Sprayers
SPRAY painting walls and other large surfaces is fast and produces even coatings without brush marks.
But spray equipment can be expensive, some practice is needed and preparation and cleanup are usually more demanding than with brushes and rollers.
Yet for several rooms, the cost of a moderate spray system, $100 to $175, may be justifiable.
For exterior painting, renting professional equipment at $250 to $350 a week can save substantially, compared to hiring painters or investing a summer of weekends painting with hand tools.


No Headline
"We've still got a long way to go, but the progress we've made is at least comparable to, say, the progress made against heart disease." JAY WINSTEN, on the fight against driving drunk.  [ 24:1. ]


The Near Abroad
Who are, or what is, the near abroad?
Who coined the phrase in Russian, and who first translated it into this English phrase?
What does it mean, and is it important?
The answer to the last is: you bet it's important, because the words deal with the new relationship between Russia and the other republics of the former Soviet Union.
Tension on the border of Ukraine and Russia, for example -- with Moscow claiming influence over ethnic Russian brethren within Ukraine -- cannot be reported without the use of this big diplomatic term.


The Arts and the A B C's
UPTOWN -- Do you find shopping for pre-19th-century masterpieces an ordeal?
Do you find trying to negotiate with erudite art dealers while sitting on their antique chairs more than a little intimidating?
If so, then last week's user-friendly First International Fine Arts Fair, with 66 galleries represented, at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue would have been for you.
"It's sort of like the Kmart approach to the Old Masters," said Robert Fisher, a student at the Institute of Fine Arts, at the preview party on May 12, which was a benefit for the Frick Collection.
"It's Rembrandts 'R' Us. You need a shopping cart.


The Seven-Day Itch
ARTHUR'S CHICKEN POX Written and illustrated by Marc Brown.
Unpaged.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)  I'VE GOT CHICKEN POX  Written and illustrated by True Kelley.
Unpaged.
New York: Dutton Children's Books. $13.99. (Ages 4 to 7)


Commencements; Fordham Graduates Are Urged to Serve
Under a hot sun in the Bronx, 1,645 Fordham University seniors received their degrees yesterday at the university's 149th commencement.
Fordham awarded a total of 2,369 degrees in its 10 undergraduate and graduate schools.


Bottom-Fishing for a Manhattan Co-op
EVERY New Yorker has seen advertisements for co-op apartments that seem too cheap to believe.
What are those apartments really like?
To find out, this reporter tried to see every apartment listed in the May 1 classified section of The New York Times that met the following guidelines: full two-bedroom apartments under $200,000, one-bedrooms under $100,000, studios under $65,000; between the Battery and 96th Street -- Manhattan's prime co-op area -- with carrying charges for two-bedrooms under $1,400 a month, one-bedrooms under $1,100, studios under $800.


In Defense of a Writer
To the Editor:
In his review of Joan Mellen's "Kay Boyle" (May 1), William H. Pritchard refers to Robert McAlmon as "a second-rate writer" and as a figure "on the way to being forgotten." I beg to differ.
McAlmon the writer was largely ignored in his lifetime (1896-1956) because of his uncanny ability to make enemies; these enemies (notably F. Scott Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway) in turn blocked McAlmon from being published in this country.
McAlmon's novels, short fiction and poetry were published almost exclusively in France, and even those copies were barred from entry into the United States (because he wrote about homosexuals and prostitutes); thus his reputation has rested not on his writings but on contemporary opinion, which was often based on personal feelings.


Federal Money Sought for Repair of 72d Street Subway Station
A $9.5 million allocation to rehabilitate Manhattan's IRT subway station at West 72d Street and Broadway -- infamous for its narrow platforms and lone entrance -- has been added to a major Federal transportation bill by Representative Jerrold Nadler.
It is the first time Federal funds have been sought to improve the station, where rush-hour riders have to line up on the Broadway median to enter the kiosk that is the subway entrance.
But the money may not insure that transportation officials will approve the project, which is estimated to cost $50 million and requires New York to contribute.


Weddings; Anne Walsh and Charles Triano Jr.
Anne Ellen Walsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Walsh of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Charles Edward Triano Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Triano Sr. of Naugatuck, Conn.
The Rev.
Kevin M. Smith officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


A Job Where Every Step Counts


He Wears His Heart On Walls
Every day, Kinrod Johnson peddles his 10-speed all-terrain bicycle through the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant hunting for walls on which to leave his imprint.
Twenty years ago, he started painting murals on the area's shabbiest walls.
He has done at least 10, maybe more.


Weddings; Solange Gonnet, John Jennings 4th
Solange Claude Gonnet, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yves Gonnet of New York, was married yesterday to John Joseph Jennings 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jennings Jr. of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Jennings, 27, is an account executive at Entertainment Publications in Troy, Mich.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of Yves Gonnet Textile in New York.
Her mother, Jacqueline Gonnet, a design consultant in New York, was a senior editor at House &amp; Garden magazine.


Pooling Risks and Sharing Costs in Effort to Gain Stable Insurance Rates
Few parts of President Clinton's health plan sound so simple as the idea of charging the same insurance premiums to all people in a geographic area, whether they are young or old, sick or healthy.
The goal is to return health insurance to "what it was meant to be: a fair deal at a fair price," Mr.
Clinton said last week.


Weddings; Kate S. Comstock, Michael Davis 4th
Katherine Sylvia Comstock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Comstock of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Marks Davis 4th, a son of Mr.
Davis 3d of Boston and the late Jeanne Evans Davis.
The Rev.
Bruce Southworth, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Water Mill (L.I.) Community House.
The bride, to be known as Kate Comstock Davis, is the associate food and decorating editor of Cosmopolitan magazine in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who retired as the executive editor of The Record in Hackensack, N.J., is an assistant director of the Journalism Resources Institute at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Comstock, retired as a social worker at Community Centers for Mental Health in Englewood, N.J.


Weddings; Victoria W. Meier, John H. Linnartz
Victoria Willson Meier, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Meier of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to John Henry Linnartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Linnartz of Pleasantville, N.Y.
The Very Rev.
William Manning Hale, the Dean Emeritus of St.
Paul's Cathedral in Syracuse, performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Linnartz, 25, graduated from Denison University and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is an ophthalmic surgeon in Huntington, L.I.


Weddings; Philip Welt and Karen Gault
Karen Teresa Gault, a publicity agent for Home Box Office in New York, is to be married today at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel to Philip Stanley Welt, a law student at New York University.
Rabbi Mordecai Genn is to officiate, with the Rev.
David M. Bossman, a Roman Catholic priest, taking part in the ceremony.
The bride, 31, graduated from Hofstra University, as did her husband.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Gault of Stamford, Conn.
Her father is an executive vice president of Time Warner Cable in Stamford.


Northwest Morels, the Fragrant Delicacy
MORELS arrived a little late this year, but they are now at their peak, and cooks are happy.
They come from Washington State and Oregon, and the season runs through July.
Highly prized, these fragrant mushrooms have a delicate flavor, which is best brought out when they are simmered in stock or light cream or sauteed in butter.
They go well with pasta, risotto and light meats like chicken and veal.
American morels don't have the pungency of French ones, so I like to mix in a few dried ones to enhance the flavor.


A Switch for Rahal and Groff
Bobby Rahal and his teammate, Mike Groff, were out-run in the last 20 minutes of qualifying today at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, but quickly re-qualified in faster cars.
The victim in the process was the Honda Indy-engine project.
John Paul Jr. (222.500 miles an hour) and Scott Goodyear (220.737) filled two of the three open spots in the 33-car lineup.
With 29 minutes left in qualifying, Mauricio Gugelmin requalified in a Reynard-Cosworth at 223.104.
Mark Smith filled the last spot in a Lola-Cosworth at 220.683.


Weddings; Virginia Dunning, Peter Tobeason
Virginia Burwell Dunning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald B. Dunning of Boyce, Va., was married yesterday to Peter Ferdinand Tobeason, a son of Katherine Kean of Oldwyck, N.J., and the late Hans F. Tobeason.
The Rev.
Dwight Brown performed the ceremony at the Grace Episcopal Church in Berryville, Va.
Mrs.
Tobeason, 28, is the director of American paintings at James Graham &amp; Sons, a gallery in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.


Weddings; Ms. Hollmann, Dr. Hendrix
Genevieve Hollmann, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Hollmann of Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
James Alan Hendrix, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John E. Hendrix of Fort Collins, Colo.
The Rev.
Thomas Gallen performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Hendrix, 29, graduated from Indiana University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in industrial and organizational psychology at Colorado State University and is an intern at Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is the president of Mainsail Associates in Boston, consultants on organizational effectiveness.


Weddings; Andrea Schaefer, Christopher Davis
Andrea Lynn Schaefer, a daughter of Daniel J. Schaefer 2d of Baldwin Harbor, L.I., and Barbara S. Schaefer of Malverne, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Rogers Davis, a son of Nadezda G. Davis of Pawling, N.Y., and Richard M. Davis of Hiawassee, Ga.
The Rev.
Thomas Orso performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church on Quaker Hill in Pawling.
Mrs.
Davis, 30, is a vice president with UBS Securities in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University.


Commencements; Fordham Graduates Are Urged to Serve
Under a hot sun in the Bronx, 1,645 Fordham University seniors received their degrees yesterday at the university's 149th commencement.
Fordham awarded a total of 2,369 degrees in its 10 undergraduate and graduate schools.


On Sunday; Staten Island And Lessons From Soweto
FAST as a salesman-drummer grabbing his bag of notions, the Rev.
Al Sharpton got off the airplane, only 15 hours removed from the exuberant elections in South Africa.
He listened as his aide and driver, Carl Redding, told him about some trouble on Staten Island: a black man had been killed in the process of being arrested.
In no time at all, the jet-lagged Reverend was on his way from Kennedy Airport, organizing a street protest.
But even he, a master manager of public issues and outcry, had to admit that the adjustment from the black Soweto ghetto-dwellers of South Africa to the burghers of Staten Island was a trip and a half.


Corrections
An article on April 17 about photographs that come with warnings about viewer discretion misidentified the Cincinnati museum that displayed Robert Mapplethorpe's work.
It was the Contemporary Arts Center, not the Cincinnati Art Museum.
The arts center reported the error in a letter dated April 18; this correction was delayed because of an editor's absence from the office.


BIG GAINS ARE SEEN IN BATTLE TO STEM DRUNKEN DRIVING
Though alcohol-related accidents continue to take a terrible toll on the country's highways, the nation is nevertheless making substantial progress in the fight against drunken driving.
Over the last 15 years, the incidence of driver intoxication in fatal crashes has been cut by almost a third through tougher, innovative laws, widespread public service advertisements that promote temperance and designated drivers, and the growth of aggressive organizations like Mothers Against Drunk Driving.


Gold In Bedrock?
Ahem.
Attention, please, citizens of Britain, Germany, France, Australia, Japan and other principalities: you may want to form an orderly line right now.
On Friday the "Flintstones" movie is to open in the United States.
It will then cross the oceans this summer to a movie theater near you.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Sunday about a 15-year-old who murdered a deliveryman misstated the age range for a national statistic on juvenile murder charges.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation's figure of 2,829 juvenile murder arrests in 1992 was for people under the age of 18, not 17.


Corrections
A front-page article last Sunday about the municipal finance business misstated the jurisdiction of a government agency mentioned in connection with an investigation of W. R. Lazard &amp; Company by the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
It is a New York State agency, not a New York City agency.


Taking Issue With 'Nice Zealot'
To the Editor:
The New York Times failed to report the not-so-nice facts about Dan Mathews and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ("Such a Nice Zealot," May 2).
Since when does being a "6-foot-5 hunk" give one the right to vandalize, threaten, intimidate or force one's views on others?


Stop Posturing
To the Sports Editor:
Suddenly, but explicably, I found myself rooting for the Chicago Bulls during the Knicks-Bulls series.
Aside from the fact the Bulls play better team basketball, the Knicks have systematically managed to turn me against them by engaging in their macho, chest-banging braggadocio throughout this season.


Journal; Disney's Bull Run
Mickey Mouse didn't make his fame and fortune by mocking all that Americans hold dear.
But his adoptive parent, the Walt Disney Company, is increasingly finding itself cast as the bad guy as it tries to build a historical theme park, Disney's America, near hallowed Civil War ground in Virginia.
A controversy that began last fall as a standard debate about the perils of development -- Disney's America would radically transform a pastoral county 35 miles west of Washington -- is now escalating into a cultural civil war.
It's getting bloody, and far more than a single business enterprise is at stake.
The battle over Disney's America is part of a much larger struggle between theme-park America and authentic America: Will this country preserve its real history, which requires education and reflection to be understood, or simply turn it over to the Imagineers of Disney, to be repackaged as socko virtual reality?


Anderson's Solution: Raise the Mound and Lower the E.R.A.
Pitchers have not been kind to Sparky Anderson in recent seasons, either those working for him or against him, but the venerable manager wants to improve their lot anyway and in the process restore baseball to its sane state.
Anderson, who has managed in the major leagues longer than any of his colleagues, has seen the kind of baseball that has been played this season, not to mention some other recent seasons, and he has concluded that it is not good.


From Runway to Locker Room
The fate of former cover girls seems more or less predictable: they co-star in movies with Tom Selleck, they cut record albums, they carry the children of rock stars.
Or, if they are less famous or less lucky, they turn up in hotel rooms with politicians or swimming pools brimming with Thighmasters.
Not so for Willow Bay, who modeled for Estee Lauder before Paulina Porizkova.
For the last three years, she has been soaked in the world of sportscasting on "NBA Inside Stuff," a basketball variety show on NBC for teen-agers, as a host with Ahmad Rashad.
With a face that looks like it's been carved out of a bar of Ivory soap and an equally porcelain manner, you might think that she feels just a touch out of place in the locker room.
But she doesn't, she says.


From .400 to 75, and Still Battling
No longer needed, the empty blue wheelchair was in a far corner.
But near the fireplace a big black metallic treadmill stood like a sentry in the middle of the living room.
"I did close to half a mile on it this morning," said the thin 75-year-old man with closely cut gray-streaked hair.


Weddings; Miss Craighead And Mr. Briggs
Catherine Thompson Craighead, the daughter of Mrs.
George Palmer Craighead of Darien, Conn., and the late Mr.
Craighead, was married yesterday to Gary Stuart Briggs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Briggs of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Constance Jordan-Haas performed the ceremony at the Noroton Presbyterian Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Briggs, 28, graduated summa cum laude from Dartmouth College.
She expects to receive a master's degree in management from Northwestern University next month, when she will become an associate consultant at Marakon Associates, management consultants in Stamford, Conn.
Her father was the managing partner in Egon Zehnder International, an executive-search firm in New York.
Her mother, Peggy W. Craighead, is the chairwoman of Craighead Publications in Darien, a company founded by the bride's father.


Clues to What a New Curator May Do
THE permanent collection at the Jersey City Museum contains 20,000 works, of which 36 may be seen in "Recent Acquisitions, 1990-1993." Though it is sparse and a bit severe, the selection, made by Alejandro Anreus, is of interest for drawing attention to his appointment as the museum's curator.
Mr.
Anreus himself is responsible for 12 of the new additions, having begun his tenure before the end of 1993.
Everything else, presumably, dates from the administration of his predecessor, Gary Sangster.
This would account for the occasional dramatic contrast.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Faith in Snowballs
SOMETIME, somewhere, in the history of Stuart Himmelfarb, something turned him from an average child who loves snow into a person who views falling white crystals as a historic event.
Mr.
Himmelfarb collects snowballs.
But only from snowstorms he considers historic.
"My oldest snowball is from the blizzard of 1969," he said.
"It was on a Sunday, and the forecast had been for rain. More than 10,000 people were stranded at Kennedy Airport. It was the snowstorm that the people in Queens hated Mayor Lindsay, because he didn't get their streets plowed."


Panama
To the Editor: Howard W. French's article "Panama Coming Back Onto Tourist Scene" (March 27) was disappointing in one crucial aspect.
In the same breath that the author promotes Panama as a place for eco-tourism, he cites other reasons for going that are far more questionable.


What the Children Are Reading
The last time The New York Times Book Review ran a list of children's best sellers was in the spring of 1978.
Since then, the baby-boom generation has finally grown up, settled down and had children.
What with grandparents and parents showering the youngsters with books from birth, the children's publishing industry itself boomed.
Now those babies are mostly in school and moving into the middle grades.
The five best-seller lists above show both the books being bought for children this year and the books children themselves are buying.
They are divided into picture books and storybooks (picture books, with minimal text, for babies and preschoolers, and storybooks for elementary-school children); chapter books (novels divided into chapters for middle- and upper-grade readers); series books of more than three titles, often sold by the group title; activity books, frequently packaged with merchandise and instructions; and collections of poetry.


May 15-21: Shuttle Diplomacy; Israel and Syria Inch A Small Step Closer To a Peace Agreement
Last week Secretary of State Warren Christopher did his best imitation of his dynamic predecessor, Henry A. Kissinger, shuttling between Syria and Israel.
While Mr.
Kissinger negotiated a disengagement agreement after the 1973 war, Mr.
Christopher was seeking to broker a comprehensive peace agreement.
The broad outlines are already in place -- Israel withdraws from the Golan Heights and Syria agrees to full peace and normal relations.
But last week the two sides got down to serious exchanges.


Caldor's Success May Lure More Big Stores to Downtown
When the Caldor Corporation opened a branch in the old Alexander's department store on Roosevelt Avenue eight months ago, its executives were uncertain.
"We weren't 100 percent sure this was the right market for us," said Marc Balmuth, Caldor's president.
He's no longer uncertain.
"It's one of our highest-volume stores," Mr.
Balmuth said.
"We believe it's successful because the area is densely populated and it's continuing to grow." Caldor, a discount chain based in Norwalk, Conn., acquired a long-term lease on the site in Federal Bankruptcy Court in 1992.


Israelis Abduct Guerrilla Chief From Lebanon
Swooping deep into Lebanon by helicopter under cover of darkness, Israeli commandos kidnapped a Muslim guerrilla leader from his home early today and took him to Israel for questioning about the fate of a long-missing Israeli airman.
Israeli officials said they anticipated international criticism.
But they defended the lightning raid, which lasted under 10 minutes, as their only choice after persistent diplomatic efforts had failed to turn up information about Capt.
Ron Arad, an air force navigator who was shot down over southern Lebanon in October 1986.


Low View
To the Editor:
After reading Nancy Alfieri's letter  [ "Not Fit for Man or Beast," May 1 ]  about taking 100 children to "Beauty and the Beast" only to learn that the stage is barely visible from the balcony of the Palace Theater, I can sympathize.
Her speculation that she and her charges would have had a view of the stage from $65 orchestra seats is not, alas, borne out by the facts, at least as far as the first few rows are concerned.
In those seats you are well below stage level and never see any actor from the knees down, even if you stand up.


World Markets; Turmoil Aside, Mexico Offers Bargains
EL ECONOMISTA, the salmon-colored financial newspaper here, has started publishing an unusual notice that says a lot about the shaky state of Mexico's financial markets.
"No More Rumors," reads the newspaper's full-page advertisement.
El Economista asks its business-oriented readers to fax in rumors before spreading them.
It promises to investigate and then to disregard or to publish what it finds, depending on whether the rumors are unfounded.


Data Bank/May 22, 1994
Data Bank/May 22, 1994
Industrial Production Index
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.5
0.5
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.6
83.6
83.4
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,455
1,492
1,314
Merchandise Exports
March
Feb.
Jan.
In billions
$43.0
$38.1
$39.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$53.1
$50.1
$49.5
Auto Production
May 13
May 6
April 29
In units, weekly total
148,241
145,190
149,066
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
120,576
122,170
118,580
Weekly Jobless Claims
May 13
May 6
April 29
In thousands
367
378
352


RECORD BRIEF
Paganini-Fisk: Caprices (24)  Eliot Fisk, guitarist. Music masters 67092-2; CD.


Weddings; Anna Haimowitz, Stephen Berger
Anna Jeanette Haimowitz, a daughter of Dr.
Samuel I. Haimowitz of Levittown, N.J., and the late Esthella Haimowitz, is to be married today to Dr.
Stephen Paul Berger, the son of Ruth W. Berger of New York and the late Morton M. Berger.
Rabbi Yaakov Wasser is to officiate at the Sutton Place Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 34, is an internal audit specialist at Apple Computer in Cupertino, Calif.
She graduated from George Washington University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is an internist in Levittown.


In 'Bhaji on the Beach,' Feminism Meets the Diaspora
TWO YEARS AGO, GURINDER Chadha, a young Asian woman who lives in London, got financing for her first feature film, "Bhaji on the Beach." The signing took place at Barclay's Bank in London, where her father had been rejected for a job nearly 30 years earlier.
Although he had worked for Barclay's in Kenya, she says, he was "laughed out of the Southall branch because he wore a turban and had a beard." The realization that she was now getting more than $1.5 million from the same branch came slowly.
"I had to savor the moment," she said, "because 'Bhaji,' after all, is a documentation of me and my parents and our history."
The film has become a sleeper hit since it was first shown last summer at a festival in Locarno, Switzerland.
"Bhaji on the Beach," which opened on Wednesday at Film Forum, was also shown at New Directors/New Films in March.
Writing in The New York Times, Janet Maslin said that Ms.
Chadha handles the material "with impressive deftness and humor."


SWISS RED CROSS FACES AIDS PROBE
In April 1985, in the early days of screening blood supplies for the AIDS virus, the New York Blood Center sent a telex to the Red Cross of Switzerland, advising it that a small part of its shipment of Swiss blood appeared to have tested positive for H.I.V.
The New York center said it had destroyed the suspect units.
The Swiss Red Cross now concedes that that telex was the first warning that the virus that causes AIDS was present in Switzerland.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
PARK SLOPE: Department of Transportation officials agreed last month not to authorize any repairs or removal of bluestone pavement from historic or non historic districts of Park Slope.
Under the old policy, inspectors who found height differences of more than three-eighths of an inch between bluestone and concrete could issue violation notices to property owners.
If repairs were not made within 45 days, the city would repave the area with concrete and property owners would be billed, usually at $4.81 a square foot.


Queens West: Why Not Something Great?
NEXT MONTH, GROUND WILL be broken on Queens West, the 74-acre residential and commercial development on a spectacular waterfront site across the East River from United Nations headquarters.
By fall, construction is expected to begin on the project's first building, a 39-story apartment building designed by Cesar Pelli.
A lot of planning has gone into this $2.3 billion project, and it has produced some excellent features.
With the river at its doorstep, the Manhattan skyline for a backdrop and Grand Central Terminal just one subway stop away, Queens West is shaping up to be a wonderful place to live.
But for those concerned about the vitality of architecture in New York, Queens West may turn out to be a disturbing place to visit.
Like Battery Park City, the project provides a framework in which individual buildings can be joined together in a cohesive urban whole.
What it has yet to do is address one of Battery Park City's most conspicuous shortcomings: its failure to nurture the architectural creativity that could bring the urban whole to life.
The shortcoming is not limited to Battery Park City.
New York has seen few buildings of genuine distinction arise in recent years.
The issue raised by Queens West is whether the public sector has a responsibility to revive an art form that has languished in historical pastiche.


Tennis for Everyone but This One
I LIKE to play tennis, so the first thing I do when I get to a resort hotel is check in at the courts.
Those rectangular parterres of beautiful red or green clay, manicured to Wimbledon perfection, surrounded by lush plantings and scented shrubs, are more inviting to me than the swimming pool that acts as a magnet to so many others.
And to enhance this dream scape, most hotels provide a resident pro, some muscular ex-tournament player with movie-star looks who will work on a guest's serve, encourage her to rush the net and generally make her feel like a young Navratilova.
At least, that is what is supposed to happen.
I have learned otherwise.
I have found more obstacles to an enjoyable game of tennis in these resorts than aces served by Pete Sampras in a U.S.
Open.


In Egypt, Some Cruises Cut, Many Remain
Incidents of terrorist attacks have caused a drop in the number of tourists visiting Egypt, but a survey of nine cruise lines reveals that only one has made changes in its Eastern Mediterranean itineraries, which often include Egyptian ports, and two have reduced their schedules for vessels sailing on the Nile.
Royal Cruise Line has revised its 11-night summer and fall "Holy Land, Greek Isles and Ancient Civilizations" cruises on Aug. 5 aboard the 750-passenger Royal Odyssey and the Oct. 25 and Nov. 6 cruises of the 1,052-passenger Crown Odyssey to eliminate calls at Port Said, the port for Cairo.
It has been replaced with a stop at Herakleion, Crete.


The Kids Managing America's Money
THE stock market's skidding, the bond market's bombing and if you had to invest all by yourself, you might be in a panic.
But fortunately, like millions of Americans, you've hired a pro to take care of all that: a mutual fund manager, or two or three.
Wise old hands, these silver-haired money managers have seen it all before and know what to do when times get tough.
Right?
Guess again.
These days, more than a third of all mutual funds, including some of the biggest, are run by people in their 20's and 30's, according to Morningstar Inc., the Chicago fund-tracking service.
Many of these managers were born in the 1960's and were in grade school during the last terrible bear market, which began in 1973.
Some had not even started managing other people's money in 1987, when the markets collapsed.


84th Street Garden Faces Extinction
Despite more than two years of efforts to save it, one of the city's oldest community gardens may have seen its last spring.
Acting Justice Beverly S. Cohen of the State Supreme Court has ruled that the garden, on 84th Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues, must move to make way for construction of 35 public-housing apartments.


Are We There Yet?
CITY DOG Written and illustrated by Karla Kuskin. 32 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 8)  PAUL By Karla Kuskin.
Illustrated by Milton Avery. 48 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $16.95. (All ages)  PATCHWORK ISLAND By Karla Kuskin.
Illustrated by Petra Mathers.
Unpaged.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (Ages 3 to 7)


Ed Rendell
A HUSKY MAN IN A DARK BLUE suit steps up to the podium, fixes his audience with a purposeful stare and says, "My name is Edward G. Rendell, and I am the Mayor of Philadelphia."
He talks about how he succeeded in balancing the city's budget in 18 months -- without raising taxes, without begging for handouts from Harrisburg, Pa., or Washington and (Rendell maintains) without lowering the quality of city services, but rather by instituting cost-cutting and efficiency procedures, privatizing many city functions and taking a hard line with municipal unions.


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; Hitching a Ride
Pop quiz: What besmirches a supermodel more -- graffiti or marketing hitchhikers using her posters to hawk their own wares?
If the model is Kate Moss and the sponsor is Calvin Klein, the graffiti is more objectionable.
Costumed in a white string bikini, her pale skin fading into the stark background, Moss gazes softly at passers-by from Calvin Klein posters all over Manhattan.
Graffiti scrawled on her image loudly accuse Klein of promoting bulimia and anorexia.
Feed me.
Please send bread crumbs c/o Calvin Klein.
Calvin Klein wants to make you vomit.
The offending words are often covered by fresh, anger-free posters overnight.


H Is for Hip-Hip-Hooray!
THE ALPHABET FROM Z TO A (With Much Confusion on the Way).
By Judith Viorst.
Illustrated by Richard Hull.
Unpaged.
New York: Atheneum. $14.95. (Ages 7 to 10)


. . . And City Backs Off on OTB
Wakefield residents who are struggling to close an Off Track Betting branch on East 241st Street celebrated a small victory last week.
It will be considered a big victory when it actually happens.
They say they have been fooled before.
Larry L. Allison, an OTB spokesman, announced last week that the city would close the dingy and crowded 23-year-old branch in about a year.
Officials will search for a new location nearby with the assistance of community leaders.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a new production of "The Nutcracker" with a scenario rewritten by Wendy Wasserstein reversed the names of two dancers who will play Clara.
Ashley Tuttle was at the far right and Yan Chen was in the foreground.


'Journey of the Adopted Self'
To the Editor:
It was distressing to read Nancy Mairs's review of Betty Jean Lifton's "Journey of the Adopted Self" (May 1).
As a professional who has worked in the field for many years, I know Ms.
Lifton's work to be ground-breaking and essential reading for the millions of people touched by adoption.
To dismiss her new book as "overwrought" and without "literary merit" is insulting not only to the author but also to an entire field that will continue to recognize her work as insightful, original and written with the grace of a gifted prose stylist.
RANDOLPH W. SEVERSON  Dallas


At an Early Age, Students Brush Up Their Shakespeare
Each spring, elementary school students gather in the dance building of Purchase College here to watch productions of "Twelfth Night," "The Taming of the Shrew," "Hamlet" and other plays by Shakespeare.
The actors are neither professionals nor college students but children themselves, whose first experience with theater is often the Children's Shakespeare Festival run by the arts and education committee of the Prompters, the volunteer task force that works on behalf of the Performing Arts Center here.
The committee also serves as a liaison between the college's dance, theater and music divisions and the community by sponsoring workshops and special events for schoolchildren.


Common Sense in Tow, Dr. Spock Returns to Sarah Lawrence
The pediatrician Dr.
Benjamin M. Spock returned to Sarah Lawrence College here last week, about 50 years after he had worked as a consulting doctor for the college's nursery school.
Dr.
Spock, who is 91, is best known as the author of "Baby and Child Care," a common-sense guide that was the first of its kind to encourage parents to trust their own instincts when it came to caring for their children.
The book, published in 1945 and translated into 39 languages, has sold more than 40 million copies and is second only to the Bible as the best-selling book of all time.


Weddings; Beth A. Leibler, Robert Bronfman
Beth Ann Leibler, a partner in Borejko Leibler Advertising in New York, is to be married today to Robert Dean Bronfman, a vice president at SFI Investments in New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum is to officiate at Temple Shaaray Tefila in New York.


Shame Along the Potomac
DREAM CITY Race, Power, and the Decline of Washington, D.C.
By Harry S. Jaffe and Tom Sherwood.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


Keep It Down, Ludwig!
BEETHOVEN LIVES UPSTAIRS By Barbara Nichol.
Illustrated by Scott Cameron.
Unpaged.
New York: Orchard Books. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


New Haven Prepares for 6,500 Athletes and 500,000 Spectators
THE 1995 Special Olympics World Games are more than a year away, but at the games headquarters in New Haven activity is already heating up.
Every night several committees meet at the headquarters on the 17th floor of the New Haven Savings Bank building off Chapel Street.
One might be working out transportation between the different game locations, another developing a marketing campaign and still another coordinating with town governments planning receptions for foreign athletes.
With 6,500 athletes from 120 countries, 2,500 coaches, 45,000 volunteers and as many as 500,000 spectators, there is a lot of planning to do.


Who Said Los Angeles Could Be Rebuilt in a Day?
TWO years ago this month, with embers from the worst riots in United States history still smoldering, Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley appointed Peter Ueberroth, the former Baseball Commissioner and Olympics organizer, to lead the rebuilding effort.
The task was formidable, for the days of fire and looting had only compounded the devastation of years of economic neglect.
While some community leaders questioned whether Mr.
Ueberroth, a white Republican, could understand the plight of those in the inner city, high hopes surrounded his appointment.
A well-connected businessman, Mr.
Ueberroth was seen as a valuable asset in persuading corporations to create jobs and economic opportunity.


Special Solutions on the Antibug Detail
THEY are beginning to appear -- bugs, pests, creepy crawlers or whatever gardeners prefer to call them.
The insect population is on the march and will gradually increase during the next few months.
There inevitably follows the complaint, "DO something!"
This "do something" response has changed a great deal in the last few years.
Rather than rush out to the toolshed or the garden center's pesticide shelves for a quick cure, many of us who work outdoors now avoid the broad-spectrum pesticides that kill everything in sight.
Too many have learned that these "cures" kill beneficial insects that feed on the pests.
Alternatives are finding a place, the primary one being to first identify the pest and, knowing the insect's habits, adopting a narrow-spectrum antidote.


Hollywood Take Note: It's the Story That Counts
To the Editor:
I found the May 8 article "The View From the Other Side," by N. R. Kleinfield, absorbing and touching.
I don't know if it's because we grew up in my suburban household with a beloved cleaning woman, or because of a sort of instinctive curiosity about what other people do for a living and how they lead their lives.
But it's uplifting when someone takes her work as seriously as Elaine Strong.


May 15-21: Pick Your Poison; Things Go Better With Butter and Coke
Margarine bad for you and Coke good?
It sounded like a scene from Woody Allen's movie "Sleeper" when a scientist argued on Monday that the fatty acids in margarine are so bad for the heart that they could be responsible for 30,000 heart attacks a year.
The same day lobbyists for the soft drink industry told Congress that soft drinks could be part of a well balanced diet and so there should be no Federal restrictions on their sale in schools.
The margarine attack began last year when scientists discovered that the so-called trans fatty acids, which are artificially created to make vegetable oils into a solid that is supposed to resemble butter, actually are worse for cholesterol levels than butter itself.
Now, in an article in the American Journal of Public Health, Dr.
Walter Willett of the Harvard School of Public Health has calculated just how much worse margarine is. (A spokesman for the Food Processors Association called his report "an editorial, not a new study with more data.")


INFORMATION FUTURE: OUT OF CONTROL
In "The Information Future: Out of Control" (May 1), James Gleick claims that "the Internet is like a town that leaves its streets unmarked on the principle that people who don't already know don't belong."


Hit-and-Run Crash Kills Queens Man And Hurts His Son
A 51-year-old man was killed and his 15-year-old son was seriously injured yesterday when a car struck them in front of their home in Far Rockaway, Queens as they repaired the family car, the police said.
The car that hit them, which had no license plates, was left at the scene of the accident, Beach 40th Street and Rockaway Beach Boulevard, by the driver, who fled, said Sgt.
Mary Dumphy of the 101st Precinct.


Yesterday


Lay Off Jordan
To the Sport Editor:
I must register my extreme distaste for The Times's commentary on Michael Jordan's attempt to play major league baseball.
For some time I have, now with jaundiced eye, awaited the next offering from the sports department detailing his past failings, current failings or soon-to-be failings.


No Matter How Early It Is, The Stars Are Already Out
Don't expect any world records at the Reebok New York Games at Wien Stadium today.
It's far too early in the season for that.
But with headliners like Carl Lewis, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Butch Reynolds, Randy Barnes, Leroy Burrell, Quincy Watts and Kevin Young, the competition should be intense enough to satisfy the most jaded track and field fan.
"The field is as strong as ever, and in some events it's even stronger," said Allan Steinfeld, the New York Road Runners Club president and director of the meet.
He and the club's chairman, Fred Lebow, created the event in 1989.


Weddings; Joanna Spencer, Caleb J. Sekeres
Joanna Albert Spencer, the daughter of Ruth and Michael Spencer of New York, was married yesterday to Caleb Joshua Sekeres, a son of Bonnie and Joel Sekeres of Providence, R.I.
John F. Shaw, a justice of the peace in Middletown, Conn., officiated at the '92 Theater at Wesleyan University in Middletown.
Ms.
Spencer, 24, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Wesleyan.
The bride is the outreach coordinator for the education department of Hospital Audiences Inc. in New York, a nonprofit art and health-education organization founded by her father, its executive director.
Her mother teaches piano and is the director of the children's choir at the 92d Street Y in New York.


Weddings; Vera Vaughan, Richard Hough 3d
Vera Vaughan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Vaughan of Little Silver, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Ralston Hough 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hough Jr. of Roanoke, Va.
The Rev.
John Burton performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Red Bank, N.J.
Mrs.
Hough, 23, and her husband, 24, graduated from Princeton University.
She received a master's degree in English and American literature from New York University this month.
Her father is an actuarial consultant at Prudential Insurance in South Plainfield, N.J.
Her mother, Diane Vaughan, is a lawyer in the appellate division of the New Jersey Superior Court in Trenton.


In America; Perchance to Dream
Camelot? No, there was no Camelot.
And yet . . .


SURFACING
FOOD  Designer lox?
Once, ordering smoked salmon was as easy as ordering coffee.
Now, ordering smoked salmon is as difficult as, well, ordering coffee.
The new types include orange-dill, Mediterranean fennel, pastrami-spice (above) and even teriyaki.


INSIDE
Bosnian Talks Planned
International mediators invited leaders of the warring factions in Bosnia to peace talks in France beginning Tuesday.
The Croats said they would attend only if the Serbs did.
Page 11.
Eye-Opening Private Schools
The post-Communist curriculum includes flourishing private schools, which are themselves an education to Russians used to the traditional regimented learning of the past.
Page 3.
Pressure for Andreotti Trial
Investigators in Italy will press for a trial for ex-Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on charges that he was the Mafia's protector.
Page 14.
Tabasco Cat Wins Preakness
Go for Gin, the Kentucky Derby winner, was edged out by Tabasco Cat by three-quarters of a length in a stretch duel.
SportsSunday, section 8.
D'Amato Pushes a Candidate
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is busy campaigning for Governor -- not for himself, but for an obscure state senator.
It seems to be working.
Page 29.
Complexities in Health Care
An effort to equalize health insurance premiums for all groups as a part of health care plan is bringing questions about fairness.
Page 22.


Two White Sport Coats, Two Pink Carnations: One Couple for a Prom
On Friday night, Paul Rivera, a slim 16-year-old from Diamond Bar High School in Walnut Valley, Calif., put on his tuxedo, clipped on his bow tie and went to the junior-senior prom, a rite of passage for millions of high school students around the nation.
But Mr.
Rivera did not attend the prom in his hometown.
Nor did he drive to other proms nearby.
To do so would have risked more of the slurs, threats and violence he says he endures every day at his school.


Boy, 13, Charged in Death of Missing 3-Year-Old
A 13-year-old boy was arrested today on charges of killing a 3-year-old girl and hiding her body in the basement of the apartment building in Newark where she was visiting relatives when she vanished last week, the police said.
The boy, whom the authorities did not named because of his age, lived in the building and became a focus of the investigation after he told the police that he had found the blue denim skirt that the toddler, Shanelle Davis, had been wearing.


The Eccentrics Who Declared Independence For America
"INTENSE LIGHTS, VAGUE shadows, great pillars in a horizon are difficult things to nail signboards to," Charles Ives wrote in tribute to the prose of Emerson.
The same might be said of Ives's own music and of the more radical strain of American music that came after.
For every well-defined mode of national expression -- European symphonic models of the late 19th century, the wide-open prairie sound of the mid-20th, even university Serialism -- there have always been independent, oppositional tendencies that resist definition.
"The American Eccentrics," the theme of a promising series of concerts this week by the New York Philharmonic, is as good a signboard as any.
An orchestral program on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall will juxtapose Ives with Carl Ruggles, his even more solitary and impenetrable contemporary; Henry Brant, whose "spatial" music was foreshadowed by Ives's experiments with multiple ensembles, and Wallingford Riegger, who echoed Ivesian dissonance and polyrhythms in clean linear form.
A chamber concert on Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall will present music of the exuberantly freethinking Henry Cowell alongside that of later innovators like John Cage, Conlon Nancarrow and Terry Riley.


Utah Canoeing
To the Editor: We enjoyed reading about the rafting trip on the Green River in Utah ("On a Cool Desert River," March 20), in large part because it reminded us of our trip in March 1992.
Our trip was run by the Pack, Paddle and Ski Corporation of South Lima, N.Y., near Rochester.
This organization is operated by two young couples who enjoy and cherish the outdoors, and our trip was accordingly enriched.
Our group of nine, plus two leaders, started farther north at the town of Green River and therefore paddled about twice as far.
We saw some of the beautiful canyon country upstream of Canyonlands National Park.
More important, we saw a geyser, slept under orange canyon walls, hiked along the beautiful side canyons and swam in refreshing pools.


'Mostly' Is A Hard Act To Follow
THE MOSTLY MOZART FESTIVAL, WHICH begins its 28th season in July, has entered the endangered-species list; this summer could be one of its last.
Peculiarly, Lincoln Center is sharpening its knives even though the festival seems healthy and robust.
Last season, the festival's 39 New York concerts (which were followed by a tour to Tokyo) earned $1.9 million in ticket sales, the second-highest sum in its history; it played to nearly 90 percent of capacity in Avery Fisher Hall.
And some of the programming for this season is appealing: Joshua Rifkin conducts Bach's B-minor Mass, Gerard Schwarz leads Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, and performers include Hans Vonk, Vladimir Feltsman, Martha Argerich, Hermann Prey and Shura Cherkassky.
But since 1992, the festival has been operating under a shadow of Mozart-weariness.
That summer, a year after its triumphant 25th anniversary, Mostly Mozart seemed a desultory affair, sweeping up crumbs left by Lincoln Center's 19-month commemoration of the bicentennial of the composer's death.
Both festivals were heartily attacked in these pages for their lack of imagination.
And last summer, the less effective programs were taken as further evidence of sclerosis.


Can New Leader Mend the Rift In Chinatown?
At 36, with only 12 years on the job, Capt.
Thomas M. Chan has had a meteoric rise in the Police Department that is considered rare.
But his sudden promotion to commander of the Fifth Precinct in Chinatown on May 3, after serving only 10 months as the executive officer of the neighboring Seventh Precinct, says as much about Chinatown as it does about his career.
Captain Chan, who grew up on Catherine Street, served as a sergeant in Chinatown.
He has generated wide expectations that he will be able to mend the rift that formed between the community and the precinct during the 17-month tenure of his predecessor, Capt.
Wayne F. Bax.


A SENSE OF PLACE
HOW exciting it is for the township to be able to announce the adoption of the new recycling rules, after months of debate and weeks of public hearings.
We hope that some of the confusion of the old rules has been resolved and that the new procedures are not only flexible and innovative but also the finest new regulations in the state of New Jersey!
Remember, these are your recycling rules!
Use them well, and wisely!
Containers: All materials must be separated and placed in clean, tidy and appropriate township-approved biodegradable containers carrying the official seal and the picture of the Mayor and the Council.
These attractive and durable items are available from the Township Department of Public Works Gift Center for nominal fees of $25 to $50, depending on size.


Weddings; Johanna Gaines, William Simms
Johanna Marie Gaines, until recently a vice president in the reinsurance division at the Transamerica Life Companies in Charlotte, N.C., was married yesterday to William Edward Simms, the president of the reinsurance division at the Transamerica Life Companies in Charlotte.
The Rev.
Giles Spoonhauer, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Todd Dubose, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Simms, 39, graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Gaines of St.
Albans, Queens.
Her father, who is retired, was a master sergeant with the United States Army.


Proposal for Welfare Cutoff Is Dividing Clinton Officials
As he completes his welfare plan, President Clinton must resolve a fight that has divided aides for months and has led one faction to accuse another of trying to rip holes in the social safety net.
The fight is over whether families who follow all the rules can eventually be dropped from both welfare and a work program that Mr.
Clinton is proposing.
While the Administration wants to enroll recipients in the work program after they have received aid for two years, the question is what happens to those who spend several years in it and still do not find jobs on their own.


A Case of So Much Art, So Little Time
The city has served an eviction notice on ABC No Rio, a nonprofit center that has been a focal point for experimental art on the Lower East Side for 14 years.
The center must vacate its leased storefront space at 156 Rivington Street by the end of the month.
As a protest, members of the center have organized a Mobile Art Show tomorrow.
It is to start with a march from the center to the offices of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, at 75 Maiden Lane, where, at noon, some 30 artists will display their works or create new ones on the spot.


Kevorkian Explains Idea for Hitler Art Show
Responding to a report that he had once tried to mount an exhibit of paintings by Adolf Hitler, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian said today that what he had really tried to organize was a major exhibition of art by three World War II leaders -- Hitler, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Winston Churchill.
Dr.
Kevorkian, the retired pathologist who is best known for his campaign on behalf of physician-assisted suicide for terminally ill patients, said: "The idea a few friends and I were working on was to put together a show of art by all the wartime leaders who painted, to entertain people and to raise money for charity."


Corrections
The Wall Street Column last Sunday about internal investigations of possible wrongdoing on Wall Street and in Corporate America misidentified a company that does financial audits.
It is the Investigative Group, not the Investigative Research Group.


Uncouth Behavior Is Not Korean
To The Editor:
As Long Island high-school students of Korean heritage, we take issue with information presented in "Learning to Stand on Ceremony" (May 1).
We were dismayed to be told that slurping soup and belching at the dinner table are expected behaviors in South Korea, signifying that guests have savored a meal.
Not only is this untrue today, but even as far back as our parents and grandparents can recall, these signs of "social protocol" have been considered impolite and even barbaric in our native country.
Americans visiting South Korea should be advised that business diplomacy and friendship, rather than being enhanced, may be severely jeopardized by behaviors that South Koreans consider uncouth.
EUNHEE CHO  JEANNE KANG  YOONJUNG LEE  JIYUN PARK  PHILIP PARK  Herricks High School New Hyde Park, L.I.


Head of Landmarks Agency Resigning for Real Estate Job
Laurie Beckelman, the chairwoman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission since 1990 and one of the few remaining holdovers from the Dinkins administration, said yesterday that she would leave government this summer to become a vice president at the LaSalle Partners real-estate concern.
Deputy Mayor Fran Reiter said yesterday that Ms.
Beckelman would certainly have been "seriously considered" for reappointment by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had she not accepted LaSalle's offer.


Streetscapes/The Rockefeller City House; Pied-a-Terre Off Fifth for a Parsimonious Billionaire
THIS month has seen a great hubbub about Kykuit, the Rockefeller estate at Pocantico Hills that opened to the public on May 4.
Tour tickets are sold out for the year except for ferry package tours.
John D. Rockefeller also had a city house, unmentioned in the celebrations of Kykuit because it was demolished more than 50 years ago.
But the unusual complex of house, stable and garden at 4 West 54th Street still presents an interesting lesson in rich men's dwellings.
And it turns out that bits and pieces of the building still exist, but not on the original site.


Weddings; Anne M. Gillespie, Bruce S. Murdock
Anne M. Gillespie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander J. Gillespie Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Bruce S. Murdock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian S. Murdock, also of Greenwich.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Michael the Archangel.
Mrs.
Murdock is an information specialist in the library of Municipal Bond Investors Assurance, bond insurers in Armonk, N.Y.
She and her husband graduated from Hartwick College.
Her father, now retired, was the vice chairman and general counsel of Asarco Inc., metals smelters and refiners, in New York.


Weddings; Caroline Krass And Adam Levy
Caroline Anne Krass, a daughter of Stephen J. Krass of New York and the late Marian S. Krass, is to be married today to Dr.
Adam Scott Levy, a son of Rena and Victor Levy of Muttontown, L.I.
Rabbi Paul Kaplan is to officiate at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 25, graduated from Cornell University.
The bride is an associate at the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel.
She received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a senior partner in Krass &amp; Lund, a law firm in New York.
She is a stepdaughter of Sallie W. Krass.


John G. Lord, 70, Author and Producer
John G. Lord, who as an author, television producer and documentary script writer dealt with modern history, died on Wednesday at his home in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He was 70.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Karolyn Lord.


Pound and Gouge, Burn and Break
NIGHT By Bilge Karasu.
Translated by Guneli Gun with the author. 142 pp.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. $19.95.


Weddings; Miss Dopsovic, Mr. Flynn
Kathleen Mary Dopsovic, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Dopsovic of Brightwaters, L.I., was married on Friday to Kevin Joseph Flynn, a son of Jeannine M. Temple of Atlantic Beach, Fla., and Dennis J. Flynn of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Robert Giuntini performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bay Shore, L.I.
Mrs.
Flynn, 27, graduated from Villanova University.
She is a vice president at Lehman Brothers in New York.


Weddings; Svetlana Petroff And Philip Smith
Svetlana Vita Petroff, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ognjan Petroff of New York, was married on Friday to Philip John Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Doral Smith of Denver.
The Rev.
Bernard Camire performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Church in New York.
Ms.
Petroff is keeping her name.
She is a partner in Rowland &amp; Petroff, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Wellesley College and from New York Law School.
She and her husband received Master of Laws degrees from the McGeorge School of Law.


Jordan Won't Be Watching but He Picks the Bulls
The right fielder for the Birmingham Barons was asked if he was aware of a basketball game scheduled in New York on Sunday afternoon.
"I heard," said Michael Jordan with a little smile, sitting before his locker in the Barons' clubhouse today.
"But I won't be watching it. I have a game of my own."


Rockets Give Houston Victory as Big as Texas
Thousands of Houston Rockets fans came to today's seventh and deciding game of the Western Conference semifinals with a banner provided in their morning editions of The Houston Post: "Clutch City." The placards were a historical lie.
But lo and behold, they just may have worked.
They were a desperate gambit to ward off the demons in what is really known as a city of legendary sports chokes.
This is a place where both the Rockets and the football Oilers hold records for the biggest blown leads in the history of the playoffs, the Rockets setting their ignominious milestone in Game 2 of this series.


To Prevent Paint Injuries, Safety Is Crucial With Some Sprayers
SPRAY painting walls and other large surfaces is fast and produces even coatings without brush marks.
But spray equipment can be expensive, some practice is needed and preparation and cleanup are usually more demanding than with brushes and rollers.
Yet for several rooms, the cost of a moderate spray system, $100 to $175, may be justifiable.
For exterior painting, renting professional equipment at $250 to $350 a week can save substantially, compared to hiring painters or investing a summer of weekends painting with hand tools.


Northwest Morels, the Fragrant Delicacy
MORELS arrived a little late this year, but they are now at their peak, and cooks are happy.
They come from Washington State and Oregon, and the season runs through July.
Highly prized, these fragrant mushrooms have a delicate flavor, which is best brought out when they are simmered in stock or light cream or sauteed in butter.
They go well with pasta, risotto and light meats like chicken and veal.
American morels don't have the pungency of French ones, so I like to mix in a few dried ones to enhance the flavor.


Family and Friends Gather to Mourn Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis


Weddings; Annene Guertin and Leo Mutchler 3d
Annene Renee Guertin, the daughter of Philip and Mary Guertin of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Leo Lawrence Mutchler 3d, a son of Gloria Lasota of Sussex, Wis., and Mr.
Mutchler Jr. of Waukesha, Wis.
Bishop Athenagoras of Dorylaion, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Hempstead, L.I.
Mrs.
Guertin-Mutchler, 26, is an assistant planner at Adler, Boschetto &amp; Peebles, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Northeastern University.


Prelude to a Photographic Career
TONY VACCARO was sent to Europe as an infantryman in World War II.
As an amateur photographer, he carried his camera along to the front lines.
The photographs he took there, many of which appeared in Stars and Stripes, the military newspaper, started him on a career that took him into the upper reaches of photojournalism.


Inflatable Angst
WHAT IT IS: A 50-inch inflatable doll called the Scream.
There is also a 12-inch version called Scream Junior.
WHAT INSPIRED IT: "The Scream," the late-19th-century masterpiece by the Norwegian artist Edvard Munch.
The 36-by-29-inch waxed crayon and tempera canvas of a ghoulish waif shrieking against the backdrop of a blood-red sky has become a symbol of modern angst in a century devastated by war, social upheaval, disease, famine and the ascendance of Barney.


Weddings; P. J. McGovern, Allan Middleton
Phyllis Jean McGovern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene McGovern of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to Allan Frank Middleton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne A. Middleton of Loxley, Ala.
Msgr.
James McCarthy performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.


Weddings; Jacqueline Pash, Charles F. Hansen
Jacqueline Pamela Pash, a senior account executive at Porter/Novelli, a public-relations company in New York, was married yesterday to Charles Frederick Hansen, a contracts manager at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad in New York.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Pash-Hansen, 35, graduated from the State University College at Cortland, N.Y., and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Opal Webster Pash of the Bronx and Joseph J. Pash of New York.
Her father retired as a marketing manager at CPC International, the food company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Weddings; Holly E. Goss, Paul E. Betts
Holly Elizabeth Goss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Goss of Hanover, N.H., was married yesterday to Paul Elwood Betts, a son of Joseph E. Betts of Westport, Conn., and the late Jeanne Betts.
The Rev.
William B. Bryant officiated at the Greens Farms Congregational Church in Westport.
Mrs.
Betts, 32, works for the Marriott Corporation in Madison, Conn., as the food-service director for the public schools there.
She graduated from Hood College and received a master's degree in hotel administration from Cornell University.


Defending the Travelers Umbrella
To the Editor:
In "Mischief Under the Travelers Umbrella" (May 1), Michael Quint made a broad condemnation, not only of Primerica, but of all those connected with Travelers Insurance.
I have been an agent of Travelers the last 46 years, selling Travelers' fire and casualty products to our personal and commercial clients.
Because of the immense brush strokes of the article, in which you also included the indemnity section of the company, you have done considerable damage to the reputation of those professional agents who have served clients honestly and well.
I personally had no knowledge of Primerica's sales practices, and if they are as you described them, most professional agents would also be upset.
Nevertheless, the article was too broad in its condemnation, and I feel The New York Times would be derelict in its duty if it did not look into it more carefully.
MARVIN S. LUFTIG  Hempstead, L.I., May 5  The writer is president of Luftig Associates Inc.


Examining Cultural Mores in a Lehman College Exhibition
Physical Evidence" comes to Lehman College Art Gallery from the Procter Art Center, at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson. It was organized at the exhibition there by Molly Sullivan, an independent curator.
On the face of it, this gathering of objects and installations by eight contemporaries differs little from others of its kind to be seen in SoHo and other hip milieus.
That is, the works tend to be allusive rather than self-explanatory.
Some are impressive spectacles, a few have esthetic appeal and all are open to interpretation.


THE CURSE
As a middle-aged New Yorker who once thought that "Andy Bathgate's Hockey Secrets" was the greatest book ever written, I can empathize with the somewhat ambivalent emotions expressed by some veteran Ranger fans in Peter de Jonge's article "The Curse" (April 24).
Perhaps fans like the one who feels that a Ranger victory "would almost be too late to do him much good" are recognizing that the dreams of our youth are rarely the same as those of our later years.


Effort to Close a Growing Gap in the Budget
In contrast with last year, when Westchester closed its books with a $14 million surplus, budgetary experts say the county could face a $28 million shortfall by the end of this year in its $1.3 billion budget.
And next year, they add, the situation could worsen, forcing large increases in what many residents consider already high property taxes.
In a report to the county's Board of Legislators earlier this month, the Budget Director, Joseph E. Phelan, said that projections based on first-quarter figures indicate a $10 million deficit in the current $938 million general-fund budget and another $5 million shortfall in the $336 million budget for the County Medical Center and the Ruth Taylor Institute, a county-run nursing home, which are administered under a separate fund called an enterprise fund.


'Journey of the Adopted Self'
To the Editor:
Nancy Mairs, in reviewing "Journey of the Adopted Self," cannot bring herself to disagree with the book's central thesis about the damaging and vastly complex effects of secrecy and closed records; she instead replicates it in an oversimplified and skewed manner.
Still, taking aim where she can, Ms.
Mairs attacks Ms.
Lifton's literary style (a surprise, considering her long and distinguished career), as well as her references to Robert Bly and Joseph Campbell.
Ms.
Mairs finds it convenient to omit that the poet Stanley Kunitz, the psychologist Erik Erikson and Carl Jung are drawn upon just as frequently as those two.
In any event, I find completely absurd the assertion that relegates "Journey of the Adopted Self" to "the heap of 'pop-psych' publications common today."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about movie trailers misstated the title of Chris Pula at New Line Cinema.
Mr.
Pula, the executive who doubted the efficacy of trailers, is the company's president of theatrical marketing, not a vice president.


Why Less Is Not More
LEAN AND MEAN The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of Flexibility.
By Bennett Harrison. 324 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $25.


Build Them, Fly Them
This aircraft does not Comply With Federal Safety Regulations for Standard Aircraft." So reads a notice stenciled on the inside wall of the rear cockpit of the BD-10 personal jet. From the outside, the BD-10 looks like a cross between an F-14 Tomcat and George Jetson's family sedan; inside, its turbojet engine propels it to Mach 0.9. And if you have three quarters of a million dollars, good memories of shop class and a private pilot's license, you could build and fly it yourself.
There are 16,000 registered home-built planes flying in this country, more than double the number 10 years ago.
Several factors brought this state of affairs about.
In the past decade, several huge adverse product liability judgements and some ill-advised marketing decisions vastly inflated the price of mass-produced light planes -- which is to say, Cessnas, Pipers and Beechcraft.
Right now, the cheapest single-engine Beechcraft sells for $256,000; a much snazzier kit plane can be had -- albeit dissassembled -- for about $30,000.
The $700,000 BD-10 is the priciest, highest-performance expression of this trend.


From Tudor City, Protests Against Noisy Protesters
Another protest is brewing at the United Nations -- but this one is aimed at all the other protests that disrupt the 4,000 residents of the Tudor City apartment complex, which stretches from 41st to 43d Streets, between First and Second Avenues.
"The demonstrations are like rock concerts in our living rooms," said Harry Laughlin, president of the residents' Tudor City Association.
"With world events, they've become much more frequent, and louder. The summer gets especially raucous, sometimes four or five nights of noise a week. It's not just people voicing opinions but using loudspeakers and amplified megaphones reaching more than 112 decibels."


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; Nike's Tattooed Ekins
All good companies have dedicated employees.
A few have turned their founders into billionaires.
But hardly any have workers who tattoo the firm's logo on their legs.
In "Just Do It," a new book on Nike due out next month, Donald Katz, who previously wrote about Sears in "The Big Store," describes the running shoe empire and its corporate culture.
Notable among the employees are the Ekins (Ekin is Nike spelled backwards), most of them young men in their 20's, who travel the country advising retailers on technical matters.
Katz writes:


THE Q GENE
Recently, as I stood red-faced, waiting in line at the toy store with my two daughters, each of whom was clutching a seductive Barbie doll, I had a small epiphany (Hers: "The Q Gene," by Sarah Bird, May 1).
Had they chosen what I wanted for them, my daughters would be toting home something egalitarian and educational: a puzzle, a book, a building toy.
But these two sisters, not yet 3 and 5, had the strength to reject what I wanted for them and to choose what they wanted for themselves.
That day, my girls showed that they knew how to think for themselves and to get what they wanted.
Are there better skills for young people of any age to possess?
SALLY WASSERMAN Stamford, Conn.


May 15-21: Mixed Signals; The Information Future: As Hazy as Ever
Is the smart money backing away from the information highway just when everyone else has gotten excited?
One had to wonder last week when the Mead Corporation announced that it wants to sell off the best-known and most profitable on-line data service in the country -- the Nexis and Lexis news and legal affairs libraries -- and concentrate on its original business: making paper.
On the other hand, Bell Atlantic announced ambitious plans to offer interactive television and data services to 8.5 million homes by the year 2000.
The company predicts that it can break even after the first four years, and it is betting that customers will pay $55 to $60 a month for cable television and newer services -- like huge libraries of movies, available at one's beck and call, and on-line video games.


Canada Acts To Cut Fishing By Foreigners
Canada has given itself the legal authority to seize foreign fishing boats outside its 200-mile limit in the North Atlantic in an attempt to stem the depletion of cod, flounder and redfish.
The law, enacted by both houses of Parliament this month, focuses on an area about half the size of New York State, known as the Nose and the Tail of the Grand Banks, fish-breeding grounds on Canada's continental shelf, southeast of Newfoundland.


Missing Link
To the Sports Editor:
Turns out the fans were right the first time.


Weddings; Laura J. English and Erik M. Boogaert
Laura Jean English, the daughter of Carol and Lawrence English of Simsbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Erik Marko Boogaert, the son of Marie Hayes of Canton, Conn., and the late Jost Boogaert.
The Rev.
Stephen G. Kendrick performed the ceremony at the Universalist Church in West Hartford, Conn.
The bride, 29, is the president of Bodyworks, a fitness club in Canton.
Her father is the president of Cigna Health Care Inc. in Bloomfield, Conn.


Scissored or Straight? A Quarrel That Won't Die.
WHAT'S PAST IS PROLOGUE which is one of the greater fascinations of archeology, anthropology, history and psychoanalysis: that perhaps we shall understand better where we are by seeing clearly where we have been.
A fair amount of art history -- and cultural history in general -- is a search for precedent and antecedents.
Though the notion of progress in art has long been in disrepute, the theme of development and continuity, the idea that what happened yesterday flowed with a certain observable logic out of the day before and helps explain what went on at 10:52 A.M. today, remains a shaping force in art studies (not to mention human thought in general).
"Pictorial Effect/Naturalistic Vision" at the Art Museum at Princeton University (through June 6) gives visual scope to a 19th-century controversy that though it might seem arcane, sheds light on the nature of photography as well as on its course over the last century.
This show of 102 prints is the first to compare the work of Henry Peach Robinson (1830-1901), the pre-eminent English art photographer of his day, and Peter Henry Emerson (1856-1936), who in the 1880's developed a serene landscape art and a dexterous way with vitriol as a challenge to Robinson's esthetic and his popular manual of photographic instruction.


Suits With Legs
A revival of miniskirts has taken place this spring among many women who invest in designer suits.
At charity luncheons, large numbers of women are appearing in skirts four to six inches above the knee.
When the short skirts were first shown in Paris in July, the idea seemed little more than a grab for headlines.
But now, with the spring season winding down, thigh-high hemlines have become a definite alternative to the many other popular lengths.


Weddings; Joy C. Levine, Michael Bertan
Joy Caryn Levine, a daughter of Myrna and Gary Levine of Jericho, L.I., was married last evening to Michael Maxwell Bertan, the son of Marilyn and Howard Bertan, also of Jericho.
Cantor Marvin Antosofsky officiated at the North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.
The bride, 26, is a special projects manager for Vibe magazine in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.


The New Unspoiled Agassi; At Peace With Himself and His Sport, He's 'Back to Stay'
The film was "House of the Spirits." The filmgoer was Andre Agassi, not a noted culture critic, and lately not even a particularly noted tennis player despite his innate genius for the sport.
Shouldn't he, with the French Open beckoning tomorrow morning, be outside sweating on a clay court someplace instead of inside a cinema drinking in that singular process where life imitates art?
Not to worry, insisted the 19th-ranked Agassi, who, having journeyed there twice already, knows the route to the French Open final like the back of his hand.
This, despite the fact that Agassi's first-round match in Paris is against Mats Wilander, a three-time French Open champ.


A Bond Market That Could Use A Psychiatrist
HAS the Fed finally gotten through to the bond market?
After the Federal Reserve's fourth interest rate hike in four months, designed to slow growth before it triggers an outburst of inflation, the bond market finally rallied a bit last week, bringing down long-term interest rates and momentarily bolstering the value of bonds across the board.


Caring For Aged In Co-ops
NOT until he was stricken with a serious illness last year did Leonard Levine, 78, realize how much support older people need to remain in their apartments.
"I couldn't even change a light bulb," said Mr.
Levine, a board member at Clearview Gardens, a 1,788-unit co-op in the Whitestone area of Queens.
It helped him understand the need for a comprehensive program of assistance for the older people in Clearview.


Weddings; Allegra Biggs, Steven Lubrano
Allegra Georgene Biggs, a daughter of Brenda B. Anderson and Jeremy H. Biggs, both of New York, was married yesterday to Steven David Lubrano, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Lubrano of Hingham, Mass.
The Rev.
John E. Owens, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley F. Druckenmiller in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Druckenmiller is a sister of the bride.
Mrs.
Lubrano, 30, graduated from Hampshire College and received a law degree magna cum laude from Boston University.
Until recently, she was an associate at Wright &amp; Moehrke, a law firm in Boston.
Her father is the vice chairman and chief investment officer of the Fiduciary Trust Company International in New York.
She is a stepdaughter of Friederike K. Biggs and of O. Kelley Anderson Jr., both of New York.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, April, pct. chg.
0.8
0.8
Existing-home sales, April, mils., ann. rate
4.06
4.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
367
370
Friday
G.D.P., provisional, 1st qtr., pct. change
2.6
2.6
G.D.P. deflator, 1st quarter, percent change
2.6
2.6
Consumer sentiment index, late May
91.5
91.5
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
2-year Treasury note auction
Conference Board releases consumer confidence survey
Wednesday
5-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting


I, Gloria
MOVING BEYOND WORDS By Gloria Steinem. 296 pp. New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Q and A
Rent Limit For the Elderly Q I have lived for more than 10 years in a rent-stabilized building.
I am over 62 years old and retired.
My rent at the beginning was $1,200 a month; it is now $1,650 a month.
Since I am a senior citizen, is there a limit to how much my rent can be raised when I renew my lease every two years? . . .
Frank Catani, Manhattan


Wall Street; A 'Virtuous' Fund Goes Aggressive
THE holy water set goes hip tomorrow morning, as a mutual fund outfit that specializes in virtuous investing announces a splashy new product to be run by an aggressive money manager.
The Calvert Group, which runs 35 "socially conscious" mutual funds and where aggressive money managers had until now been shunned, has hired Cedd Moses to run its new Calvert Strategic Growth Fund.
Mr.
Moses manages $350 million of private investors' money out of his Los Angeles office.


Traffic Alert
PARK AVENUE FESTIVAL Park Avenue South will be closed today between 23d and 32d Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SALUTE TO ISRAEL DAY PARADE Fifth Avenue will be closed between 57th and 79th Streets, and 79th Street will be closed between Fifth and Third Avenues, from noon until the parade's completion.


Parsippany Journal; Condominiums on Mountain Are Called Eyesore by Some
THERE is something new on top of old Watnong Mountain that many Morris County residents can see every day.
And that's a shame, some people around here say.
Even though the new project, called the Powder Mill Heights condominiums, is still under construction near the top of the mountain off Route 10, critics of the 6-story (or 10-story, depending on how you look at it), 355-unit luxury development are giving their negative reviews now and not waiting for the last act, as the builder suggests.


Can They Deliver?
Maybe it's the sugared walnuts, chocolate syrup and ice cream.
Perhaps it's pride of place, or plain old enlightened self-interest.
But on the last Thursday of each month, in Room EF-100 of the Capitol, a ground-floor hideaway a few steps from the gift shop, a group of instinctively fractious politicians comes together for lunch and a make-your-own-sundae sit-down.
They represent constituencies almost as diverse as America, yet 14 of them are crammed together in just over 300 square miles, a land mass one twenty-fourth the average size of a single Congressional district.
Most of them toil in comparative anonymity, 200 miles from home, where City Council members are just as likely to get local ink or air time.


Hudson Sites Share In a Social Revival
Historic homes and estates in the Hudson Valley are once again resounding with the strains of music, the clink of champagne glasses and the banter of refined small talk.
Earlier this month, Historic Hudson Valley opened two of its properties, Sunnyside in Tarrytown and Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown, for private parties.
The properties join the ranks of other homes and sites seeking to make money by offering an alternative to restaurants and catering halls for weddings, engagement parties, anniversary dinners and fund-raising events.


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; Great 'White' Pumpkin
Dear Linus: You've been waiting a long time for the Great Pumpkin.
Each Halloween, it fails to appear.
Well, this may not live up to all your hopes (nothing in life does), but there's a new variety of pumpkin that has possibilities.
It's white.
It's called Luminia.
And this is only the second season it has been on the United States market (from numerous seed companies).
Plant now and there'll be a ghostly presence in the pumpkin patch next fall, glowing in the moonlight.
Tell Charlie Brown.


The Nation; The World Through Her Eyes
EVERYONE knew that Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis had taste.
It pervaded her public activities, from her insistence on authenticity in refurbishing the White House to her choice of couturier clothes that exactly suited her to her work editing books for Doubleday with a meticulous regard for quality.
What is less obvious, however, is that for her, taste was a mission.
Like any evangelist, she wanted to convey her beliefs to the world around her, to pass on her ideas of what was beautiful, what was appropriate, what was right.
And in so doing, she had a whim of iron.


Charleston
To the Editor: Having just visited Charleston, S.C., in March, we enjoyed Scott Norvell's article ("What's Doing in Charleston," April 17) but were surprised to find no mention of some of what we considered important elements of our two-day stay: the Visitors Center, the variety of bus and van tours leaving the center with pickups at strategic locations and the Charleston Museum right across the street.


Synagogue In Jericho Tests Peace
Guarded by Palestinian policemen and visited daily by armed Jewish settlers, an ancient synagogue in Jericho has become a fragile testing ground for Israel's agreement with the P.L.O. on Palestinian self-rule.
Since it became a Jewish island under Palestinian control, the synagogue has emerged as a potential flash point of Jewish-Arab tension in an area that has been otherwise calm since the entry of the Palestinian police on May 13.
With reinforcements that arrived on Wednesday, the police force in Jericho is now about 700 strong.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with the At Work column, about commuting by bicycle, located the office of the organization Transportation Alternatives incorrectly.
It is in Manhattan, not Brooklyn.


Northwest Morels, the Fragrant Delicacy
MORELS arrived a little late this year, but they are now at their peak, and cooks are happy.
They come from Washington State and Oregon, and the season runs through July.
Highly prized, these fragrant mushrooms have a delicate flavor, which is best brought out when they are simmered in stock or light cream or sauteed in butter.
They go well with pasta, risotto and light meats like chicken and veal.
American morels don't have the pungency of French ones, so I like to mix in a few dried ones to enhance the flavor.


Early-Bird Specials
Though Memorial Day weekend signals a new season in entertaining and warm-weather cooking, this may have less to do with what's on the shelves than what's on our minds.
Right now, the fixings for simple summer dishes -- home-grown tomatoes, eggplants and zucchini, a panoply of lettuces, shell beans and herbs -- are mere sprouts in most of the country.
Yet the appetite for them is inflamed by the first suggestion of a long weekend in May.


Seeking to Give Classical Music A Pretty Face
IT'S EARLY MONDAY morning in New York, and Peter Gelb is on the telephone in his large corner office on the 16th floor of the Sony Building.
As always, scheduling is tight.
Behind him are several days of work on a feature film at Sony's Columbia Pictures studio in Los Angeles.
Ahead is a hop to Germany for consultation on recording and television projects.
"But I'll be back Wednesday," he tells the caller.
Between his duties as president of Sony Classical Film and Video, a division created last summer that released its first titles two months ago, and Sony Classical U.S.A., the company's domestic classical-record division, Mr.
Gelb moves on a blurred trajectory between the coasts, frequently veering off to Japan, where the Sony corporate hierarchy sits, or to Europe, where much of the musical talent and many of the great venues lie.


Weddings; Katherine Allen, Andrew Roth
Katherine Holden Allen, the executive editor at Vanguard Classics, a recording company in New York, is to be married today to Andrew Roth, a psychologist.
The Rev.
David Bumbaugh, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi Nathan Benjamin is to officiate at Laurel Woods, the home of Judge and Mrs.
William Gural, friends of the couple, in Springfield, N.J.
Ms.
Allen, 39, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Allen of Los Angeles.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is the retired chairman of the applied physics department at the University of California at Los Angeles.


Secret Gardens: Dining Alfresco This is the time of year when diners migrate to outdoor cafes and gardens, which New Yorkers, with considerable ingenuity, have created out of narrow sidewalks and tiny back lots. Here is the first in a series of looks at some accommodating spots to dine outdoors this summer. BAROLO * +  (212) 226-1102; 398 West Broadway, near Spring Street; $$$; all major credit cards    One of the prettier and more spacious outdoor gardens downtown can be found at this spirited northern Italian restaurant. The enchanting walled-in garden with spotlighted trees, terra-cotta floors and a balcony is hidden behind the two main handsome dining rooms, far from the street fumes and noise. Among starters are a salad combining grilled shrimp, beets and green beans in a balsamic vinaigrette, and beef carpaccio with arugula and shaved Parmesan. Pastas seem to be the strong cards, including gnocchi in a pesto sauce with green beans and potatoes, rigatoni with eggplant and ricotta cheese, and cappelletti with calamari and broccoli. Simple roasted or sauteed fish and meat are done well, too. Among offerings are grilled salmon with mustard sauce, grilled veal chop with shiitake and grilled tuna with a sauce of eggplant. (Review: 1/14/94)


The Nation; Stepping on Toes, Discreetly
As the Democrats can no doubt remember, the lot of the opposition party is not an easy one.
Getting heard is difficult, developing an image as something more than partisan naysayers rebelling against the White House is harder still.
This is the psycho-political truth that helps explain the conduct of the Republicans on health care, the dizzying dance between high partisan pique and bipartisan outreach that was so much in evidence last week as two committees formally took up the health care bill.
Each of those positions carries political risks; the attempts of Republican leaders to calibrate a course between the two will furnish much of the legislative drama of the next few months.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  U.S.
BACKS REACTOR PLAN  In a plan that is drawing protests, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation intends to complete two Soviet-designed nuclear reactors in the Czech Republic with the backing of the Clinton Administration.  1  BLOOD SCANDAL TAINTS SWISS  The Swiss Red Cross is having to answer for decisions that allowed products contaminated with H.I.V. into the blood supply.  1


RECORD BRIEFS
R.
Strauss: Orchestral Songs; Mahler: Nine Early Songs (orchestrated by Berio) Andreas Schmidt, baritone; Cord Garben conducting the Berlin Radio Symphony.
RCA 09026-61184-2; CD.


Special Solutions on the Antibug Detail
THEY are beginning to appear -- bugs, pests, creepy crawlers or whatever gardeners prefer to call them.
The insect population is on the march and will gradually increase during the next few months.
There inevitably follows the complaint, "DO something!"
This "do something" response has changed a great deal in the last few years.
Rather than rush out to the toolshed or the garden center's pesticide shelves for a quick cure, many of us who work outdoors now avoid the broad-spectrum pesticides that kill everything in sight.
Too many have learned that these "cures" kill beneficial insects that feed on the pests.
Alternatives are finding a place, the primary one being to first identify the pest and, knowing the insect's habits, adopting a narrow-spectrum antidote.


Corrections
The "What's Doing" column on May 8, about Boston, misspelled the name of a restaurant.
It is L'Espalier.


Weddings; Miss Delafield And Mr. Cox
Caroline Mortimer Delafield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Delafield of New York, was married yesterday to William Preston Cox Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cox of Lexington, Ky.
The Rev.
Francis Huntington performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Trinity Parish in Tivoli, N.Y.
The bride graduated from the College of Wooster and received a master's degree in educational administration at Teachers College of Columbia University, where she was a Klingenstein Fellow.


Weddings; Jennifer A. Hamm, Jacob I. Maltz
Jennifer A. Hamm, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Hamm of Brooklyn, is to be married tomorrow to Jacob I. Maltz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon E. Maltz of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Yisroel Reisman is to perform the ceremony at El Caribe Country Club in Brooklyn.
The bride, 21, is a teacher of retarded adults at the Young Adult Institute in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Brooklyn College.
Her father is a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Herzfeld &amp; Rubin.
Her mother, Margaret Hamm, is a librarian at the Shulamith School for Girls, a private elementary and secondary school in Brooklyn.


Perfect Run for Zito Except for the Finish
This time, Nick Zito could not bless just about everything in sight as Go for Gin came roaring down the stretch.
Although game, the Kentucky Derby winner finished three-quarters of a length short in his bid to win the Preakness and the first two legs of the Triple Crown.
Watching from the clubhouse, Zito, his trainer, was disappointed, but unbowed, after the race.


Jurassic Lark
TIME FLIES Written and illustrated by Eric Rohmann.
Unpaged.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $15. (Ages 4 to 7)


Weddings; Karen Estilo, John Owczarski
Karen Anne Marie Estilo, a litigator for NBC, was married yesterday to John William Owczarski, an associate at the law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Charles White performed the ceremony at St.
Helen's Roman Catholic Church in Howard Beach, Queens.
Mrs.
Owczarski, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Apolonia E. Estilo of Howard Beach and the late Dr.
Bernardo S. Estilo.
The bride's mother is an anesthesiologist at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.


Conklin Propels Princeton in Overtime
Scott Conklin saved the Tigers their skins today.
The junior attackman scored the tying and winning goals, the latter in sudden-death overtime, and enabled Princeton to defeat Johns Hopkins, 12-11, in a game that had a wild conclusion.
The victory, achieved before a crowd of 4,796 in Palmer Stadium, lifted the Tigers into the semifinal round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association lacrosse tournament.
Princeton will play Brown in one match and Syracuse will meet Virginia in the other at College Park, Md., on May 28 with the championship game on May 30, also in Maryland's Byrd Stadium.


Clintons Plan to Attend Burial Service for Onassis


Sun Shines, Lilacs Bloom, Birds (Aargh!)
It could be heard well into the southwest corner of Central Park, a screech that sounded something like a cross between a swarm of crickets and a mind-control device from a science-fiction movie.
In fact, the mysterious noise came from an unassuming three-pound metal box called a Birdgard, used by the managers of the New York Coliseum site to try to keep the building's marquee and large metal medallions free of pesky pigeons and their corrosive droppings.


Nobody Understands Vinnie
FLIP-FLOP GIRL By Katherine Paterson. 120 pp.
New York:  Lodestar Books/Dutton. $13.99. (Ages 8 to 12)


Bowing to Irate Neighbors, Nightclub Will Close
Since last fall, residents of West 19th Street say, they have been plagued by noise, trash and threats by rowdy youths who flock to Warsaw, a club off Fifth Avenue.
But now, it seems, relief is just a week away.
Armand Braiger, who owns Warsaw, has assured community leaders that the club will close after Memorial Day weekend.


Weddings; Suzanne Stoler, Ivan Katz
Suzanne Stoler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Stoler of Morganville, N.J., was married last evening to Ivan Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Katz of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi Ezra Labaton officiated at Congregation Magen David in West Deal, N.J.
Mrs.
Katz, 24, is an account executive at Scaasi Dress in New York.
She graduated from the University of Bridgeport.


Weddings; Gayle C. Libson, Neil D. Aaron
Gayle Colton Libson, a daughter of Helen C. Libson of White Plains and Dr.
Harold J. Libson of Riverdale, the Bronx, is to be married today to Neil David Aaron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Aaron of Jericho, L.I.
Cantor Kalman Fliegelman is to officiate at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
The bride, 27, is a program director at Intramed, a New York pharmaceutical marketing and advertising company that is a division of Sudler &amp; Hennessey.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a dentist in Yonkers.
Her mother is an artist and interior designer in White Plains.


Wrong Priority
To the Sport Editor:
I am enraged every time I read about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's agonizing worry about keeping the Yankees from moving to New Jersey.
The city is falling apart: potholes abound on every highway; public housing and schools are deteriorating; children are not being educated, fed or healed; people are dying in the streets from violence and drug wars; AIDS is spreading through all areas of city life.
Why should a nickel of public money be spent to keep the Yankees in the Bronx?
K.
GREENE  New York


Weddings; Mercedes Meyer, Stephen Hewitt
Mercedes Kunigunde Meyer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel P. Meyer of Lloyd Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Merrill Hewitt, the son of Ann B. Hewitt of Fort Worth and Richard M. Hewitt of Dallas.
The Rev.
Kevin L. Badeaux performed the civil ceremony at the Petroleum Club in Houston.
Ms.
Meyer, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in biomedical sciences at the University of Texas Health Science Center in Houston.
She is a researcher in retroviral replication at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.


Coliseum: Its Worth Depends on Whom You Ask
One hundred million dollars is what the Metropolitan Transportation Authority says it must have for a portion of the New York Coliseum site it is negotiating to sell to developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
For his part, Mr.
Zuckerman says he will not budge from his $80 million offer.
And an appraiser hired by the city put a preliminary price of $57.5 million on the property.
What gives?


Sound Bytes; Looking Back to the Future
THERE might seem to be little connection between the history of American newspapers and the development of Microsoft's Word for Windows software.
But the two are inextricably linked for Jeffrey B. Rutenbeck, who worked at Microsoft in the late 1980's while writing his doctoral dissertation about 19th-century newspapers.
Mr.
Rutenbeck, an assistant professor in mass communications and journalism studies at the University of Denver, had scant knowledge of computers and software when he got a summer job as a technical writer at Microsoft in 1986.


Manager's Profile
J. Thomas Futrell
Fund: Nuveen Premium Income, ticker symbol NPI; $1.3 billion in assets.
Manager since 1988. (Sponsor: John Nuveen &amp; Company, Chicago.)


Istanbul
In a world that is changing rapidly, Istanbul retains a flavor of the exotic that seems increasingly rare, even in Turkey itself.
Although the city's outer limits have been transformed by high-rises and freeways, the central core of old Istanbul remains intact: the six minarets of the Sultan Ahmet mosque, the clamorous tangle of the Grand Bazaar, Topkapi Palace and the spangled confines of the Bosporous itself with its shoreline villas and grand Ottoman palaces.
That is not to say, though, that the newer areas are without attraction.
For Istanbul's smart set -- far more at home with Armani suits than with any vestigial memory of the fez -- the city's residential spread onto the eastern shoreline of the Bosporous provides the setting for some of the trendiest new discos and restaurants.


'Grease!' May Have Survived, but Not the Fun
EACH PERFORMANCE OF "Grease!" starts approximately 30 minutes before the stated curtain time with what, in television, is called a warm-up.
Brian Bradley, a tall, limber actor and stand-up comedian in real life, comes out onto the stage of the Eugene O'Neill Theater in the person of Vince Fontaine, radio station WAXX's deejay within the show.
Wearing a zootish black-and-white jacket that suggests fake pony fur but he calls "real tiger," Vince is a veritable tornado of wonderful, long-gone, 1950's deejay hot air.
He talks fast, radiates cheesy self-esteem and introduces a succession of hit platters of yesteryear, such things as Little Richard's "Good Golly, Miss Molly" and Elvis Presley's "Jailhouse Rock," all played at a volume to lull with noise and to bring out the manic energy in Vince.
The man cannot stay still or onstage.
He is constantly dashing into the audience to choose dance partners, who follow him back up onto the stage, where they perform with the pleased self-consciousness of high school girls suddenly caught by the camera on some sort of teen-age television bandstand.
The audience loves it, but then, as it must, the real show starts.
The funny, ebullient Mr.
Bradley disappears into the fiction to become a minor player.
That's when you hear the thud.


A Handful of Hot Seats In This Year's Race
MOST members of Congress from New York have seats as safe as any in the nation.
But the 1992 redistricting roiled the waters enough to insure some interesting ripples this year.
By all odds, the most competitive race should be City Councilman Charles Millard's Republican challenge to Carolyn B. Maloney.
Unlike virtually all other Democrats in the House, Ms.
Maloney could be said to owe her 1992 victory to Bill Clinton.
He racked up nearly 70 percent of the vote in her Silk Stocking district, redrawn to include a few more Democratic blocks, while she won by just 2 percentage points.


Move in California to Bar Service to Aliens
A ballot initiative that would deny public education and non-emergency medical care to illegal aliens in California is the latest and one of the most drastic attempts to curb illegal immigration and its costs.
Backers of the petition drive, "Save Our State," say they have gathered 600,000 signatures, with those of 384,974 registered voters required to place the proposal on the ballot.
Voter registrars have until Tuesday to verify signatures, and if the requirement is met, voters will consider the measure in November.


Weddings; Diane C. Louie, Paul Rothenberg
Dr.
Diane Caroline Louie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee F. Louie of Englishtown, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Paul Louis Rothenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Rothenberg of Douglaston, Queens.
Rabbi Judith Lewis is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Louie, 32, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant attending physician at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Yale University, from which she also received an M.D. degree.


Family Cruising
To the Editor: The article "Boys and Girls Together" by Betsy Wade (April 10) is an accurate critique of the cruises sponsored by American Family Cruises.
The week before Ms.
Wade's trip, we took four children, their spouses and seven grandchildren on the same cruise.
The trip was memorable, and the entire family enjoyed the experience.
The emphasis is on children's and family activities, of course.
A couple with no one accompanying them might object to being surrounded by children most of the day.


Barry Runs Again to Lead Washington
Less than four years after a cocaine-possession conviction forced him out of City Hall and into prison, Marion S. Barry Jr. is again running for mayor of Washington.
He finished a six-month sentence in April 1992, but immediately tried to regain the political stage, winning a two-year term on the District Council as representative of the city's poorest ward.
Now, he says, pointing to the city's problems of unrelenting violence, poverty and urban flight, Washington needs the kind of strong leadership he provided in his three terms as mayor from 1978 to 1990.
More to the point, he says, the city needs to be rescued from his successor, Sharon Pratt Kelly.


City Slickers Send Smoke Signals to the Cosmos
Seven stories above the asphalt, surrounded by skyscraper mountains, William Fares feels close to the earth inside his rooftop tepee.
Bad vibes lurk in the corporate canyons below: X-rated peep shows, check-cashing outlets, drug sellers.
"The Indians lived with nature and with harmony," Mr.
Fares said.
"Our lives are definitely out of balance."


Con Men and Conquerors
A WAY IN THE WORLD By V. S. Naipaul. 380 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


SUNDAY, May 22, 1994; Who Said It When?
Let the government confiscate and forbid the entire sale of automatics, even to police officers, and everybody, because officers kill 10 innocent people to 1 guilty one with those sprinkling cans, and prohibit guns of even the older variety to any but officers, and then, when you catch a guy with a gun, send him to jail, not just fine him."


Board Defies Mayor Over Fulton Fish Market
No one was surprised last week when Community Board 1 endorsed plans for a new business improvement district for lower Manhattan.
But the board also defied the Giuliani administration by recommending that the B.I.D.'s boundaries include the Fulton Fish Market.
Tom Cusick, the project manager for the proposed district and president of the Fifth Avenue Business Improvement District, told the board that the Mayor's office had requested the market be left out of the B.I.D. discussions because of what he called "investigations."


Weddings; Ellen W. Curtis, Phillip Boiselle
Ellen Wade Curtis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Pelham Curtis of Millerton, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Phillip Michael Boiselle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip Rene Boiselle of Fayetteville, N.C.
The Rev.
Gilbert Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Sharon, Conn.
Mrs.
Boiselle, 27, is studying for a Ph.D. in American studies at Yale University, from which she graduated summa cum laude.
She received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.
Her father is an internist in Millbrook, N.Y.
Her mother, Ellen Curtis, retired as an administrator at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon By Patrick Marnham.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.
This biography shows that the genius of the prolific Belgian-born novelist was perhaps fueled by his resentment toward his embittered mother.
"Mr. Marnham's account of Simenon's troubled world is thorough and convincing," Tony Judt said here last year.
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas By A. S. Byatt.
Vintage International, $12.
From seances to South American entomology, the author re-creates a Victorian world of obscure preoccupations.
In the first of these novellas, "Morpho Eugenia," an impoverished scholar of insects falls in love with the daughter of a wealthy amateur naturalist.
The second, "The Conjugial Angel," imagines what might have become of Tennyson's sister, Emily, following the early death of her fiance, Arthur Hallam.
Last year our reviewer, Wendy Lesser, said, "A. S. Byatt is a very clever woman, and 'Angels &amp; Insects' exhibits her cleverness even more clearly than did its predecessor 'Possession.' "


'Speeding Recycling Of City Buildings'
To the Editor:
Your "Speeding the Recycling of City-Owned Buildings" on March 27 provides some useful perspective on private vs. public ownership and, incidentally, explains some of the contention over whether rent regulation is related to building abandonment.


Weddings; Sharon L. Broder, Daniel Gainsburg
Sharon L. Broder, a daughter of Joan Broder of Glen Ridge, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Daniel M. Gainsburg, the son of Lilly Gainsburg of New York and the late Norman Gainsburg.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner is to perform the ceremony at the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York.
The bride, 30, is a registered nurse at Children's Hospital in Newark.
She received a nursing degree from the St.
Francis School of Nursing in Jersey City.


The Executive Computer; Preparing for the Battle in Mix-and-Match Software
SO far in the 1990's the software business has seen a continuous battle for control of the most visible aspect of computing: the graphical user interface.
In this war, Apple Computer's Macintosh and Microsoft's Windows have vied for the hearts and eyes of the computing public with their competing software systems: each is based on the concept of executing commands by pointing and clicking at pictographs on a screen instead of typing arcane words or numbers.


Penske Drives Through Loophole And Into Indianapolis Front Row
Roger Penske's competitors can't say they weren't warned.
Yes, the rule allowing the race-car owner to build the Mercedes-Benz engines that threaten to dominate the Indianapolis 500 next Sunday has been on the books since 1991, for anyone to take advantage of.
And long before Penske's surprise announcement on April 13, the other team owners knew Mercedes was aiming its Silberpfeiles -- Silver Arrows, the name it gives its race cars -- toward Indy in 1995.


On the Takeover Of a Police Deptartment
Re: Prof.
James J. Green's letter to the New Jersey editor on March 27 ("On the Takeover of a Police Department"):
The professor's letter says that many seeking police careers seek authority and splendor.
I am certain he chose and executed his thesis after calm deliberation.
I agonize for the students in his criminal-justice seminars or classes.


They Sent Me Back On the Next Plane
To the Editor:
When I set off for a 10-day skiing holiday to the United States, the last thing I expected was to be refused entry and sent back on the next plane!
Last Jan. 13, having completed an exhausting 10-hour flight, I was subjected to a random spot check at Minneapolis airport, where I was cross-examined about my past by three armed immigration officers.


Sports of The Times; These Bulls Play Like Old Knicks
IN my youth, growing up in New York, we held the rather stuffy position that we were collectively a city of point guards.
We had eyes behind our head.
We could tell when trouble was coming around the corner.
We could watch out for pigeons and not trip over the curb, both at the very same time.
We were cool.
We believed we had produced every great point guard that ever lived, through procreation or example.
Cousy and McGuire begat Wilkens and Archibald who would eventually begat Smith and Anderson and Hurley from just across the river.
When those wonderful Knicks teams of the late 60's and early 70's materialized, we felt our innate urbane slickness had contributed to the cause.
We were sharp; they ran the back-door play.


P.L.O. Condemns Gaza Strife
The Palestine Liberation Organization denounced the killing of two Israeli soldiers as a threat to Palestinian security.
Page 12.


Evening Hours; Gala Awards for Jazz Legends
A benefit for the Northside Center, which provides social services for families in Harlem, at the Plaza, May 10.


Corrections
A chart on May 8 about mothers in the movies referred incorrectly to the Academy Award history of Anjelica Huston's performance in "The Grifters." She was indeed nominated for an award.


Feet First Into The Clubs
Baysie Wightman is a woman in search of hip feet.
She often finds them in the clubs of New York, Tokyo and London, in the rock-and-roll bars of Seattle and Portland or on the streets of Los Angeles, dancing, strutting or dangling nonchalantly.


Weddings; Elizabeth Irwin, B. A. Schlosser
Elizabeth Anne Irwin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Irwin of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Benjamin Arthur Schlosser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Schlosser, also of Larchmont.
The Rev.
Joseph Irwin, an uncle of the bride, officiated at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
Dorothy Greene, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.


Weddings; Katherine Cole, Steven Anderson
Katherine Olivia Cole, until recently an account manager at Bryson Associates, an insurance brokerage in Jenkintown, Pa., was married yesterday to Steven Bruce Anderson, a portfolio manager at Progressive Partners, a money management firm in Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gil Watson performed the ceremony at the Emory Presbyterian Church in Atlanta.


May 15-21: Counting the Country; Next Time the Census Wants a New Bag of Tricks
Just how many of us are there, anyway?
That Constitutionally mandated question has become more and more expensive and, in some respects, increasingly harder for the Census Bureau to answer.
In 1990 it cost the bureau $2.6 billion for its decennial count.
Bureau officials estimate that the cost for the year 2000 could nearly double.
Surely, they believe, there is a better way.
With an increased number of immigrants, large concentrations of poverty-stricken blacks in inner cities, and a growing number of two-earner families, there are more people with a limited command of English, a historic distrust of government, or less time on their hands.
The result: Only 65 per cent of households mailed back the census forms in 1990, a record low.
That meant the bureau had to send out people called enumerators to those houses that did not respond, an expensive procedure.


Ethnic Artifacts and Their Collectors
AN exhibition at the New Jersey State Museum answers questions most people never thought to ask.
Donors of art and craft objects are usually recognizable only as names at the bottom of exhibit labels.
In this show the focus is on the collectors, who turn out to be as heterogeneous as their choices of ethnic artifacts.
A 19th-century Army officer assigned to Indian territories has only his collector's zeal in common with two sisters who toured Alaska in 1930, oil company surveyors in New Guinea and an Oglala Sioux who graduated from Princeton.
Brief but tantalizing background histories and a few photographs accompany selections from their gifts to the museum.


About L.I.:


Meyer Parodneck, 89, Advocate For the Poor of New York, Dies
Meyer Parodneck, who promoted self-help programs for New York's poor ranging from a milk cooperative to community housing, died on Friday at his winter home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Parodneck, who lived in Brooklyn, was 89.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


In the Region/Westchester; Renovating a White Plains Tower to Lure Tenants
EVEN though downtown White Plains remains plagued by a 32.7 percent vacancy rate -- one of the highest in the country -- the new owner of Gateway One, a 525,000-square-foot high-rise near the city's downtown, has decided to invest $2.5 million to renovate the grounds and interior and add more than 200 parking spaces.
Jon Halpern, a principal of the Halpern Building Corporation of Tarrytown, which is managing the property, said this was the first major privately financed renovation of an office property near the downtown train station in five years.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Candidate Blossoms As D'Amato Provides Sun
When Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato announced seven months ago that he would not run for Governor this year, he never said he would not campaign for Governor.
He has spent much of this year doing exactly that, all on behalf of an obscure State Senator named George E. Pataki who, thanks largely to Mr.
D'Amato, is expected to become the gubernatorial choice of the Republican State Committee at its convention in Manhattan on Monday.


Method and Madness; BELIEVING IN VITAMINS
If only there were a magic pill that offset the ravages of smoking, drinking and overeating and let vices be really enjoyed.
If only there were a harmless chemical that averted disease and helped prolong life.
If only there were a way to look after one's health without suffering the tedium of green vegetables and exercise bicycles.
If only?
Many people believe that taking massive doses of certain vitamins, far in excess of the body's minimum daily requirements, is a promising prescription for good health.
But last month, a major new trial of vitamin supplements, the best of its kind, found no evidence that they do any good at all; they may even hurt.
The result is exasperating for all who thought the issue was settled.
But to look on the bright side, it's surprises of this kind that keep science interesting.


Weddings; Ms. Werenfels, Dr. Satterthwaite
Martha Louise Werenfels, a daughter of Eleanor H. Werenfels of Princeton, N.J., and the late Peter H. Werenfels, was married yesterday to Dr.
Franklin Bache Satterthwaite Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Satterthwaite of New York.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Werenfels Caes, the bride's sister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton Friends Meeting House.
Ms.
Werenfels, who is keeping her name, is an architect in Providence, R.I.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father was an electrical engineer and research scientist at the RCA Corporation in Hightstown, N.J.
Her mother is an editor at the Educational Testing Service in Princeton.


OUR COUSINS' KEEPERS
If the animal rights activists seem to lack logic, so does Nicholas Wade (Method and Madness: "Our Cousins' Keepers," May 1).
Why should an animal's distance from us on the evolutionary scale determine how we treat it?
According to Wade's reasoning, it would be O.K. to keep your cat in a cage barely its own size (as minks are kept on "ranches"); torture the hamster (as mice are in labs); kick the dog around, if you need to let off steam (after all, dogs are bred for human use); but don't dare mistreat cousin chimp.
Equally important, avoid stepping on those societally "ancient and intricate" ants.
Logical?


'You Deserve a Break Today,' as Played by the Champion Blue Jays
Blue Jays 9, Indians 7
Toronto's Joe Carter has been driving home every run in sight lately, except when he hasn't had the chance because of the guy hitting in front of him.


Calling All Nit-Pickers
To the Editor:
Regarding Henry Kissinger's reply (Letters, April 24) to Ernest R. May's review of "Diplomacy": Mr.
May nit-picked correctly when he wrote, "Neither a line of text nor a footnote mentions Sir Harold Nicolson's elegant book of 1939, also entitled 'Diplomacy.' "
The copyright page of Mr.
Kissinger's book does not not count as text, and footnote 33 of Chapter 4 refers to a 1963 edition of Nicolson's book.


'The Road to Mecca' in Croton Falls
When Athol Fugard bought a house in New Bethesda in the desert in South Africa in the 1970's, he was drawn to a reclusive woman, Helen Niemand, who created a vision of Mecca, surrounding herself "with silly statues and sculpture that she made and had all around her house."
To the people, Helen was the village eccentric.
To the playwright, an exile in his own country, the woman he never knew was a living portrait of the artist as an outsider and a powerful symbol of his own ambivalence.
For Fugard perceived himself as a confused insider, a white man driven by guilt over apartheid, yet unable to break away from his homeland.


'You Deserve a Break Today,' as Played by the Champion Blue Jays
Blue Jays 9, Indians 7
Toronto's Joe Carter has been driving home every run in sight lately, except when he hasn't had the chance because of the guy hitting in front of him.


Weddings; Terri Rosen, Eric Deutsch
Terri Lee Rosen, the senior assistant to the counsel of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, is to be married today to Eric Jay Deutsch, an assistant vice president of the Real Estate Board of New York.
Rabbi Daniel Alder is to officiate at the Brotherhood Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 30, graduated from Goucher College.
She is the daughter of Janet and Alan Rosen of Woodmere, L.I.


Penalty Box Due
To the Sports Editor:
Although one wonders if the National Basketball Association would have the nerve to implement a revolutionary rules change, may I suggest an effective solution to the flagrant fouls and violence that now infiltrate pro basketball?


Weddings; Joan O'Connor, R. G. Bundschuh
Joan Patricia O'Connor, a daughter of Mrs.
Margaret O'Connor of Yonkers and the late David O'Connor, was married yesterday to Russell G. Bundschuh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. W. Bundschuh of Sands Point, L.I.
Msgr.
James Lisante performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church in Port Washington, L.I.
The bride is a business operations manager at the Xerox Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Iona College.


Louise Svendsen Memorial
A memorial service for Louise Averill Svendsen, curator emeritus of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, is to be held at the museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, at 6:45 P.M. on Wednesday.
Mrs.
Svendsen, who worked at the museum for nearly 30 years, died in December at the age of 78.
Speakers at the service are to include Thomas Messer, a retired director of the Guggenheim; Peter Lawson-Johnston, the president of the Guggenheim, and David Nash, the director of the department of Impressionist and modern art at Sotheby's.


Alec Nove,78, Dies; British Economist and Critic of Soviets
Alec Nove, a Russian-born British economist and longtime critic of the Soviet system, died on May 15 in a hospital in Voss, Norway.
He was 78 and lived in Glasgow.
The cause was a heart attack he suffered while vacationing in Norway, his son David said.


Bridge
Those who sign up for bridge cruises expect a memorable experience, but it is doubtful whether any of them has ever topped the record of a group that journeyed to the Far East in early April on the Royal Viking "Sun." During a side trip to Beijing, they found themselves in the State Guest House where Presidents Reagan and Bush stayed during visits to China.
Two touring teams competed in a three-team contest, with a Chinese team of celebrities.
It included: Deng Pufang, chairman of China's organization for the handicapped and a son of Deng Xiaoping; Ding Guangen, Minister of Information and Communications; Sun Ming, a member of China's strong women's team; and Kathie Wei-Sender, who has won world titles for the United States.


Israel Alerts Envoys and Border, Fearing Reprisals for Abduction
Israel put its overseas missions and its soldiers along the northern border on alert today against the possibility of reprisals for its kidnapping of an Islamic guerrilla leader in Lebanon.
Shiite Muslim militants in Lebanon threatened "spectacular" retaliation for a daring raid on Saturday in which Israeli commandos flew deep into Lebanon and captured Mustafa Dirani, the head of a pro-Iranian group, who Israel says may have information on the whereabouts of a long-missing Israeli airman.


Corrections
The Sounds Around Town column in Weekend on Friday misspelled the surname of the guitarist playing in the Dick Hyman Trio at Tavern on the Green over the weekend.
He is Howard Alden, not Arlen.
The column also misstated Bob Haggart's instrument; he plays bass for the trio, not piano.


An Inventor Who Is Making a Difference


Review/Pop: The Knack; A Reunion of the Knack, Bored With Teen-Age Lust
In the liner notes to a greatest-hits album by the late-70's Los Angeles power-pop group the Knack, the band leader Doug Fieger argues that the Knack was an art project and not, as the group's many critics have contended, a commercial sellout and musical fraud.
On Thursday night at CBGB, the Knack was all of the above.
On the one hand, the main reason the band reunited for the first time in four years was to profit from renewed interest in its 1979 No. 1 hit, "My Sharona," which was featured in the recent film "Reality Bites." On the other hand, the Knack tried to make fun of its status as a nostalgia band.
The 41-year-old Mr.
Fieger grimaced as he sang lyrics about teen-age lust, injecting each cliched line with as much sarcasm as he could muster.
Whenever Berton Averre stepped forward to play a clunky guitar solo, he looked bored, as did the rest of the band.


Concern Over Fake Fingerprints
Criminals from other countries or terrorists may have been granted residency or other benefits in the United States because they were able to use fraudulent fingerprints bought from street vendors to circumvent background checks, an inspector general's report on the Immigration and Naturalization Service says.
The immigration service requires fingerprints from every alien seeking naturalization or other Federal benefits, but, the Justice Department report said, because the agency no longer maintains its own fingerprint operation, it is the responsibility of the alien to supply the prints.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Thursday, about the Digital Equipment Corporation's review of its worldwide advertising account, misstated the effect of the review on its six current primary agencies.
Though the agencies were eliminated from the review, Digital is still considering their future roles in its advertising; it is not deciding when to end its relationships with them.
The six agencies are Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston; Ciociola &amp; Company in New York; Holland Mark Martin in Burlington, Mass.; Ketchum Advertising in Pittsburgh; Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., and Publicis Etoiles in Paris.


Knicks Beat Bulls to Gain Conference Finals


Bucks Get First Shot at Draft
Although Mike Dunleavy, Milwaukee's head coach and vice president of basketball operations, does not know exactly what he will do with the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft on June 29, he was definitely glad to beat out Dallas for it today in the draft lottery.
The Mavericks, with the worst won-lost record (13-69) in the league for the second straight year, got the second pick in the revised lottery system.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Emotional Ending For Bulls
"Yes, there were some tears, definitely," said Horace Grant, recalling what had been the mood of the team in the locker room immediately after the Bulls lost to the Knicks yesterday.
"You would expect that, after we had given our throne away."
The throne, of course, was the National Basketball Association championship that the Bulls had begun to think, after three straight titles, was their personal possession.


Cagle's Inc.(CGLA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Officer Aids in Brother's Arrest in a Hit-and-Run
An off-duty police officer acted as an intermediary in the arrest of her own brother Saturday night after the brother was involved in a hit-and-run accident in Queens that killed a man and seriously injured the man's teen-age son, the police said yesterday.
The incident was the latest of a series of fatal accidents in Queens in the last three weeks involving drivers with suspended licenses or no licenses.
In Saturday's accident, the police said the driver was also drunk.


Fond Adieu to Jacqueline Onassis, at Her Home
A river of solemn mourners -- family members, friends and close associates of a lifetime touched by tragedy and triumph -- paid their respects to Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis yesterday, flowing in and out of her Manhattan apartment for an informal wake on the eve of her funeral and burial today.
Wearing dark suits and grim faces, they arrived in limousines or taxicabs, passed silently under the green canopy at 1040 Fifth Avenue, at 85th Street, took elevators to the 14th floor, and were ushered into a simply furnished room, where Mrs.
Onassis lay in a closed coffin draped with an antique cloth.


Long Balls Make Short Work of Smith
The first hit was an omen, one delivered by Lenny Dykstra.
Pete Smith threw the pitch, and Dykstra sent it to the Phillies' bullpen behind the wall in right field.
This was in the bottom of the first inning today at Veterans Stadium, with Smith facing his first batter of the afternoon.
He would not improve.


UAL Buyout Plan Sweetened a Bit for Employees
The parent company of United Airlines, the UAL Corporation, has renegotiated some terms of its unions' $5 billion proposal to gain majority control of the carrier and create the nation's largest employee-owned company.
The weekend negotiations were prompted by the pilots' union after a recent sharp drop in the stock's price.


Review/Theater: Marathon 1994/Series B; Sexual Relationships Through 3 Generations
Regina Taylor's "Mudtracks," the last of five plays in Series B of Marathon '94 at the Ensemble Studio Theater, doesn't really belong in an evening of one-acters.
This examination of sexual relationships through three generations of black women has ambitions a short drama can't begin to embrace, and it sprawls awkwardly for well over an hour.
Still, it seems churlish to complain too much about a play that puts the sublime Mary Alice (best known from the television program "I'll Fly Away") on a New York stage again.
Playing a laconic, compulsively tidy middle-age woman, she glows with a fever of lifelong disappointments.
And when her character finally erupts into a fury of accumulated sorrows, she inspires pity and terror in a way that seems to belong to another time, another play.
Ms.
Alice could probably do an extraordinary Medea.
But these days, theatergoers must take their epiphanies where they find them.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Smoothing Out the Shore's Building Regulations; New Jersey Officials Reassure Coastline Property Owners About Environmental Rules
A spring storm that raged on the Jersey Shore over new environmental laws subsided in the last few days with assurances that the plant police would not be let loose.
Homeowners will not be kept from planting vegetable gardens or rose bushes, the Department of Environmental Protection and Energy said.
Nor will they need a special permit in the future to rebuild if lightning or hurricanes strike their homes.
And contrary to some interpretations, officials said, people who sweep windblown sand off the street will not face fines of $25,000 a day.


Review/Film: Desperate Remedies; Spoofing Movies With Arty Glamour
"Desperate Remedies," Stewart Main's and Peter Wells's gorgeous but silly mock epic, is a film that wants to have its cake and eat it too.
The New Zealand film, which opened yesterday at the Quad Cinema, aspires to be the 90's answer to a 40's Hollywood costume drama, but with a big wink in its eye and layers of sexual ambiguity added.
Unfolding as a series of tableaux in which the actors mouth deliberately wooden dialogue while the camera adores their faces, the movie isn't acted so much as it is posed in a style that suggests a hybrid of Ken Russell and a Calvin Klein Obsession perfume ad.
Peter Scholes's overwrought score, larded with excerpts from Donizetti's "Forza del Destino" coats the proceedings with a thick quasi-operatic gloss.


Inmac Corp.(INMC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Armstrong Tires of Knick Guards
Moments before the third quarter ended, B. J. Armstrong missed two free throws that, had he made them, would have lifted the Bulls into a 65-64 lead over the Knicks in the seventh game that was.
"When B. J. missed them both," Doc Rivers, still recuperating from knee surgery, was saying now after the Knicks' 87-77 victory, "I looked over at our bench and saw the guys looking at each other. They knew he was getting tired."


Engle Homes Inc.(ENGL) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Clinton and California: An Economic Policy Clash
In 1992, the motto of the Clinton campaign was: "It's the economy, stupid." For the White House aides counting electoral votes for 1996, the theme is: "It's California, stupid."
Those two goals collided on Tuesday, when the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates for the fourth time this year, seeking to brake the national economy before its recovery gets too strong and leads to inflation.


CHRONICLE
There's a new player on the Manhattan charity circuit.
MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN , a Canadian economist who married HENRY R. KRAVIS , the leveraged buyout specialist in February, is on the benefit committee for Childhelp USA's hoedown on June 7, at Denim and Diamonds, a country and western club in midtown.
The event, whose chairwomen are GEORGETTE MOSBACHER and KELLY DAY , will raise funds to establish a Childhelp Center at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where doctors, police, prosecutors and social workers can coordinate investigations of suspected child abuse.
DAN SHAW


Identity Crisis
As the director-counsel of the N.A.A.C.P.
Legal Defense and Educational Fund from 1961 to 1984, I am often asked why the N.A.A.C.P. has wooed Minister Louis Farrakhan, Prof.
Leonard Jeffries and the rapper Sister Souljah.
One apparent explanation is that because of its success the N.A.A.C.P (which is separate from the Defense Fund) has yielded its central, mainstream role in the black community to black elected officials.
They are now the community's legitimate representatives.
The organization is thus trying to renew itself by overtures to other seemingly ascendant leadership forces.
While I certainly did not forsee it last year, this strategy should have been no surprise, given the background of Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., who succeeded Benjamin L. Hooks as leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.


The Splendid Spring of '94
It says something about humankind's natural pessimism that blizzards and terrible winters are long remembered, even by their years, but glorious springs are not.
Americans still unborn in Northeastern states are likely to hear in decades to come about the record snowfalls that blew in with winter '93.
But what about the sequel?
Why not a toast to the splendid spring of '94?
Rarely in memory have bulbs and wildflowers, shrubs and fruit trees blazed so brightly, or bloomed so long.
First came purple and saffron crocuses in March, followed by a veritable sunburst of daffodils.
Next were tulips, mingling with blazing plumes of forsythia.
Lawns never seemed greener, and carpets of periwinkle abounded with ingratiating blue flowers.


Wascana Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Essay; Let's Make a Deal on Health
What's the difference between the Clinton health plan and Elvis Presley?
According to Senator Phil Gramm: Elvis is the one that might be alive.
Nobody here doubts that the President's grandiose scheme to place one-seventh of America's economy under government domination is dead.
That's because Americans have come to realize that permanent price controls (euphemized as "premium caps") require rationing, or denial -- and most of us do not want the health care we already have taken away.


Patents; Honoring a Team of Scientists, Along with a Solitary Inventor, at an Annual Awards Ceremony
INVENTORS still enjoy a romantic image -- the lone crusader tinkering in a workshop, driven by the belief that there has to be a better way.
It may be harder to think of biologists, engineers or software designers who work for huge manufacturers or laboratories as inventors, too, but the fact is that most ground-breaking innovations come out of places with research budgets and salaried staff.
With its annual inventor of the year awards, the Intellectual Property Owners Association recognizes this, while also trying to remind people that the little guy can still be important.


A Clean Sweep Before the Pounding of Feet


Commencements; Hofstra Graduates Hear an Appeal for Love
Before 650 graduates of Hofstra University's College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and alumni from the Class of 1944, the newspaper columnist Murray Kempton received an honorary doctorate today for his achievements in a 50-year career in journalism.
Under a cloudless sky, Mr.
Kempton, 76, called upon the graduates, who sat in rows of chairs on the college's well-manicured football field, to "love one another or wither." He repeatedly spoke of "family values," which by his definition meant protecting society's weakest members, particularly the elderly and women and children on welfare.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 'An elderly leopard' changes its spots by creating an alliance to expand into brand consulting.
THE LEO BURNETT COMPANY is making an unusual foray into consulting, seeking fresh ways to further broaden the services it offers beyond traditional advertising.
Burnett's British agency, Leo Burnett Ltd., has opened a small unit called the Leo Burnett Brand Consultancy, in partnership with the London office of the Arthur Andersen &amp; Company accounting firm.
So far, the Brand Consultancy -- not the Burnett Brand Consultancy, please, which might be abbreviated as BBC -- has worked with seven or eight marketers in categories like telecommunications and oil.
Some are on Burnett's roster of advertising clients, some are not.


CHRONICLE
Hillary for President?
In a profile of the First Lady this week, the New Yorker magazine quoted an associate of the Clintons as saying that White House staff members have discussed a possible bid by HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON to succeed her husband in the year 2000.
But PRESIDENT CLINTON dismissed the idea in an interview for the same article, saying that his wife wouldn't do it "in 100 years." Yesterday, Mrs.
Clinton's spokeswoman emphatically denied that any discussions have occurred and derided the speculation as "beyond imagination."


Officer Kills Robbery Suspect After Chase Through Harlem
A police officer killed a robbery suspect in Manhattan yesterday, after what the police said began as a jewelry-store holdup in Washington Heights, turned into a harrowing car chase and ended with a collision and the shooting in Morningside Heights.
At the end of the chase near Columbia University, one of the robbers pointed a gun at officers and was killed by a single shot, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a Police Department spokesman.
He said investigators were not able last night to identify the dead man, who was thought to be in his 20's.


Joyner-Kersee Can't Argue With Winning Facts
Husbands and wives have been known to argue with each other.
And when the husband is a track coach and his wife is his prize athlete, the arguments can become intense.
Bob Kersee and his wife, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, say they seldom argue as husband and wife.
But as coach and pupil, they often disagree on how she should train and when she should compete and in which events.


Charming Shoppes Inc.(CHRS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Police Union Fights City On Forcing Contract Pact
After reaching nearly identical contracts with city firefighters and the housing police, the Giuliani administration is trying to force the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association to accept the same settlement, city and union officials say.
Traditionally, mayors have settled first with the P.B.A., the city's largest and most powerful police union, creating a contract that serves as a model for pacts with the city's other so-called uniformed unions.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani broke with that pattern earlier this year when he pursued and obtained pacts with the firefighters and the Housing Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.


Bon-Ton Stores Inc.(BONT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


A Sitcom Is Born: Only Time Will Tell   The Road To Prime Time: Last of four articles on the creation of a television series.
The morning they found out they had made it onto NBC's fall schedule, Kevin Bright, Marta Kauffman and David Crane popped open a bottle of Champagne at 10:30.
They continued drinking Champagne while flying from Los Angeles to New York aboard one of Warner Brothers' corporate jets.
Then they had more Champagne with dinner.
The next day, when they met for breakfast at the Regency Hotel, they were all still giddy.


Lemaire and Devils Chafe Under Cloak of Anonymity
The day after his team evened its Eastern Conference final with the Rangers at two games each, New Jersey Coach Jacques Lemaire was making a determined effort to give the Devils their due.
"I just want our players to get the recognition they deserve," Lemaire said at the Devils' training center here this afternoon as some of his players were on the ice for an optional practice.
"We never get credit when we win."


Lehman Makes Himself Heard in a Big Way
He is a quiet man, understated in both word and dress, favoring khaki pants and light blue shirts and speaking softly when he chooses to speak at all.
But today under a brilliant blue sky on one of the hardest golf courses on the pro circuit, Tom Lehman made the loudest statement of his life.
Twenty under par.
The number fairly shouts out what Lehman accomplished at the Memorial Tournament at Muirfield Village Golf Club.
Not only did Lehman, 35, win his first PGA Tour event, he did so with a record score for this tournament.
Not only did he win by five strokes, the largest margin of the year on tour, he did so over Greg Norman, whose four-stroke victory at the Players Championship had been the widest on tour to date.


Republicans Open Convention Today
New York's Republican State Committee gathers at a Manhattan hotel today for an old-fashioned convention where back-room deals and last-minute lobbying may have much to do with the party's chances of defeating Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in November.
It is widely assumed that the 394-member committee will give State Senator George E. Pataki a majority of its votes, making him the designated gubernatorial candidate of the party apparatus.
But the size of Mr.
Pataki's victory may determine whether he must survive a tough primary before turning his attention to Mr.
Cuomo and whether he will be the consensus choice of both the Republican and Conservative Parties.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Thursday about a New York law protecting women's right to breast-feed in public misstated the penalties for violations.
The law gives women the right to file civil suits or to ask the Attorney General or the Division of Human Rights to sue; the division may also impose compensatory damages.
The law does not provide for fines or prison sentences.


No Headline
"We know how to train young men how to be men. We don't know how to train young women to be men. We don't even know how to train young women how to be women." -- MAJ.
RICK MILL, a spokesman for The Citadel.  [ A10:2. ]


Water Rates
New York City's water and sewer rates increased 148 percent between 1986 and 1993 and the typical bill for a single-family home rose to $350 from $142.
The rate hikes reflected greater capital spending, mainly for water pollution control projects, after a decline in federal aid.
Sludge disposal became more costly after the federal ban on ocean dumping.
Since the creation of the Water Finance Authority, which issues bonds, and the Water Board, which sets rates, the city's water system has depended on user fees rather than tax subsidies.
The city is now in the first year of a planned two-year rate freeze.
To avoid future rate hikes, the city hopes to encourage conservation and continue to meet EPA guidelines without having to filter all its drinking water.


Military Struggling To Stem an Increase In Family Violence
In a trend that has Pentagon officials deeply worried, domestic violence in military families has increased steadily since the late 1980's, according to Defense Department figures.
The number of confirmed spouse abuse cases climbed to 18.1 per 1,000 spouses last year, from 12 cases per 1,000 in 1988.
At the same time, substantiated cases of child abuse have increased slightly to 6.6 per 1,000 children, from 6 per 1,000.


More Fines For Infinity
The Federal Communications Commission approved the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation's bid to buy an AM-FM radio station outside Washington but it imposed a fine of $200,000 for reportedly indecent comments by Howard Stern, the New York talk show host carried on many Infinity stations.


Federated Won't Quit Macy Fight
Federated Department Stores Inc. vowed yesterday to continue its quest for a merger with R. H. Macy &amp; Company, even though it has been at least temporarily sidelined by a court decision that allows Macy alone to submit a plan for emerging from bankruptcy protection.
Many people involved in the Macy talks said they were wondering why Federated stopped short last week, when it clearly had the upper hand in negotiations to produce a reorganization plan for Macy.
At midweek, Federated was within tens of millions of dollars of obtaining enough support from creditors to win with its merger bid, but it balked at committing the extra money.


Cecil Gould, Art Expert, 75
Cecil Gould, a specialist in Renaissance painting and former keeper and deputy director of the National Gallery in London, died on April 7.
He was 75 years old and lived in a village in Somerset, southwest England.
Mr.
Gould worked at the London museum from 1946 until his retirement in 1978.
He wrote the catalogue of the gallery's collection of 16th-century Italian paintings as well as studies of Leonardo da Vinci, Correggio and Bernini and "Trophy of Conquest," an account of Napoleon's looting of artworks for the Louvre.


Market Place; Garbage haulers are attracting new followers on Wall Street.
TRASH is making a comeback, and that is good news for companies like WMX Technologies Inc., the nation's biggest collector, hauler and disposer of refuse, with revenues of $9.1 billion last year.
Trash, after all, is cyclical.
During a recession, households and business buy less and throw out less.
That was bad news until recently for WMX, formerly known as Waste Management Inc., because there was less material to be handled and because it was forced to trim prices to keep business from being diverted to competitors.


Lawmakers Sow Health Bills and Reap Donations
As Congress enters a crucial period in its consideration of health care legislation, political contributions from the health care industry are continuing to set records, a study shows.
While the ultimate winners and losers in the health care debate have yet to be determined, the indisputable victors so far are the many members of Congress, notably those who sit on committees considering various plans, who have received large contributions.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; A Managing Director Quits at D.M.B.&amp; B.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles announced that William C. Melzer, the managing director of its St.
Louis office, had unexpectedly resigned, citing a combination of "personal reasons and philosophical differences about the future direction of the organization."
Mr.
Melzer, 48, whose resignation was effective on Friday, had headed the St.
Louis office for five years, overseeing 310 employees and billings estimated at $484 million from clients including Anheuser-Busch, Blockbuster Entertainment, Pet Inc., Southwestern Bell and Mars Inc.


Troubled Miami Smiles for Tourism Gathering
With this city's reputation among foreign visitors already battered by several highly publicized killings of tourists, Miami's latest indignity came at an especially inopportune time.
On May 13, Norwegian tourists were hijacked and robbed on a hotel courtesy bus as Miami was preparing to be host to what organizers say is the world's largest annual tourism trade show.
Foreign tour operators attend the show to book hotel rooms, restaurants, entertainment and transportation for travelers who will be visiting the United States in the coming year.


For a Pipeline Company, Moving Data Pays Better
The Williams Companies is one of the nation's largest processors and transporters of natural gas.
It is also the nation's leading transporter, through its fiber optic network, of high-quality video, audio and movie signals for productions of Frank Sinatra, David Letterman and Steven Spielberg.
To executives here, gas and glitz are a perfect fit.
"Now, we are also moving pulses of light," said J. Douglas Whisenant, the manager of a Williams pipeline division.


Slashing Youth Programs Will Only Feed the Crime Problem
To the Editor:
In a crime-preoccupied city, which has not made a dent in violent crime by juveniles (up 80 percent since 1988), where a 1992 New York City-Federal survey found 20 percent of high school students admitting they carried a weapon, and where homicide is the leading cause of death for those younger than 25, any proposal to eliminate youth recreational, job training and summer employment programs is irresponsible.
The Giuliani administration's plans to slash Safe Streets, Safe City youth programs would be a costly mistake socially, politically and economically.


Abroad at Home; Response To a Threat
Jamie Gorelick, the new Deputy Attorney General, used to hear from her Washington law partners about Robert Kennedy's Justice Department.
She finds that it is a very different place now.
Thirty years ago it was a smallish Federal agency, with a budget of $343 million and 32,000 employees.
Today the department spends nearly 10 times as much and it has a staff of 90,000.


Crisis-Torn Africa Becomes Continent of Refugees
Joao da Cruz, 48 years old but already wizened and stooped with the burdens of life, represents a problem for Africa and the world.
A gentle man who strokes his gray beard in reflection as he talks, Mr. da Cruz used to own land in Nambuangongo in Bengo Province, about 80 miles away.
His voice takes on a rich, deep tone as he describes the coffee, bananas and mangoes he used to grow.


Working the 24 Hours of a Day, and Even Longer
For Martin E. Gotkin, conviction and disbarment for defrauding the Assigned Counsel Plan were only temporary setbacks.
Last year he was paid $124,175 by the program, more than any lawyer in Manhattan or the Bronx.
Now he is billing as a private investigator.
Mr.
Gotkin pleaded guilty in 1981 to a charge of grand larceny and was fined $20,000 for submitting inflated legal bills to the Assigned Counsel Plan.
On hundreds of days over three years, he had billed for more court hours than the courts were even open, according to court documents.
On 27 occasions, he billed for more than 24 hours in a single day.
On one day in 1978, he claimed he worked 28 hours in court and 22 out of court.


Unexploded Bombs Take Toll in Laos, Too
To the Editor:
It is good, if painful, to be reminded of the tragedy that surrounds Khe Sanh plateau, where unexploded projectiles from massive 1968 American bombing still wound and maim Vietnamese children and farmers at the rate of one a day, with an unknown number of others killed (front page, May 13).
The untold story, however, remains the legacy of American bombing in neighboring Laos.


Far Apart on Welfare Reform
Line up the three major welfare-reform plans and they appear, at first, nearly in sync.
President Clinton, the Mainstream Forum of conservative and centrist House Democrats and the House Republicans propose transforming welfare from a system that writes checks to a system that puts recipients to work.
Look again and note this oddity: The centrist Democrats as well as Republicans want to spend more money than the President.
That should require no ideological war to resolve.
But look more closely and differences emerge that cannot be easily bridged.
The President's plan is shaping up as the only one of the three that combines compassion with sensible obligations.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Foyt's Stand-Pat Decision Works for Herta  A. J. Foyt's decision to stick with the earlier qualifying speed of his driver, Bryan Herta, paid off yesterday at the Indianapolis 500 trials.
The car survived four last-minute attempts to bump it out of the 33-car lineup for the race next Sunday.
With 25 minutes left in qualifying, Marco Greco bumped Scott Goodyear with a four-lap, 10-mile run of 221.216 miles an hour in a Lola-Cosworth.
After Greco qualified, Herta, Foyt's rookie driver, was the top man on the bump list as the slowest remaining car.
Geoff Brabham then called off his run after three laps because he was going too slow.
Mark Smith then spun and crashed in the first turn of his first lap.
Gary Bettenhausen then ran two laps but called off the run as too slow.
At that point, Foyt could have sent Herta out in a faster spare car, but he thought that Willy T. Ribbs, the only challenger left, did not have enough laps in his car to go fast enough.
Foyt's decision worked, as Ribbs quit after two laps that were too slow.
TENNIS  Fernandez Beats Sabatini  Third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez extended the drought of top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 2-6, 6-4, 6-0, in the Strasbourg Open final in France on the eve of the French Open, which begins today.
Sabatini has not won in 36 tournaments since the Italian Open in May 1992.
Fernandez was in her fifth tournament of 1994 after undergoing abdominal surgery last fall. (AP) LACROSSE  Princeton Women Win Title  Princeton (16-1) won its first Division I women's national lacrosse championship yesterday by defeating previously undefeated Maryland, 10-7, in the Terrapins' Byrd Stadium at College Park.
Trenton State won the Division III title for the fourth year in a row with a 29-11 victory over William Smith, its 57th consecutive triumph.
In a men's Division III semifinal, Hobart beat Nazareth, 18-14, at Geneva, N.Y., and will play undefeated Salisbury State.
GOLF  Late Birdies Decide for Crosby  Elaine Crosby birdied the 16th and 17th holes yesterday for a two-under-par 70 and a 211 total to win the $400,000 Lady Keystone Open in Hershey, Pa., by one stroke over Laura Davies. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  St.
Francis Prep Girls Take Title  St.
Francis Prep of Queens captured the team title yesterday in the city Catholic High Schools Athletic Association girls championships with 62 1/2 points to Bishop Loughlin's 54 at Farrell High on Staten Island.
Sloan Brown of Cardinal Spellman won the 200 meters in 25.1 seconds, the long jump at 17 feet 11 3/4 inches and ran a leg on the winning 400-meter relay.


Finlay Enterprises Inc.(FNLY) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Review/Theater: Suburbia; Aimless Youth, Shouting Out Its Angst
"Suburbia," Eric Bogosian's new play, takes place in front of the 7-Eleven in a town called Burnfield.
Do not think that name was picked out of a hat.
It is a clear declaration of Mr.
Bogosian's artistic intent.
In this scathing study of rootless youth, he practices a scorched-earth policy.
The third offering in the Festival of New American Plays that Lincoln Center Theater has been holding this season in the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, "Suburbia" recounts a night and the morning after in what one character calls the "pizza and puke capital of the world." And that qualifies as a delicate utterance in a work as ferocious as Mr.
Bogosian's own one-man shows.


Honda Motor Co.(HMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Magna International (MGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Treasury Selling Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and auctions of two-year notes on Tuesday and five-year notes on Wednesday.
On Thursday, the Government will sell a new one-year bill.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.13 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 4.53 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 5.81 percent, the five-year note at a price to yield 6.59 percent and the one-year bill at a price to yield 4.84 percent.


Convention in New York: How Republican Leaders Will Build a Ballot
Some have been orchestrated with military precision.
Others have been unpredictable free-for-alls.
But this year's Republican Party state convention promises to be a little of both.
The Republican State Committee will meet in New York City beginning today to select candidates for statewide offices.
And while party leaders have been hustling behind the scenes to line up a ticket, it remains far from clear who will be on the ballot when the votes are all counted.


Yanks See Relief Just A Dugout Away
Sometimes all the hours of preparation, all the careful study and all the maneuvering with a rested bullpen can still leave you precisely where you don't want to be.
That is where the Yankees were left late yesterday afternoon -- standing in the shadows, looking out into the sunlight at a former teammate, Lee Smith of the Orioles, whose 17 saves lead the major leagues and whose career total of 418 remains a record.
After 10 innings and 3 hours 55 minutes of mental gymnastics and game-extending heroics, the Yankees just became another statistic.


CHRONICLE
The National Dance Institute, which provides free dance classes in public schools in New York City and Jersey City, has invited 12 foreign students to perform with the institute's 1,000 students at its benefit recital tonight at the Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden.
"But we didn't want them to represent the world in a political way, so they're not representatives of specific countries," said ELLEN WEINSTEIN , the co-artistic director of the institute, which was founded by Jacques d'Amboise 18 years ago.


'Save the Males' Becomes Battle Cry In Citadel's Defense Against Woman
At times in the Federal courthouse here last week, as many as a dozen close-shaven, well-mannered men from The Citadel have sat with their arms hooked loosely over the visitors' benches as they listen to tedious arguments about the history of South Carolina's education policies.
Drawn to courtroom No. 3 by an enormous sense of threat, they have fought the boredom of the moment by fiddling with their class rings or the sea-blue pins that hint darkly at their sense of impending doom.
Though unfailingly polite and generally soft-spoken, they wear their hearts on their lapels: "Save the Males."


Computer Network Helps Journalists Find Academic Experts
A reporter for The Poughkeepsie Journal needed to learn about people who keep crickets as pets.
An Associated Press writer had about four hours to find an ethnomusicologist knowledgeable about relationships between black and Jewish jazz musicians.
A journalist with Radio Canada wanted an agricultural expert in the United States who could speak about the environmental problems posed by pig manure -- in French.
A few years ago, a well-stocked Rolodex and hours on the telephone would have been needed to find such authorities in arcana, if they could be found at all.
But these reporters succeeded with only one call to Profnet, a computer network of university public information officers.


Liberal Party Backs Bid for Attorney General
Karen S. Burstein, one of four Democrats running for state attorney general, picked up what amounts to the endorsement of the Liberal Party yesterday, guaranteeing her a spot on the ballot in the general election this November.
Her strategists hope the support will give her campaign momentum as she heads into the Democratic State Convention next month and makes a case for a spot on the party's primary ballot.
Hank Morris, Ms.
Burstein's campaign manager, said the endorsement also lends added credibility to her campaign, which started later than those of her two main rivals, State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell and Brooklyn District Attorney Charles J. Hynes.


A Walk for Life and a Parade for Peace


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  EMBARGO TIGHTENS IN HAITI
As the economic noose drew more tightly around Haiti, its military leaders vowed to overcome the hardship and seemed confident there would be no militarty intervention from the United States.
A1


Rwandans Die While the U.N. Procrastinates
To the Editor:
"The United States forced the United Nations Monday to scale down its plans and put off sending 5,500 African troops to Rwanda in an effort to end the violence there" (front page, May 17).


Black &amp; Decker Puts Tool Unit in Review
The Black &amp; Decker Corporation has placed in review the account of its United States power tools group, after seven years at Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago.
The company and agency said Friday that they had mutually agreed to part ways, citing "increasingly different business philosophies." Though billings were not disclosed, Competitive Media Reporting, an advertising tracking service, estimated spending at $11.4 million in 1993.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On the Verbal Expression of Bigotry
To the Editor:
Juxtaposing Franklyn G. Jenifer's argument that "Hate Speech Is Still Free Speech" (Op-Ed, May 13), when directed against an ethnic group, with cases of the punishment of individuals directing racist epithets ("water buffalo") against individuals of another group leads one to the inescapable conclusion that there is a double standard regarding the verbal expression of bigotry in academia.


Sports of The Times; With This Rangers-Devils Series, It's the Tale of Two Coaches
In the days before the Stanley Cup playoffs began, Mike Keenan was talking about the importance of his Ranger players' emotional energy at the start of a game and how quickly he could assess it.
"After about 38 seconds," he said with a smile.


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Defenders by Default: A special report.; Option to Legal Aid for Poor Leaves New Yorkers at Risk
Of all the things that went wrong during Amine Baba-Ali's journey through New York City's criminal courts, perhaps the most jarring was the performance of his court-appointed lawyer.
The lawyer, J. Edward Cardoso, neglected to subpoena a crucial witness who could have refuted the charge that Mr.
Baba-Ali raped his 4-year-old daughter.
Mr.
Baba-Ali said Mr.
Cardoso rarely returned his calls.
And the lawyer made little effort to recruit medical experts for the defense.
He made a few telephone calls, court records show, but gave up after getting busy signals.


Books of The Times: The Varieties of Metaphysical Poetry; T. S. Eliot Looks at Poets as Mirrors of Daily Life
The Varieties of Metaphysical Poetry  The Clark lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge, 1926, and the Turnbull lectures at the Johns Hopkins University, 1933  By T. S. Eliot  Illustrated.
Edited and Introduced by Ronald Schuchard. 343 pages.
Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $29.95.
In the spring of 1925, at a time he described to a friend as the "blackest moment of my life" because of a spiritual crisis he was going through, T. S. Eliot was invited to deliver the 1926 Clark lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge.


Gaz Metropolitain reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
THE SYSTEM THAT ISN'T LEGAL AID
The Assigned Counsel Plan, a loosely organized and haphazardly supervised New York City program to provide extra lawyers for indigent defendants, has grown enormously in recent years, raising complaints about inflated fees, lawyers who sleep through trials or fail to show up, and the quality of city's monitoring.
A1.


Top Chinese Judge Warns of Serious Crime Problem in Rural Areas
China's top judicial authority warned today that "security problems are escalating enormously" in rural parts of the country and that they needed the urgent attention of Communist Party officials to bring them under control.
The warning came from Ren Jianxin, president of the Supreme People's Court, at a Communist Party forum on "comprehensive management of social security," of which he is chairman.


CABLE TV INDUSTRY TURNS PESSIMISTIC AS GROWTH SLOWS
After years of reeling in dollars, the cable television industry, buffeted by Federal regulation, competition and uncertainty about the future, is now simply reeling.
As cable executives gather here this week for their annual convention, the mood among many is grim -- uncharacteristically so for an industry that produced a boom as long and as loud as any in recent business history.


Elias Motsoaledi, Apartheid Opponent, 69
Elias Motsoaledi, a South African opponent of apartheid and a former Johannesburg regional commander of the African National Congress's guerrilla wing who was imprisoned with Nelson Mandela, died on May 10 in Soweto, South Africa.
He was 69 years old.
He died of throat cancer, The Associated Press reported.


Autodesk Inc.(ACAD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


2 Key Rangers Hurting At a Key Time in Series
Twenty years from now, hockey fans around the region will reminisce about the Rangers-Devils playoff round of 1994.
Either they will recall the stress and strain the Rangers endured before finally eliminating a stubborn rival and reaching the Stanley Cup finals or they will remember the tortoise-and-the-hare approach of the Devils, who never got the respect and attention of the local public, even when they overtook the Rangers and upset them before moving on to the championship round.


B.C. Sugar reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Belmont Homestretch Might Settle It
On the morning after they dueled down the homestretch of the Preakness Stakes, Tabasco Cat and Go for Gin were booked into New York today to stage the rubber match of their Triple Crown rivalry in the Belmont Stakes, the last and longest race in the series.
There will be no Triple Crown winner, and both of these colts will feel plenty of heat in the Belmont from star horses who skipped the Preakness, notably Brocco, Strodes Creek and possibly even Holy Bull.
But for now, they are on top of the 3-year-old division.
There's Go for Gin, who won the Kentucky Derby two weeks ago, and there's Tabasco Cat, who won the Preakness on Saturday and redeemed two and a half years of racing setbacks and family crises for his trainer, D. Wayne Lukas.


Price Rise For Movies Engenders No Protest
It is often said that New Yorkers complain about almost everything, from potholes to panhandlers.
But there was barely a whisper of protest this weekend when the two largest movie chains in the metropolitan area raised ticket prices at many of their theaters, increasing the price of a movie in Manhattan to $8 for adults, from $7.50.
"I guess the prices have to go up sometime," said Anna Holtzman, a student at the Horace Mann School, who was waiting to see "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" Saturday night.
"It's not going to keep me from going."


People
*
Patrick Pitcher, managing director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, Toronto, was promoted to president, succeeding Liz Torlee, who will leave at the end of the month.


SOME OPPONENTS OF HEALTH PLAN GIVE SOME GROUND
For the first time since President Clinton proposed a national health insurance plan in September, some of his opponents are giving ground.
Not necessarily a lot.
"It's a very narrow strip of ground," said Senator Daniel R. Coats, the Indiana Republican who last Thursday suspended his all-out opposition to anything resembling the Clinton proposal.
He did so just long enough to join a unanimous Senate Labor Committee vote for a cost-control plan that involved major concessions by both sides.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the continuation of an article about New Yorkers' memories of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis rendered her son-in-law's first name incorrectly in some copies.
He is Edwin Schlossberg, not Edward.


INSIDE
Moscow Comes to NATO
Bearing a new plan for an over-stuffed army, Russia's Defense Minister calls on Brussels, seeking a special place in the alliance that Moscow once bitterly opposed.
Page A6.
Remembering Mrs.
Onassis
Family members and friends of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis streamed into her Manhattan apartment for an informal wake before her funeral and burial today.
Page B1.


Capriati Was in Clinic For Counseling Earlier
Shortly after deciding in late January to take a respite from the women's tennis tour, Jennifer Capriati entered a rehabilitation center outside of Tampa, Fla., a person close to the Capriati family said tonight.
Before her arrest last Monday on a misdemeanor marijuana charge, the 18-year-old Capriati spent time at The Manors, a rehabilitation center for adolescents with drug dependency or emotional problems situated in Tarpon Springs, Fla.


New Flavors for Readers of Food Magazines
Saveur, a lush new magazine for people with sophisticated tastes in food, enters the burgeoning field of epicurean food magazines this week.
A creme de la creme publication in every sense, it not only aims at the top end of the market but also tosses away concerns about calories and fat.
"Enjoy food. Stop worrying about it. Trust your palate and your heart," writes Dorothy Kalins in the editor in chief's letter in the first issue.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B10-11.


Rockett, Burkhead Gets Ambra Account
The Ambra Computer Corporation, a subsidiary of the International Business Machines Corporation in Raleigh, N.C., has selected Rockett, Burkhead, Lewis &amp; Winslow in Raleigh to handle its advertising account, which had been at FCB Direct in New York for the last year.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Dividend Meetings


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
April Existing-Home Sales . . .
April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  G.D.P. (revised) . . . 1st Qtr.


U.S. Adopts a Disputed Coding Standard
The Federal Government quietly adopted a much-debated standard last week for creating digital electronic signatures that cannot be forged, using a method developed by researchers at the National Security Agency that has been bitterly opposed by many computer companies.
A digital signature allows one person to produce a specially encrypted number that anyone can later verify could only have been produced by that individual.
Digital signatures are vital in the information age because they can authenticate electronic documents and insure that the documents have not been tampered with or altered.


Traffic Alert
Eighty-third and Eighty-fourth Streets between Park and Lexington Avenues will be closed starting at 7 A.M. today for the funeral of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.


After All the Bruising, Hugs From the Bulls
Passage is never easy, but at least the Chicago Bulls handled theirs with dignity and class.
They learned something from watching the Detroit Pistons walk off in a snit after the Bulls had swept them from their throne in the spring of 1991.
The Knicks had come after the Bulls for three years, with elbows flying, feet flailing, with antisocial talk and a very mean streak.
Xavier McDaniel, Anthony Mason, Greg Anthony and John Starks were among the faces on the walls of Chicago post offices: Knicks most wanted.
Now it was the Bulls' turn to lose to these chest-bumping castigators, and they were going out with their hands outstretched.


Graphic Industries (GRPH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Ballet Theater: The Nutcracker; 'The Nutcracker' as a Morality Play
There is an unescapable feeling about American Ballet Theater's new version of "The Nutcracker" that it is different for the sake of being different.
In this respect, Kevin McKenzie's and Wendy Wasserstein's production certainly succeeds.
And as such, this spectacular staging, which had its New York premiere on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, has many interesting elements.
Enlisting a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright like Ms.
Wasserstein to tinker with the scenario was not at all a bad idea.
Anyone who still has time to catch the ballet's last performance tonight will surely be entertained by the mix of street smarts and wry wit that may be Ms.
Wasserstein's contribution; it is a question of tone.


Hancock Fabrics Inc.(HKF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Cracow Journal; A McDonald's? Not in Their Medieval Square
The esthetic guardians of this gloriously intact medieval city, the home of Karol Cardinal Wojtyla before he became Pope John Paul II, are determined that their main market square, with its domes and statues and ancient town houses, will not go the way of some of Europe's other landmarks, like the Champs-Elysees, the center of Stuttgart, the heart of Bologna.
Fired by centuries of city pride that glows ever more fiercely since the collapse of Communism, Cracow is saying no to McDonald's in the square, known as Rynek Glowny.


Sunglass Hut Intl(RAYS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


On The Verbal Expression of Bigotry; Address by Powell
To the Editor:
It was disconcerting to read of Gen.
Colin Powell's defense of Howard University in a commencement address as "rigorously protecting freedom of speech" (news article, May 15).
To be sure, Howard provided a platform for the anti-Semitic blather and historically inaccurate claims of the Nation of Islam.
But Mr.
Powell did not mention that the university canceled a lecture by David Brion Davis of Yale, past president of the Organization of American Historians (scheduled for April 4) "because he is Jewish" (news article, April 16).
Professor Davis was thereby prevented from countering the baseless charges of the Nation of Islam with fact.


Low Cigarette Taxes Encourage Smoking
To the Editor:
"Tobacco Company Was Silent on Hazards" (front page, May 7), your expose of yet more tobacco industry cover-ups and deceptions, needs one correction.
You summarize a 1963 internal memo by Addison Yeaman, then an executive of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, who predicted "cigarette taxes would shoot up" following the 1964 Surgeon General's report on smoking.


Getting Tough With Garbage Collectors
Now that the Giuliani administration has gotten tough with the custodians' union, it is imperative that it do the same with the sanitation workers.
Anything less than the same strong talk and high standards would weaken Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's credibility and undermine his pledge to revamp the way the city does business with its unions.
After all, the custodians -- who carried a bad reputation and have only 864 members -- were an easy target.
The Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association, by contrast, is a powerful union with 6,500 members and a a proven record of negotiating rings around City Hall.


The N.R.A.'s Faithful Hear a Rallying Cry After 2 Defeats on Capitol Hill
Ed Williams believes in his heart that a right to bear arms is not merely guaranteed but ordained by the Second Amendment to the Constitution and by the King James Bible.
Yet like others in the National Rifle Association lately, he is putting more faith in scripture than the Bill of Rights.
"Jesus said that even if you must sell your garment, protect yourself, and work with one hand and carry your sword in the other," said Mr.
Williams, one of 20,000 faithful who came to the association's annual convention this weekend for what may be the most important meeting -- and regrouping -- in the gun lobby's 123-year history.


With World War II Crew, Circle Line Boat Sails Back to '44
The Circle Line claims on its side to be "America's Favorite Boat Ride," and on Saturday afternoon, a sunny and splendid wisp of the summer to come, aboard a ship named Circle Line X, it was more than that.
The ship's former captain, officers, cook and deck hands, who served on it when it was a Navy landing vessel in the South Pacific, the Philippines and China during World War II, returned for a reminiscence-filled journey around Manhattan.
From Florida and Colorado and many places in between, the old men came to glimpse faces they remembered from younger days, and to hug, cry and laugh.
It was a reunion, their first, and they brought families, including one man's 5-month-old great-granddaughter.


Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.; Security Tactics in Vietnam Still Inspire Widespread Fear
The terror of arbitrary arrests, secret trials and penal servitude that gripped Vietnam in the decade after "liberation" has begun to fade against the glare of the nation's economic dawn.
But fear still casts a subtle shadow over this long-suffering country.
By 1988 Vietnam's Communist leaders began a struggle to improve their nation's image and attract desperately needed foreign investment.
It is believed that by then, all but a few hundred of the tens of thousands of political prisoners held in the country's network of prison camps had been freed.


A Perfectly Safe Airport
To the Editor:
Anthony Fortune, a commercial airline pilot, charges (letter, May 6) that John F. Kennedy International Airport lacks "suitable landing aids."


A Wrinkle in the Jet Age: Propeller Planes
More than 35 years after jet aircraft first carried passengers and 25 years after the test of the first supersonic Concorde, propeller planes are making a comeback, flying more and more passengers on routes long served by jets.
While the smaller airplanes are considerably less expensive for airlines to operate, many communities fret over the sound of whirring propellers on their runways.
Many passengers board propeller planes reluctantly or refuse to fly them at all, unhappy about the relative safety, greater turbulence or lack of amenities.


Strong Yen Aids Japan's Asian Rivals
When Mitsubishi Motors of Japan said recently that it might buy steel from the Pohang Iron and Steel Company in South Korea, it created headlines on both sides of the Sea of Japan.
Japanese auto companies, as a rule, have never bought Korean steel.
But with the rise of the Japanese yen, Korean steel is now about 20 percent cheaper than Japanese steel, Mitsubishi said, a difference too great to ignore.


General Manager At BBDO New York
BBDO New York, continuing its efforts to groom the next generation of leaders, has named Bill Katz, executive vice president and senior account director, to the long vacant position of general manager, effective immediately.
Mr.
Katz, 39, will assume some day-to-day administrative duties from Tom Carey, president and chief operating officer.
He will continue reporting to Mr.
Carey, with whom he will serve as co-chairman of the agency's operating committee.
Mr.
Katz will also continue to head the agency's Pepsi-Cola, Frito-Lay and Haagen-Dazs accounts.


Review/Television; Good Night To Another 'Generation'
Still one of the most successful drama series ever put into syndication, "Star Trek: The Next Generation" is being withdrawn from weekly television and steered in the direction of movie box offices.
Paramount has somewhat brazenly decided it will boldly go where it has gone before with its blockbuster "Star Trek" films.
Movies, it seems, have a longer shelf life and more packaging potential than television episodes.
That is, if they are hits.
And now that, at least in New York City, the price of a movie ticket is going up to $8, the gamble has an irresistible bottom-line logic.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Propeller planes are making a comeback as airlines use them to replace jets and cut costs.
Although travelers have expressed concerns about safety, more than 50 million people in the U.S. flew on propeller aircraft last year, mostly on regional airlines, on flights of less than 500 miles or two hours.  [ Page A1. ]


Knicks March On After Bulls Fall Down and Break Their Crown
After years of frustration, and a seven-game series that tested the limits of their will, the Knicks finally exorcised the opponent that haunted them like no other.
The Knicks eliminated the Chicago Bulls, the three-time National Basketball Association champions, 87-77, yesterday in Game 7 of their Eastern Conference semifinal series before a jubilant Madison Square Garden crowd.


An Army in Need of a Role: A Russian Goes to NATO
When Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, the Russian Defense Minister, visits NATO in Brussels on Monday, he goes as the embattled boss of a demoralized military that has found itself having to lobby publicly for money from a Government it saved, however reluctantly, only seven months ago.
General Grachev will tell NATO what sort of "special status" Russia wants in order to join a NATO program offering informal relations to the formerly Communist countries of Eastern Europe.


All Is Glamorous, But That's Just an Act
In her cabaret show "An Affair to Remember: Movie Music From the 50's," Mary Cleere Haran is the embodiment of sophistication and old-fashioned glamour, complete with slinky dress and long gloves.
The setting is Rainbow and Stars, seemingly perched in the clouds and wrapped in glitter.
It's just like a scene from those old movies, Hollywood's idealized version of how things used to be.
With that image fresh in your mind, visiting Ms.
Haran at her home on a tree-lined street in Park Slope, Brooklyn, can feel like culture shock, in a nice sort of way.
For one thing, this neighborhood is a jumble of ethnic groups and languages, a place inhabited by the kinds of people who rarely appeared in studio films of the 1950's as anything but maids or chauffeurs.
Except maybe for Louis Armstrong, Ms.
Haran says, who always played himself.


World Economies


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Electronic Components Inc., Elkhart, Ind., an initial public offering of 1.1 million shares.
Chicago Corp.


Accounts
*
Delphi Internet Services Corp., Cambridge, Mass., to Woolward &amp; Partners, San Francisco, to handle advertising for the on-line services company, previously at Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners, Boston.
Billings were estimated to exceed $6 million. *
Lavazza Premium Coffees Corp., New York, to Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, as the first agency to handle its American account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Haiti's Generals Remain Defiant As a Strict Embargo Takes Effect
As a sweeping international embargo took effect here today, Haiti's military leaders appeared to be resolved to ride out the sanctions, convinced that the United States would not mount an armed intervention to unseat them.
The broadened embargo, pushed by a Clinton Administration that has been increasingly exasperated by the Haitian military, covers all trade with the country except for medicines and certain foods.
A United Nations ban on shipments of fuel and arms has been in place since October.


BMTC Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critic's Notebook; At Cannes, Offbeat Promising Wild Cards
The bottom line has shifted this year at the Cannes International Film Festival.
Big-name studio films and frenzied behind-the-scenes deal making, usually major aspects of the Cannes experience, have been low-key.
Instead, something different has happened: Cannes looks more and more valuable as a launching pad for hand-picked specialty items, particularly when those films have international appeal.
Interesting, offbeat film makers are the great beneficiaries when Hollywood stays home.
This year's perfect example is Nanni Moretti, a film maker whose popularity in Italy and France has suddenly exploded into worldwide attention.
Mr.
Moretti's work has had exposure on the film festival circuit (including a recent retrospective in Toronto).
But there are many countries, including the United States, in which he is largely unknown.


Southwestern Bell to Invade Bell Atlantic Phone Market
The Southwestern Bell Corporation has applied for permission to offer traditional telephone service in a suburban Washington market served by the Bell Atlantic Corporation, the first such attempt by one regional Bell company to compete directly against another.
Although Southwestern Bell, based in San Antonio, has been competing in other Bell companies' markets with its cellular phone service for some time, it said Friday that it would modify the cable television system it owns in Montgomery County, Md., to offer local phone service in competition with Bell Atlantic.


Sports of The Times; Ewing Raises His Game, and Then Raises His Hands
HE had no points at halftime, which is a rather serious condition for a superstar who has said he would help take his team to a championship one of these years, before it gets too late.
It seemed like the makings of a nightmare, a negative definition for his entire career: "Came up scoreless in a seventh game against Chicago."
But Patrick Ewing said he was not embarrassed by his halftime total.
"I was doing other things," he said.


A Mixed Welcome Awaits a Homeward-Bound Solzhenitsyn
Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn is said by his wife, Natalya, to be returning to Russia on Friday, 20 years after the Soviet leadership bundled him onto a plane and into forced exile.
Beginning in Vladivostok with a train tour across this vast country, he will begin his new life here, at 75, in a downtown apartment.
His new dacha, in the village of Troitse-Lykovo in western Moscow, has a leaky roof and is not ready for him.


A Monitor May Be Used At 40 Schools
As many as 40 New York City schools that have shown a steady decline in academic performance could face increased monitoring and a possible takeover by Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, school officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Cortines announced last month that he would intervene in the operation of six elementary and junior high schools whose leadership, he said, had permitted failure for so long that it amounted to "educational corruption." But in a report released yesterday, 34 additional schools were identified as facing possible action, in which the chancellor would more closely monitor performance, and then might ultimately replace the school's leadership if no progress is reported.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday and an entry in the Business Digest, about a company investing in a bond mutual fund it manages, misspelled its name.
It is Piper Jaffray.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; After the fall of his airline magazines, an executive aims for a smoother ride with sports yearbooks.
A MEDIA advertising executive whose network of in-flight magazines prospered mightily, only to collapse when the airline industry retrenched, is seeking to replicate his earlier success in a more earthbound arena.
Jeffrey S. Butler founded the East/ West Network in 1968 and built it into a company that at its peak published and sold the advertisements in 19 magazines available to passengers of airlines like Continental, Eastern, Pan Am, Trans World and United.
By offering marketers one-stop access to affluent fliers through a network of regional and national publications with controlled circulations, East/ West's advertising revenues reached $50 million to $60 million a year in the 1980's.


Dow Declines by 23.94 in Light Trading
Amid a confusing confluence of events, the stock market fell yesterday in light trading, prompting worries by some traders that the Federal Reserve may be compelled to raise rates a fifth time this year.
Hurt in the fall were blue chips like Chevron and General Motors, local telephone companies like Bell Atlantic and conglomerates like General Electric, as well as over-the-counter stocks like MCI Communications.


The Year That Wasn't To the Editor:
To the Editor:
When Ben Dickinson states in "Remembering Pericles" (letter, May 11) that the 2,500th anniversary of Pericles's birth in 494 B.C. will be in 2006, he is closer to an "elegant anniversary" than John Newhouse (Op-Ed, May 1), who suggested 1994.


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Apr 30


Rule Is Eased For Reporters At World Cup
The organizing committee of the World Cup soccer championship yesterday withdrew its demand that reporters who want to cover the matches sign waivers authorizing law-enforcement agencies to provide any information they might have about the reporters.
A dispute over the demand had jeopardized coverage of the World Cup, which will begin on June 17.
Representatives of some news organizations had said the waivers would violate reporters' right to privacy, and they had indicated that they might not cover the World Cup if the committee insisted on them.


Paying for Medical Research Cuts Health Costs; Dental Folly
To the Editor:
Health care reform coverage has reassured me it is business as usual with our representatives in Washington.
They are solving one problem, but leaving a larger one behind, which we will pay for later.
This time, it is our national health care bill, which we may be forced to pay through our teeth.


This Time It's Jays Looking Up at Yanks
The Yankees are alone in first place.
They are not sharing that elite position in the American League East, not even with those tormenting Toronto Blue Jays.
If only it were October instead of May, Buck Showalter might be thinking, because then the Blue Jays might finally be throttled.
But even in May, the Yankees are immensely proud of being seven games ahead of the Jays.
Why?
Because the Yankees and Jays were tied for first place on eight different occasions last season and New York never squirmed ahead of them.
So, as the Jays headed into the Bronx tonight wondering if their closer, Duane Ward, will be pitching by next month, the Yankees were thrilled to be in first, thrilled to see the Jays alone in fourth and prepared to renew their rivalry.


Classical Music in Review
Chris Merritt  Tenor Carnegie Hall
Rossini, Bellini and Donizetti have been reborn within the last generation, but the agile, high-altitude tenors to sing their roles have not.
One of the busiest and most widely traveled of current bel canto operatives is Chris Merritt, who appeared with the pianist Warren Jones at Carnegie Hall on Friday night.


Thanks, but Bucks Expect to Keep Pick
The Milwaukee Bucks almost certainly will keep the top pick in the N.B.A. draft, Coach MIKE DUNLEAVY said yesterday.
That means the team will probably try to sign forward GLENN ROBINSON of Purdue, who could command upwards of $100 million.
The Bucks won the first pick in Sunday's N.B.A. lottery.


Catherines Stores Inc.(CATH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Miscellany
*
General Motors Corp. has become the exclusive sponsor of a special issue of Newsweek magazine about the 1994 World Cup.
The issue, published this week, will be available through the final matches on July 17. *
Kallir, Philips, Ross, New York, formed Stratis Health Communications, New York, a health care public relations agency.


Becker Is Beaten by His Back
Boris Becker, hobbled by a backache that made getting out of bed uncomfortable and made playing a Grand Slam tennis match impossible, was forced to withdraw from the French Open today without ever striking a ball in competition.
Thus, Becker, who has never won a clay tournament, won't make his breakthrough here despite a foray to the Italian Open final two weeks ago.
Citing pain emanating from muscles near the base of his spine, the 10th-seeded Becker withdrew shortly before his scheduled match against 42d-ranked Jonathan Stark at center court.


Two Counties Epitomize Public Hospitals' Problems
Decades before Medicare and Medicaid appeared, Westchester and Nassau Counties opened hospitals with the same mission: to care for all county residents, regardless of their ability to pay.
Over the years, the two suburban hospitals grew into the Westchester and Nassau Medical Centers, sophisticated teaching hospitals offering an array of services that rival the giant hospitals of Manhattan.


'Because of Her, We Could Grieve and Then Go On': Tributes at the Services
Following are tributes by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg and President Clinton delivered yesterday at the services for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
Mr.
Kennedy's eulogy, recorded by The Associated Press, was given at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan, as was Mrs.
Schlossberg's reading of a poem, which was recorded by Reuters.
President Clinton's remarks were made during burial services at Arlington National Cemetery and recorded by The New York Times.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy
Last summer, when we were on the upper deck on the boat at the Vineyard, waiting for President and Mrs.
Clinton to arrive, Jackie turned to me and said, "Teddy, you go down and greet the President."


Mississippi Seeks Damages From Tobacco Companies
Mississippi today became the first state to demand that cigarette makers bear the health care costs of smoking.
The state sued the tobacco industry, seeking reimbursement for the cost of medical programs, including Medicaid, that support victims of smoking-related illnesses.


Review/Dance; Fluent in the Languages Of Ballet and Theater
The latest entry in the New York City Ballet's continuing Diamond Project is "Chiaroscuro" by Lynne Taylor-Corbett, who has recently done the musical staging for Joan Rivers's show, "Sally Marr . . .  and Her Escorts."
As usual, the choreographer's interest in both theatrical and dance values can be sensed in her most recent ballet, which had its premiere on Saturday night at the New York State Theater.
Whether it deserved a stupifying and thunderous ovation, the kind that even George Balanchine never received in that theater, is another matter.


Q&amp;A
Brain Fever
Q.
In Victorian literature, people who experience a severe emotional shock sometimes become ill with "brain fever," characterized by a high fever with delirium, lasting for weeks.
Is this an actual medical condition or an invention of novelists?


Cuomo's G.O.P. Rival Faces Biggest Challenge
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican Party's endorsed candidate for governor, has built a political career out of toppling popular incumbents and entrenched political machines.
In his first political race, in 1981, he defeated the three-term Democratic mayor of Peekskill, a Democratic city in northern Westchester County.
Three years later, he handily ousted the Democratic Assemblyman.
And in 1992, he accomplished a rarity in New York State politics: he defeated a sitting Republican state senator in a primary.
He is even fond of describing how he outmaneuvered a more socially prominent classmate to become senior class president at Peekskill High School.


Griffey's 21st Homer Eclipses a Mantle Mark
Athletics 7, Mariners 5
Brent Gates' four hits overcame Ken Griffey Jr.'s record 21st homer in Oakland last night as the Athletics broke a six-game losing streak with a 7-5 victory over Seattle.


Quietly at Her Side, Public at the End
He had known her for more than 30 years and had been her constant companion for more than a decade, sharing everything: the daily victories, big and small, the adventures and frustrations of her complex life, and then her final months of suffering.
He walked with her in the park in her last days, steadying the frail body with his hand, and he was at the bedside Thursday night when she died.
Maurice Tempelsman always seemed to be there for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
To the general public, which had rarely seen them together and had not even known his name until recent days, his central role in yesterday's ceremonies may have seemed astonishing.


Nicholls Comes Back And Takes Charge
When the Devils go back to the Meadowlands to try to end their series with the Rangers tomorrow night, they will be nervous.
Nervous, when the team is one game away from reaching the Stanley Cup finals?


Old Accident Points to Brain's Moral Center
IN 1848, Phineas P. Gage, a 25-year-old foreman for a New England railroad, met with a horrible accident.
In laying track across Vermont's rough terrain, Mr.
Gage routinely drilled holes in large rocks, poured in blasting powder, laid fuses and covered the explosives with sand.
After tamping these miniature bombs with a long metal rod, he would light the fuses and run for cover from the explosions and shattering rocks.
But one September day, Mr.
Gage was momentarily distracted and began tamping the blasting powder before his assistant had added sand.
There was a powerful explosion.
The tamping rod, measuring three and a half feet long and an inch and a quarter in diameter, flew like a rocket into his face, just under his left cheek.
It shot up behind his left eye, destroying it, and exited the top of his skull.
The rod landed many yards away.


Shooting in Indianapolis Restaurant


Thwack! Navratrilova Exits Paris Angrily
After her wet noodle of a performance sent a damp-eyed Martina Navratilova from her last French Open with her first-ever first-round loss here, she launched her most vehement stroke of the afternoon.
The angry veteran took a final baleful look at the high-tech widebody racquet that failed her so miserably, and then rendered it a pretzel by smashing it into her hardwood chair.
This was, in every way, no way to say goodbye.


Review/Dance; 2 Works on the Difficulties Of Peaceful Coexistence
In one of the two choreographically imaginative and intelligent new works that David Dorfman Dance presented on Friday night at the Kitchen, people appeared to assemble for a folk-dance festival, only to discover there was nothing to be festive about.
In the second premiere, two men enjoyed themselves, but what made them happy was being nasty.
Both pieces blended eloquence with grim comedy.
Guy Klucevsek, who composed and played the accordion score for "Hey," also performed in it onstage with Mr.
Dorfman and the other members of his troupe: Curt Haworth, Carol Kueffer-Moore, Peggy Peloquin, Lisa Race and Tom Thayer.
A program note said one of Mr.
Klucevsek's melodies was based on a traditional brass-band tune from the former Yugoslavia.
Although that provided "Hey" with topical significance, its depiction of anxiety was relevant to all times and places.


Executive Changes
CHASE SECURITIES INC., New York, appointed John Kolmer managing director and head of its high-yield securities group.
FRUIT OF THE LOOM INC., Chicago, named Larry K. Switzer executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Lean on the Dominican Republic
Sanctions can work to restore democracy in Haiti -- if they are strong and if they are enforced.
New, stiffer sanctions went into effect at midnight on Saturday.
But as long as contraband gasoline flows freely across the border with the Dominican Republic, the U.N. embargo against Haiti exists in name only.
The immediate need is to get tough with the Dominican Republic, reminding its Government that these sanctions, approved by the United Nations, are mandatory and that those who ignore them will pay dearly for defying the international community.


Review/Rock; A Marriage Of Punk And Pop
Mac McCaughn of Superchunk was mildly irked by the usual moshing and stage-diving during the band's set at Irving Plaza on Saturday night.
Stray people onstage didn't only interfere with his guitar playing; they simply didn't fit the music.
Superchunk's galloping drums and speed-strummed guitars are made for the original punk dance, the pogo: jumping up and down with the jubilant power of the music.
Even the band members hop all over the stage.
Superchunk is a band of punk classicists, dedicated to the combined power of a good tune, a high-powered beat and blaring power chords.
For Superchunk -- as for the Buzzcocks, the Replacements, Husker Du and the early Who -- the disruptive power of punk can coexist with neat pop song structures and one guitar hook after another.
The band's lyrics can be oblique or plain-spoken; Mr.
McCaughn sings them in a high, unpolished voice.


Timorous on Timor
It is generally reckoned that at least 200,000 civilians died after Indonesia lawlessly invaded in 1975 and then annexed the former Portuguese colony of East Timor.
But unlike recent massacres in Rwanda, it caused no international outcry, no calls for military intervention by the United Nations.
One reason for the different response is that Indonesia is a big and powerful Islamic country, a leader of the nonaligned bloc, yet also a lucrative market for Europe and the United States.
And Jakarta has few scruples about using its muscle.
This has been confirmed afresh by Indonesia's crude pressure on President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines to censor a human rights conference in Manila scheduled to begin next Tuesday, at which eight exiled East Timorese activists were invited to speak.
When Indonesia's military regime learned of this, it warned that unless the conference was canceled, Indonesia would probably refuse to be host to peace talks between the Philippine Government and Muslim separatist rebels.


Reviews/Television; Once Again, 'Rashomon' Meets the Menendezes
Don't get your hopes up, but television's obsession with the Menendez brothers, the weepy young men who admit they blew away their wealthy parents, may subside for a while after tonight's second and final installment of CBS's four-hour movie "Menendez: A Killing in Beverly Hills." The same case was dramatized last month on Fox, and a two-hour documentary summary of the joint two-jury trial, which ended in a mistrial, is being carried on Court TV (a repeat is available tonight on Channel 51).
After watching the tactics and theatrics of this case from several different angles, most of which support one another, many viewers are likely to agree with a prosecutor who said at the trial's end, "I think all of us are weary of this." Of course, the State of California has promised to try the case again on charges of first-degree murder.
We're not out of the sensationalism woods yet.


4 Aristide Backers Slain in Haiti as Tensions Rise
Four supporters of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, were shot to death today in one of this city's slums one day after sweeping new international sanctions were imposed to force a return to democratic rule.
The killings came amid mounting tensions in Haiti over repeated warnings by the Clinton Administration that it would not rule out the use of force to restore Father Aristide, who was overthrown by the army in September 1991.
The Haitian Army is reported to be on alert, and soldiers mounted stepped-up patrols on the streets of the capital today.


METRO DIGEST
CONVENTION PICKS PATAKI TO FACE CUOMO Solidifying his position as the frontrunner for the Republican gubernatorial nomination, State Senator George E. Pataki won an overwhelming majority of the vote at the Republican state convention and became the only candidate with a guaranteed spot on the primary ballot.
A1.
George E. Pataki has built a career out of toppling incumbents and political machines.
B4.


CHRONICLE
Retired from the Army in 1991, Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF is working his way up to four-star tele-general at CBS.
He is under contract to the network, and has already made on-the-battle-site documentaries about Pearl Harbor and Vietnam.
Yesterday, he was in Manhattan to talk about his latest project, "D-Day," a special that will be televised on Thursday from 9 to 11 P.M., Eastern daylight time.
Sitting in a CBS studio next to his co-host, DAN RATHER, in front of a floor-to-ceiling American flag, General Schwarzkopf said he had never set foot on the beaches at Normandy before this assignment, and he was deeply moved.


Business Objects to a Code in China
As the Clinton Administration approaches a June 3 deadline for renewing China's favored trade status, American companies with operations in China are being asked by human rights campaigners to embrace a code of conduct that many of them do not like.
A prominent rights group, Human Rights Watch, is urging such companies to adopt a voluntary code that includes proposals that American companies not use products made by prison labor, discourage political indoctrination in the workplace, and encourage their senior executives to discuss rights abuses with Chinese officials.


Michaels Stores Inc.(MIKE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


U.N. Rebuffs NATO Plan On Bosnia
The top United Nations general in the former Yugoslavia has rejected a NATO request to threaten force to push back Serbian artillery around the northern Bosnian town of Tuzla, United Nations officials said today.
The decision by Gen.
Bertrand de Lapresle of France, the United Nations force commander, to rebuff Adm.
Leighton W. Smith Jr., the American commander of NATO operations in Bosnia, underscored the deep divisions between the United Nations and NATO in their quest to end the war in Bosnia.


Oceaneering International(OII,N) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Corrections
A sports picture caption in some editions last Friday describing the Rangers' winning goal over the Devils in Game 3 of their playoff series incorrectly identified the Ranger player who was celebrating.
It was Stephane Matteau.


People
*
David R. Strandberg was named to the new position of executive vice president and creative director at McCracken Brooks, Minneapolis.
He was previously a vice president and creative director at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.


No Headline
"I often think of what she said about Jack in December after he died: 'They made him a legend, when he would have preferred to be a man.' Jackie would have preferred to be just herself, but the world insisted that she be a legend, too." -- EDWARD M. KENNEDY  [ A16:4. ]


Classical Music in Review
Michael Bach and Anthony de Mare  Cellist and Pianist Miller Theater Morningside Heights
In the last decade, Michael Bach has established himself as an avatar of the avant-garde cello, collaborating closely with composers and devising solutions to long-standing historical problems.
He is the inventor of a "cello curved bow," inspired by the convex bow Albert Schweitzer designed for playing Bach's cello suites, which allows playing three or four strings at once.
He has also developed techniques for producing high overtones and differentials.


So Inviting, So . . . Sony; Can a Public Plaza Be Too Corporate?
When the public spaces on the ground floor of 550 Madison Avenue were run by AT&amp;T, they were spare, monumentally scaled and usually empty.
Today, as Sony Plaza, they are colorful, more intimately scaled and often crowded.
They are also -- unmistakably -- Sony's.
In an annex at one side of the atrium, midblock between 55th and 56th Streets, hang six blue banners, all but one bearing the Sony name.
The banner for City Bakery proclaims "Sony Commissary"; for Gottfried's Newsstand, "Sony Plaza Newsstand." Banners mark the Sony Signatures store and the Sony Wonder Technology Lab, a new attraction opening tomorrow in the annex.
Opposite are the Sony Style showrooms, with more Sony banners in what was an open-air arcade when the building served as AT&amp;T headquarters.


Zaire Drifting Into Anarchy As Authority Disintegrates
After four years of political turmoil, Government authority here is simply dissolving away, leaving the cities and the countryside to pillaging soldiers and roaming gangs of thugs and bandits.
Zaire is coming to represent a new specter in Africa -- the stateless country.


Newmont Mining
Gold prices surged as a rise in the Commodity Research Bureau index to its highest in three and a half years touched off fears of inflation.
One of the biggest beneficiaries of yesterday's run-up in gold was Newmont Mining of Denver, which has operations in the United States and some Pacific Rim nations.


A Dark Comedy Wins at Cannes
"Pulp Fiction," Quentin Tarantino's electrifying and original dark comedy about an assortment of underworld characters, received the Palme d'Or tonight as the best film at this year's Cannes International Film Festival.
This film, an American entry, stars Bruce Willis, John Travolta, Harvey Keitel and Uma Thurman.
A grand jury prize, honoring runners-up in the best-film category, was split between the festival's two most politically charged favorites: Zhang Yimou's "To Live," the story of a long-married couple whose lives reflect changing phases of recent Chinese history, and "Burnt by the Sun," Nikita Mikhalkov's tragic yet lyrical tale of a Stalinist hero in the Soviet Union.


Violent Weather Battering Globe In Last 2 Years Baffles Experts
THE extreme weather of the last two years in North America is part of a worldwide pattern, scientists say, and they are searching hard for an explanation.
The United States has suffered through the extra-cold summer that chilled the Northeast in 1992; Hurricane Andrew in August 1992, the most destructive American hurricane ever; the East Coast "storm of the century" in March 1993; the devastating flooding in the upper Midwest last summer; and the seemingly unending snows of early 1994 in the Northeast, accompanied by record warmth in the West.


Brady Ruling Heartens Opponents of Gun Control
A ruling by a Federal judge here striking down a provision of the new national law requiring background checks of people wanting to buy handguns is opening a new front for opponents of gun control.
The May 16 ruling did not turn on the Second Amendment, the right to bear arms, which is the traditional focus of gun-control debates.
Instead, Judge Charles C. Lovell of Federal District Court here cited the 10th Amendment and the notion of federalism, or the division of powers between the Federal Government and the states.


Classical Music in Review
Joan Morris and William Bolcom  Mezzo-soprano and Pianist Metropolitan Museum of Art
Joan Morris and William Bolcom, a walking museum of American popular song tradition, presented a delightful program of turn-of-the-century songs and Scott Joplin rags on Friday evening.
It was a balance of heartwarming nostalgia, amusing sentimentality and faintly alarming grotesquerie.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Luis Ortiz, third baseman, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Placed Scott Fletcher, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.


91 Degrees in the Sun


Paying for Medical Research Cuts Health Costs
To the Editor:
The newly unveiled health care plan of Senator Edward M. Kennedy (front page, May 10), in addition to insuring small business protection and broadening individual choice of insurance, recognizes how uncured illness underlies health care costs.


Since Time Is Precious, Programs Try to Save It
"IRECOMMEND to you to take care of the minutes," Lord Chesterfield wrote to his son on Nov. 6, 1747, "for hours will take care of themselves."
There are computer programs to take care of the minutes, and the hours too, in the interests of that ugly word, productivity.
They range from truly serious programs for truly serious, and busy, professionals and business people to at least one that is frankly loony.


In Plea Deal, Officer Agrees To Give Details Of Corruption
A police officer implicated in the 30th Precinct's corruption scandal has agreed to provide evidence against his fellow officers and pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal drug charges and civil rights violations, law-enforcement officials said.
The officer, Michael Walsh, was one of the worst of the rogue officers that prowled the precinct in northwest Harlem, robbing and beating up drug dealers and lying under oath about arrests they made, prosecutors said.
His cooperation will help prosecutors prepare cases against other officers, a senior law-enforcement official said, but it was not clear yesterday how much help Officer Walsh's testimony might be.


Radius and Supermac in Circuit-Card Deal
Radius Inc. said today that it would acquire Supermac Technology Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $80.5 million.
Radius and Supermac, both based in San Jose, Calif., are the No. 1 and No. 2 companies, respectively, in the market for circuit cards, which enhance the graphics performance of Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
A generation ago, American composers dependent on orchestral commissions were churning out pieces approximately 20 minutes long, just short enough to keep audiences in place between the concerto and the intermission.
Now, with the advent of the New Romanticism, composers are often granted the full concerto slot.
They have more space to work with, but they must also meet the particular demands of soloists.
The result is a minor glut of ad hoc concertos.


Kidd Questioned After Fleeing Car Crash
JASON KIDD, expected to be one of the picks in next month's National Basketball Association draft, met yesterday with California Highway Police authorities who were investigating his feeling the scene of an auto accident early Sunday near Berkeley, Calif.
There were no injuries in the crash, in which Kidd's vehicle was said to have skidded, sideswiped another and overturned.


Cantrex Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Democrats Fear For a Seat Held For 100 Years
The election is not until Tuesday, but Democratic Party officials are so fearful they will lose the seat held for 40 years by Representative William H. Natcher of Kentucky that they are already making excuses for what went wrong with the campaign.
In an extraordinary effort to distance themselves from their party's nominee, Democratic officials said today that the candidate, Joe Prather, a former state senator, had shunned their offers of help and had waged a lackluster campaign.


Clothestime Inc.(CTME,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Funeral Heard Across Nation
In the end, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's invitation-only funeral Mass was heard across the country.
But it was not seen.
Three television networks -- CBS, CNN and NBC -- carried the sound of the service yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan.
But cameras were not permitted inside the church.


Paying for Medical Research Cuts Health Costs; Cost-Ineffective
To the Editor:
"How We Die," a current book by Sherwin B. Nuland, a surgeon, is critical of many of his colleagues, who are buying marginal improvement in life expectancy by soaring health costs.
One wonders how much these attitudes underlie the low cost-effectiveness of American medicine.


SOCCER
President's Report
Alan Rothenberg, president of World Cup USA 1994, addressed just about every subject pertaining to the tournament yesterday in a conference call with the news media.
Rothenberg said he was confident that law enforcement agencies in Washington and Dallas, two of the nine cities that will play host to games, would abandon the idea of fencing in the stands at R.F.K.
Stadium and the Cotton Bowl, respectively.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling three noncallable issues of securities: $14 million of debentures due in 1995 priced at 100 to yield 5.7 percent through Hongkong and Shanghai Bank; $150 million of 6.345 percent notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 6.345 percent through CS First Boston and $21 million of notes due in 1996 priced at 100 to yield 5.97 percent through Aubrey G. Lanston &amp; Co.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1996 priced at 100 to yield 6.08 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in one year.


Jury's Still Out on Second Amendment
To the Editor:
I respond, as one of 27 teachers of constitutional law who signed a May 2 ad on the Second Amendment and gun-control legislation, to "Constitution Backs Gun Lobby" (letter, May 12) by Glenn Reynolds.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the pilot for the new television series "Friends" included an erroneous identification from NBC for the actress at the right.
She was Clea Lewis, not Lisa Kudrow.


Weyerhaeuser Wins Insurance Case
Insurance companies may not reject claims for pollution cleanup costs just because the policyholder has not been sued by the government, according to a decision late last week by the highest court in Washington state.
In a dispute between the Weyerhaeuser Company and four insurance companies, the Washington State Supreme Court said the corporate liability policies issued by insurers did not specify that coverage would apply only in situations in which Weyerhaeuser had been sued, or threatened, by state or Federal governments.
Ruling Is Unanimous
In a unanimous decision written by Chief Judge James A. Andersen, the court noted that pollution had occurred and that state laws made Weyerhaeuser, which is based in Tacoma, Wash., liable for cleanup costs.
It concluded that "a reasonable reading of the policy language is that coverage is available."


Motorist, 27, Killed By Off-Duty Officer
An off-duty police officer driving home on Sunday shot and killed another motorist who the police said had threatened him with a lead pipe in a traffic dispute in Queens.
The case is to go to a grand jury, as is normal for fatal shootings by officers.
Officer Christopher Charles, 29, was placed on modified assignment, and his gun and shield removed, pending a department investigation.


DEATH OF A FIRST LADY: The Overview; Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Is Buried
Eulogized by President Clinton as a "remarkable woman whose life will forever glow in the lives of her fellow Americans," Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was buried today on an Arlington hillside next to her martyred first husband, the 35th President of the United States.
The eternal flame that Mrs.
Onassis lighted three decades ago as a 34-year-old widow flickered in a summery breeze as the President spoke of her courage at the time of John F. Kennedy's assassination, when her poise and dignity helped to salve the nation's wounds, and of her kindness to him and to Hillary Rodham Clinton as they searched for ways to shield their daughter, Chelsea, from the corrosive glare of publicity.


Data Highway Ignoring Poor, Study Charges
The regional telephone companies are planning to build the first of their advanced communications networks -- the wiring of the so-called information highway -- mainly for the affluent, while bypassing poorer neighborhoods and minority populations, a study by consumer and civil rights groups has concluded.
The study's sponsors say the research, released yesterday, raises concerns about an exclusionary "electronic redlining" that might be similar to the kind of discrimination that is curbed by law in fields like banking and insurance.


Honors
*
Dunaudy Munch Muro, Melville, L.I., took top honors, winning seven awards, at the 21st annual Best on Long Island Awards presentation sponsored by the Long Island Advertising Club.
Other multiple winners include Marchon/Marcolin Creative Services, Melville, with four awards, and, with three each, Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville; Kopf Zimmerman Schultheis, Hauppauge, and Lowell/Harrison/Leifer, Rockville Centre.


Villalba Journal; How Don Calo (and Patton) Won the War in Sicily
Biagio Plumeri sits at the desk of the man a lot of people around here regard as a key to the Allies' speedy occupation of Sicily in World War II.
Mr.
Plumeri, a 55-year-old tomato farmer who has been part-time mayor on and off since 1967, is not much troubled that President Clinton will not stop at Villalba in June when he visits Italy to help celebrate the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Rome by Allied forces.


Nordson Corp.(NDSN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about the actor Gilbert Roland misstated the medium in which he portrayed the Cisco Kid.
Mr.
Roland played the role often in movies, but another actor, Duncan Renaldo, starred in the television series.


Pro Bono Accounts
* Rainforest Alliance, New York, to Milton Samuels Advertising, New York.


High Court to Rule on Amtrak Ban on Political Sign
Accepting an appeal from an East Village artist who tried to rent a billboard in Pennsylvania Station for his political art, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Amtrak can exclude particular political messages from its train stations.
The Justices will decide whether Amtrak is a private corporation that is not bound by the Constitution, as a Federal appeals court ruled in dismissing the artist's suit five months ago, or whether it functions as a Government entity that must abide by the First Amendment, as a Federal District Judge initially held.


CHRONICLE
After only 124 years, the City Bar Association is inducting a woman as president.
She is BARBARA PAUL ROBINSON, and she takes office tonight.
Not surprisingly, she said yesterday that she was "interested in equal opportunity" in the legal profession.


House Panel Told of More Tests Done Without Consent
Experts in medical ethics testified at a Congressional hearing today that they had found additional cases in which researchers had withdrawn medication from schizophrenic patients without proper consent and had made the patients become severely ill in order to study them.
At the hearing, both researchers and patient advocates, representing opposing viewpoints, were unanimous in saying that the current system for reviewing ethics of psychological experiments was inadequate.


Morgan Keegan Inc.(MOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Clinton Plan Imperils City Hospitals
President Clinton's health-care plan, in the main a valuable reform effort, would inadvertently brutalize New York City hospitals.
That is the opinion not only of local hospitals, but also of independent analysts.
The problem for New York is that the President's plan -- and Congressional knock-offs like the recent proposal by Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts -- would pay for universal coverage primarily by imposing gargantuan Medicare cuts that are unevenly distributed.
About half of Mr.
Clinton's in-patient Medicare cuts would come from hospitals that train doctors and hospitals that serve indigent communities.
New York hospitals do a lot of both: they account for 5 percent of national in-patient Medicare expenditures, and about 15 percent of Medicare's contributions toward medical training and indigent care.
And though universal coverage would provide inner-city hospitals with a new revenue stream, the extra fees would not come close to making up for the lost Medicare and other reimbursements.


Review/Dance; Enlightening Couplings Along a Long, Lonely Path
"The Seven Last Words" is the work of three choreographers -- Paul Sanasardo, Manuel Alum and John Passafiume -- and a memorial to Mr.
Alum, who died a year ago.
The dance, which was presented on Saturday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio, is also one whose powerful simplicity and directness make Mr.
Sanasardo's long absence from the New York dance scene even more regrettable.
Inspired by stunning music by Giya Kancheli that has something of the dark resonance of Ernest Bloch, the dance tells the story of a passage through a life.
At first, the Dancer finds his way through a world in which one path leads to another, though their junctions must be carefully negotiated.
The Dancer wears the costume from Mr.
Alum's "Cellar," and quotations from other pieces by him and by Mr.
Sanasardo are weaved in smoothly.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Fox announced an alliance with a broadcast station group that would result in the defection to Fox of eight stations from CBS, three from ABC and one from NBC.
The deal by the upstart network -- which calls for a $500 million investment in the New World Communications Group, the owner of seven stations -- represents a sweeping realignment of the television industry.  [ Page A1. ]
Sandoz offered to buy Gerber Products for $3.7 billion.  [ D1. ]


Review/Pop; Individuality Under History's Weight
Writing an original pop song can be a difficult task for a musician with a sense of history.
There are so many classic riffs, exquisite harmonies and memorable melodies already in circulation, a personal vision can easily get lost.
On Saturday night at the Academy, Matthew Sweet performed a captivating balancing act.
The Nebraska-born singer sounded like a graduate of the academy of pop songwriting, with a major in Lennon-McCartney and a minor in Neil Young.
He also sounded like a passionate and introspective soul, with a gift for turning songs into tugs-of-war between desire and apathy.
On lead guitar, Richard Lloyd, a veteran of the late-1970's New York band Television, strove for understatement.
Between verses, his guitar squealed but never screamed.
Mr.
Sweet played rhythm guitar as if he was searching for the perfect strum.
Will Rigby, former drummer for the dB's, maintained a light and consistent drumbeat, rarely breaking into a solo.
Tony Marsico kept his bass to a minimal throb.
The restrained music pressed at the seams of each song, threatening to burst into abrasive noise at any moment.
This tension heightened the effect of "Someone to Pull the Trigger" and "Devil With the Green Eyes," songs delivered from the point of view of someone two steps from the edge.


Relatives of Confessed Mexican Assassin Seek Asylum in U.S.
The mother and five other relatives of the young factory worker who confessed to killing Mexico's leading presidential candidate two months ago have crossed illegally into the United States and asked for political asylum, their lawyers said today.
The relatives of the accused gunman, Mario Aburto Martinez, told immigration officials on Sunday that they feared for their safety if they remained in this border city, where part of the family has lived for years.


Keeping Politics Out of Base Closings
Congress removed politics from the painful process of closing military bases in 1988 by giving the central role to an independent commission.
It was a smart move.
In the preceding decade, bluster by the Pentagon and politicking by members of Congress had prevented any closings at all.
But since then, more than 100 bases have been tagged for closing, and 24 of them are already closed.
When they are all closed, the savings will exceed $4 billion a year.
The Supreme Court ruled yesterday that the Federal Government's choice of which bases to close is not subject to challenge in court, thus foreclosing efforts by some states to save facilities in their areas.
But the carefully constructed process is now threatened in Congress.
A proposal to tinker with it has support in the House, and will be offered this week as an amendment to the defense authorization bill.
Its passage would be a mistake.


Critic's Notebook; Of 'Medea' and 'Medee,' Or, Horror Hot and Cold
Theatergoers have been exiting Broadway's "Medea" with fear in their hearts.
Men run home to wives and lovers determined to be nicer.
Divorce or separation inspires dread.
Women listen to Diana Rigg's rage and feel their feminist resentments boil.
Men look apprehensively over their shoulders and try to smile.
The same story was told last week in Brooklyn, where William Christie and Les Arts Florissants played Marc-Antoine Charpentier's "Medee" four times.
On both sides of the East River, a woman kills her children, poisons the minds and bodies of her rivals and reduces an errant husband to jelly.
So how is it that Broadway's update of Euripides can make our insides churn and Charpentier sends listeners away from the Brooklyn Academy of Music in a relative state of calm?


'Kiss Me, Kate' Is Canceled
The New York Shakespeare Festival has canceled a production of "Kiss Me, Kate," the Cole Porter musical suggested by Shakespeare's "Taming of the Shrew," that was to be presented at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park this summer.
The play, whose likely stars were Kevin Kline and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, was to be part of the festival's annual summer series in the park.
Festival officials said the show had been called off because legal negotiations between the various interested parties -- including the Shakespeare Festival, the creative team, producers who planned to bring the show to Broadway and the estates of Cole Porter and Bella Spiwack, who wrote the show's book -- were stalled and could not be completed in time for the show to be presented at the end of July.


Coleman Faces Charges
Accompanied by three lawyers, Derrick Coleman, the Nets' All-Star forward, walked into the West 20th Street station house in Manhattan yesterday and accepted a desk appearance ticket requiring him to appear in court next Tuesday to answer third-degree assault charges.
The misdemeanor charges were filed by three teen-agers who say they were assaulted outside a bar on Eighth Avenue and 16th Street, at 4 A.M. on April 30, after they taunted Coleman and a teammate, Jayson Williams, following the Nets' loss to the Knicks in the first playoff game.


The Puzzle of New Jobs: How Many, How Fast?
Faced with nervousness in the credit markets, the Clinton Administration is growing concerned that the robust job growth in recent months might become a victim of further interest rate increases.
But there seems to be little the Administration can do about it.
So far, job growth has continued despite rising interest rates, and is running well above the rate needed for the President to deliver on his campaign pledge of eight million new jobs during his four-year term.
The economy has added an average 245,000 net new jobs a month this year to the national employment rolls.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BACKING FOR CHINA TRADE STATUS  Secretary of State Warren Christopher offered President Clinton an accounting of China's human rights record that effectively provided the legal argument for renewing China's trade benefits, officials said.
A1


Cox Quits Fund Post At Tiger
Archibald Cox Jr., who last summer stunned Wall Street when he resigned as president and chief executive of CS First Boston, has left another job.
After a six-month stint, Mr.
Cox yesterday chose to leave his new employer, the Tiger Management Corporation, after he failed to raise $1 billion that the fund management company had planned for direct investments in emerging markets, primarily infrastructure projects in China and Southeast Asia.


Tridel Enterp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Justices Reject Challenge to Base-Closing Process
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the Government's choice of which military bases to close is not subject to challenge in Federal court.
The decision forecloses an effort by elected officials from Pennsylvania and New Jersey to block the scheduled closing of the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
It also effectively ends a separate lawsuit that New York State filed late last year to challenge the scheduled closing of Plattsburgh Air Force Base.


Officer to Give Own Defense To Grand Jury In S.I. Case
Police Officer Donald Brown plans to defend himself before a grand jury investigating witnesses' charges that he used excessive force in arresting a 22-year-old Staten Island man late last month, Philip Caruso, the president of the Patrolman's Benevolent Association, said yesterday.
Mr.
Caruso said Officer Brown believes he acted properly and that with so many witnesses offering condemning accounts, "we want the jurors to hear what the officer has to say, to be convinced of his innocence."


CHRONICLE
RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI, music lover, may have found that being Mayor of New York is more schizo than scherzo, but the job does have its lyric perks.
Last night, the mayor took the podium at Carnegie Hall and conducted the New York Pops orchestra through a Sousa march.
He gamely gestured while the orchestra played and the audience clapped in time.


Rising Commodity Prices Cause a Sharp Bond Selloff
For the second consecutive trading day rising commodity prices were behind the sharp selloff in bonds, as investors focused on inflation and its potential to erode the value of their investments in the future.
Also contributing to yesterday's tumbling bond prices was the selling that often precedes a Treasury auction as dealers get rid of old bond notes to make room for the new ones and, possibly, bring down the price they have to pay for them.


Federated Is Confident On Takeover
Although it may have to wait until August to formally submit its proposal to get R. H. Macy &amp; Company out of bankruptcy protection through a merger, Federated Department Stores Inc. will still be able to get its plan through court by January, a spokeswoman for Federated said yesterday.
"We're not at all discouraged by where we are in this process because of the substantial support we already do have among creditors," Carol Sanger, the Federated spokeswoman, said.
"If there's enough support, there should be no problem with the time-table the judge has set out."


Merrill Corp.(MRLL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Sandoz Bids $3.7 Billion for Gerber
Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss drug and chemicals company, agreed yesterday to buy the Gerber Products Company for $3.7 billion in cash, a deal in which Sandoz would take over the dominant, but stagnating, baby-food brand in the United States and try to sell it to the rest of the world.
Sandoz offered to pay $53 each for all outstanding Gerber shares.
Gerber, which was the most actively traded stock on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, jumped $15.50 a share, or 45 percent, to close at $50.125.


Sbarro Inc.(SBA,A) reports earnings for 16wks to Apr 24


Slaying to Be Reviewed
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office said yesterday that a grand jury would review the case of a teen-ager shot to death by the police in January under disputed circumstances.


Accounts
*
Stroh Brewery Co., Detroit, to Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, as the first agency to handle advertising for Clash, a clear malt alcoholic beverage being introduced in test markets.
Fallon also handles advertising for Stroh's Augsburger beer brand.
Billings were not disclosed.


Secret Zulu Land Transfer Poses First Crisis for Mandela
President Nelson Mandela faced -- and, for now, finessed -- the first crisis of his new unity Government today: a secretive agreement in which the outgoing Government transferred vast swaths of land to the Zulu king two days before a new Constitution formally ended white rule.
The unorthodox land deal may have been the inducement that persuaded the Zulu King and the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party to end a potentially calamitous election boycott, allowing the April vote to pass without the violence many had feared.


On My Mind; The Waldheim File
In 1948, the United States representative to the U.N.
War Crimes Commission voted to list Kurt Waldheim as an "A" suspect -- the most serious category -- for his work in Yugoslavia as an Austrian officer during World War II.
The case vanished.
No connection ever seemed to be made with the Waldheim fast rising in the Austrian Foreign Ministry.


Review/Television; A Gold-Mining Deal Bears a Closer Look
Last week Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt reluctantly signed away billions of dollars worth of public lands to a gold-mining company.
He called the sale, nearly 2,000 acres in Nevada for $5 an acre, "the biggest gold heist since the days of Butch Cassidy."
As tonight's edition of "Frontline" explains, Mr.
Babbitt's hand was forced by an 1872 law that entitles mining interests to buy public land cheap and exploit it without paying royalties to the Government.
Robert Krulwich, the evening's reporter, notes that with gold now at about $380 an ounce, the sale was a much better deal for the mining company than for the taxpayer.


Chess
Gary Kasparov had his troubles, but he came through on Thursday to win the Max Euwe Memorial Tournament in Amsterdam anyway.
While Kasparov was drawing his last-round game with Nigel Short of England to achieve a 4-2 score in this elite double-round competition, which was sponsored by the Verenigde Spaarbank to honor the Netherlands' former world champion, his leading rival, Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine, went astray and lost an even endgame against Jan Timman of the Netherlands.
That broke the tie: Kasparov got the $8.000 first prize; Ivanchuk, at 3 1/2-2 1/2, came in second.
Timman was fourth at 2 1/2-3 1/2 and Short last with 2-4.


Books of The Times; In the Nixon White House, Day by Day
The Haldeman Diaries  Inside the Nixon White House  By H. R. Haldeman  Illustrated.
Introduction and afterword by Stephen E. Ambrose. 698 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $27.50
With his death last month, Richard M. Nixon seemed to achieve the rehabilitation in the nation's memory that he had sought with such persistence for so long.
The former President, who left office in disgrace in 1974, was eulogized as a visionary foreign-policy maker who had helped to end the cold war.
He was praised for his doggedness, his determination, his political savvy.
Forgotten (or at least played down) was the Other Nixon, the Nixon of Watergate and the Cambodia bombings, the Nixon who kept an enemies list and turned red-baiting into a ferocious campaign tactic.
President Clinton hailed "the significant value of his contributions to our nation" and said he hoped Nixon "left us with enough of his wisdom to guide us safely into the next century."


Farewell to a Woman Of Strength and Grace
The family and friends of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis gathered yesterday morning in a Manhattan church, and many hundreds of others thronged outside, to bid farewell to the woman they remembered with love and admiration for restoring their pride and hope at one of the country's bleakest moments.
As housekeepers watched from the windows of Park Avenue apartments and helicopters hovered against a bright blue sky, inside the church those closest to the former First Lady remembered her for her love of words, "her spirit of adventure" and her devotion to her family.


Ready or Not, Pacers Invade Hoosierville
Eric Anderson draws a crowd in Indianapolis.
Patrick Ewing is a 7-foot center for Anderson's pro team, the Knicks.
True story, happened last season, according to John Cirillo, the Knicks' vice president of public relations.


Thomas to Help Run New Toronto Team
Isiah Thomas, who retired earlier this month from the Detroit Pistons, is expected to be named today as vice president of basketball operations for the Toronto Raptors expansion franchise.
According to one of Thomas's business associates, Thomas will also be given minority ownership in the Toronto franchise, which will begin play in the 1995-96 season.
Thomas, one of the game's all-time-great point guards, retired at age 33 after a 13-year career during which he made 12 All-Star teams and led the Pistons to National Basketball Association titles in 1989 and 1990.


We Can't Stop Drunk Driving Without Alcoholism Treatment
To the Editor:
Neither "The Law and Murderous Drivers" (editorial, May 6) nor any of the coverage we have seen on the tragic killing of three people in one family by a drunk driver on Long Island mentions the importance of addressing the underlying problem -- alcoholism.
Attempting to rely solely on drunk driving penalties without treating the alcoholism that causes so many violations is like trying to reduce lung cancer without doing anything about smoking.


With a Little Practice, Gooden Looking Good
Dwight Gooden was fluid on the mound tonight and he even added a run-scoring single to his night's work.
The pitching was only in batting practice, however, and Gooden's hit came in an exhibition game against the Mets' Class AAA farm club, the Norfolk Tides.
Still, they were signs that the Mets, who lost, 3-2, before a paying crowd of 10,760 at Harbor Park, are that much closer to getting their ace back.


Review/Fashion; Diverse Designers Give A Special Spin to Furs
From Karl Lagerfeld and Valentino in Europe to Oscar de la Renta, Marc Jacobs and Mary McFadden in this country, fashion designers are giving a special spin to fall furs.
With many manufacturers paying attention to furs other than mink, the fashion picture is more varied than usual.
Color, soft details like tiered effects, and cozy hoods for extra warmth all play a part in extending the boundaries.
But it was the spirit of each designer that made a diversified assembly of furs seem memorable in the shows last week in New York.


Purebred Horse Unknown to West Is Reported in Highlands of Tibet
LONG before the Mongolians swept into China, the horsemen of Tibet and their magnificent mounts had a place in Chinese historical writings.
Now an anthropologist and explorer from France has found what he believes to be descendants of those Tibetan horses in Nangchen, a remote region in northeast Tibet that straddles the Chinese border.


Stephen Brener, 68, Real-Estate Broker For Hotel Industry
Stephen Walter Brener, a leading Manhattan-based expert, consultant and broker in hotel and motel real estate, died on Wednesday while on vacation in Chaumont-sur-Tharonne, France.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Healthy or Not, Rangers Are Hurting
Are they injured?
Are they hurt?


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE TENNIS  U.S.C. and Stanford in N.C.A.A.
Final  It will be an all-Pac-10 final in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I men's championship after Southern California and Stanford won semifinal matches yesterday at Notre Dame.
Top-seeded U.S.C. (21-3), the defending national champion, advanced to the final with a 4-0 defeat of Mississippi State (21-7).
The Cardinal (24-2) advanced with a 4-0 victory over U.C.L.A. (22-6).
For U.S.C., the key turned out to be winning the doubles point.
U.S.C.
Coach Dick Leach said, "We have won 20 of 22 doubles points this year; we expect to win that point." The winning doubles point was important for Stanford, too, as Vimal Patel and Grant Elliott rallied for a 9-7 victory to clinch the point.  (AP)


Fast Food Stirs Fear For Future
NINE miles beyond the end of the expressway, amid a patchwork of farms and tract homes, you come to one of the few remaining places on Long Island where you cannot buy a Whopper.
This is the land that fast food forgot, the edge of the suburban sprawl that spreads west to New York City.
Out here the slogan "Have it your way" means ordering a deluxe special medium rare at a diner or flipping some burgers on the grill in the back yard.


Top Managers Are Out at Kurzweil
Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc. yesterday announced the resignation of nearly its entire senior management team after the company discovered questionable transactions on its books.
Kurzweil, a maker of automated speech-recognition systems aimed at the medical market, said it had discovered "the existence of a number of significant transactions for which revenues were recognized but which do not appear to have been bona fide transactions." The company announced last month that it was delaying the reporting of its fourth-quarter earnings, prompting several shareholder lawsuits.


WHITE HOUSE GETS PROGRESS REPORT ON RIGHTS IN CHINA
After months of debate over linking China's human rights performance to its trade privileges, Secretary of State Warren Christopher today offered President Clinton an accounting of China's record that effectively provided the legal argument for renewing the trade benefits, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Clinton, in an executive order last year, spelled out the human- rights conditions for the renewal, two of which are mandatory.
Mr.
Christopher told the President today that China had met those two requirements: cooperation on ending the export of prison-made goods to the United States and allowing close family members of certain dissidents to leave the country.


Revamped Pacers Won't Be Pushovers As Knicks Move On
Most people expected the Indiana Pacers to be on vacation by now.
Instead, they are the one team left standing between the Knicks and the National Basketball Association finals.
On Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks and Pacers will begin their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference championship series, a matchup that was unexpected when the playoffs began.
This is the Pacers' first appearance in the conference finals, and until this season, they had never won an N.B.A. playoff series.


Body of Slain 3-Year-Old Girl May Have Been in a Refrigerator
The body of a 3-year-old girl abducted and slain while visiting her aunt's home here May 14 may have been stored in a refrigerator after she was killed, law-enforcement officials said today.
The Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor, said the body did not bear signs of decomposition consistent with someone who had been dead for nearly a week.


Paying for Medical Research Cuts Health Costs
To the Editor:
The newly unveiled health care plan of Senator Edward M. Kennedy (front page, May 10), in addition to insuring small business protection and broadening individual choice of insurance, recognizes how uncured illness underlies health care costs.


Crownx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


James A. Shannon, 89, Is Dead; Ex-Director of Health Institutes
Dr.
James Augustine Shannon, a medical investigator and educator who was director of the National Institutes of Health from 1955 to 1968, died on Friday at the Church Home in Baltimore.
He was 89.
The cause was a ruptured aortic aneurysm, according to the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Segreta  Alice Tully Hall
Musica Segreta, an invitingly named period-instrument ensemble from Buenos Aires, presented a patchwork of obscure, alluring works on Saturday evening.
Most of the music was written in the 18th century by composers who worked in Latin America, either in the Jesuit missions or in the cities.
The European exceptions either referred to Latin America or its mythology -- excerpts from Graun's "Montezuma" and Provenzale's "Schiavo di sua Moglie," an opera about an Amazon queen -- or were found in mission archives.


Baseball Is Caught Not Stealing This Season
Rickey Henderson hasn't led the American League in stolen bases for two seasons, but his presence on the disabled list is symbolic.
The stolen base seems to be there with him.
With only three steals in seven attempts, Henderson is part of the reason for the noticeable reduction in stolen bases this season.
Age and a sore left knee have slowed Henderson's pace, but what's everyone else's excuse?


Classical Music in Review
Siegmeister Tribute  Ethical Culture Society
Elie Siegmeister, an American composer who died in 1991, would have been 85 this year.
Friends and colleagues remembered him on Sunday afternoon with a recital of his music.
There were pieces for the piano, duo sonatas with violin and with flute, and a series of songs that signaled Siegmeister's close relationship to the poetry of Langston Hughes.


Steve Scott to Undergo Cancer Surgery
STEVE SCOTT, the American record holder in the mile, has said he recently had his cancerous left testicle removed and will enter a hospital in San Diego today for additional surgery.
Scott, 38, said he noticed something was wrong with his testicle when he was preparing for a vasectomy late last month.
Following tests and X-rays, the testicle was removed.


APS Holding Corp.(APSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 25


Ghulam Farid Sabri, Pakistani Singer
Ghulam Farid Sabri, a noted Pakistani singer of centuries-old devotional music, called Qawwali, in praise of the saints of Sufism, the principal mystical extension of Islam, died on April 5 in Karachi, Pakistan.
He was in his mid-60's..
Mr.
Sabri grew up in Gwalior, in central India, in a musical family that moved to Karachi while he was a teen-ager.
There he and his younger brother, Maqbool Ahmed Sabri, received advanced instruction in singing.


Rangers Suddenly Find Their Odds Are 1940 to 1
What's next for this Rangers-Devils series, now that the New York team is one defeat from elimination and the New Jersey team is one victory from the Stanley Cup finals?
What new twists and turns of plot are to come in this succession of mini-dramas, every other night, with one team that was riding high in April about to be shot down in May?
Following New Jersey's 4-1 triumph, a thorough and methodical thumping by a poised team, the New Yorkers are one defeat away from elimination and the Devils are one victory short of battling either Vancouver or Toronto for the Stanley Cup, something the Rangers have not captured since 1940.
The four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals resume tomorrow night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, with the Devils leading by 3 games to 2.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.31
4.21
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.23
4.13
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.53
3.19
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.18
7.01
6.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.30
7.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.32
8.20
7.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.37
5.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


El Paso Electric Co.(ELPAQ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TAKES 8 FROM CBS
In a sweeping realignment of the television industry, Fox Inc. announced yesterday that it would form a new alliance with a broadcast station group that would result in the defection of eight important CBS stations to Fox.
CBS, which had already seen Fox steal away the rights to broadcast National Football League games that CBS had held for four decades, now faces the further humbling exercise of having to seek new -- and probably weaker -- affiliates in many of the nation's biggest cities, including Dallas, Detroit, Cleveland and Atlanta.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page picture caption yesterday about the Knicks' playoff victory over the Chicago Bulls reversed the team memberships of two players in some copies.
In most copies Patrick Ewing was correctly described as a Knick and Pete Myers as a Bull.


Rangers Lead, at the Bank
Many perceive the Rangers-Devils series as a match between the haves and the have-nots.
Along with fan following and media attention, the players' salaries fit this description.
Consider the total salaries of the 20 players who dressed for each team in the Devils' 4-1 victory last night.
The Rangers' wages totaled $16.542 million, an average of $827,100 per man.
The Devils' total was $10.526 million, an average of $526,298 per man.


What Use to Make Of China Leverage
To the Editor:
I was in China during the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989 and am certainly as concerned about human rights there as anyone.


Paul J. Goldin, Marketing Executive, 62
Paul J. Goldin, a former statistics professor who parlayed his son's interest in baseball cards into Score Board Inc., a multimillion-dollar marketing company specializing in sports collectibles, died on Saturday at West Jersey Hospital in Voorhees, N.J.
He was 62.
The cause of death was a heart attack, the family said.


By Design; The Dressiest Sneakers
A new brand of sneakers is giving Adidas and Reebok a run for their money among the fashion cognoscenti.
They're called Chipies, they're made in France and they come in high-visibility silver leather, red patent or black patent, trimmed with white reflective material.
"I think they'll be the status sneakers of the summer," said Kalman Ruttenstein, vice president for fashion direction at Bloomingdale's.
"Last fall the kids in London were wearing the silver. Now, I see the models wearing them."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP., Birmingham, Ala., announced that its American Steel and Wire division would build a $75 million rolling steel mill to double the unit's production to about 1.1 million tons annually.
FIRST FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CORP., Atlanta, an information systems concern, has signed an agreement to buy AT&amp;T Corp.'s Information Imaging Systems division, a provider of microfilm, computer processing and related printing and imaging services.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Director of 'Maverick' Basks In the Glory of a Weekend Hit
Virtually everyone predicted that "Maverick" would open strongly over the weekend.
Well, everyone except Richard Donner.
Mr.
Donner, the director of the droll western and one of the most successful film makers in town, views the opening of each of his movies with so much anxiety that he flees Hollywood and goes salmon fishing.


Chinese Military's Business Empire Puts Profits Into Commerce, Not Arms
Ever since the People's Liberation Army went into business more than a decade ago, Western intelligence agencies have been concerned that profits from its vast commercial enterprises would go toward the purchase of tanks, missiles and fighter aircraft.
But over the last two years, the agencies have come to a new conclusion: China's military enterprises are pyramiding their successes, plowing profits into new and bigger commercial enterprises, hotels, truck and shipping companies -- even discos.


Fed Disclosure Is Sought
In another move to force the Federal Reserve to become more open about its policies, the chairman of the House Banking Committee, with the support of the panel's ranking Republican, is seeking more information about efforts to raise or lower the value of the dollar in international markets.
A bill introduced today would require the Fed's chairman to explain the central bank's views on the dollar in his semiannual appearances before the House and Senate Banking committees to discuss monetary policy.
The bill would also require the Treasury Secretary to provide a semiannual report on the Administration's policies on the dollar and on any lines of credit or other deals to prop up another country's currency.


Observer; Life in Theme World
Ours is a theme family.
We put it in years ago after Disney first demonstrated the glory of the theme park.
"America is going theme in a big way," the salesman said, showing mock-ups of the wife and children being offered at amazingly low prices.
Theme things were the new frontier of entertainment, and what was America all about, if not entertainment?
Although I had been brought up in a real family and enjoyed it now and then, often it really hadn't been that much fun.


Mother's Milk Found to Be Potent Cocktail Of Hormones
AS scientists lately have struggled to learn exactly what human milk is made of, the list of ingredients has gotten so long that breast-feeding infants should be grateful their packages come without a food label.
Beyond the proteins, minerals, vitamins, fats and sugars needed for nourishment, there are antibodies in milk to help fend off infection during the early months, when the baby's own immune system is still too weak to work; growth factors thought to help in tissue development and maturation; and an abundance of hormones, neuropeptides and natural opioids that may subtly shape the newborn's brain and behavior.


Kohl's Choice Is Named German President
Chancellor Helmut Kohl won an important political victory today when a specially constituted assembly chose his candidate, Roman Herzog, Chief Justice of Germany's highest court, to be the next German President.
Mr.
Herzog is to take office on July 1, replacing Richard von Weizsacker, who after two five-year terms was ineligible for re-election.


PHH Corp.(PHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Toddler's Body Is Found in Bag
The body of a toddler was found in a plastic bag last night in his family's home in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, the police and family members said.
The mother's landlady, who said she is also a relative, said she and another family member found the child, Joseph Padgett, after becoming concerned about not seeing him recently.
She said he was 16 months old; the police gave his age as 18 months.


Bulgari and Chanel In Perfume Venture
Two marketers and retailers of luxury goods, the Bulgari Corporation of America and Chanel Inc., said yesterday that they had teamed up to introduce a women's perfume in North America.
Bulgari Parfums U.S.A. will handle the distribution of the new scent, called Bulgari, while Fragrances Exclusive Inc., a unit of Chanel, will handle sales, merchandising and distribution.
It will be sold in Bulgari's eight American stores as well as in specialty stores.


Stray Shots Kill Woman in Crown Hts.
Tessa Warren was getting ready for her weekly Sunday dinner with her family when young men who the police said were celebrating the Knicks' playoff victory began firing shots in the air outside her third-floor apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
As terrifying as the gunfire was, it was not unusual.
Residents of Mrs.
Warren's neighborhood had learned to fall to their apartment floors or duck behind parked cars when gunfire erupted on the streets.


Upper Deck Moves Account In-House
The Upper Deck Company said yesterday that it had moved its account in-house after almost two years at Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $8.5 million.


Market Place; Investors wary of what Tenneco might do with a pile of cash.
TENNECO INC.'S plan to sell to the public a 35 percent stake in its J. I. Case farm and construction equipment division has been praised by Wall Street analysts.
Some of them are so bullish about the conglomerate's prospects that they have upgraded their recommendations.
But you cannot see much of the optimism in the recent performance of Tenneco shares.
In the weeks after the April 26 announcement of a public offering of Case stock, Tenneco shares fell sharply, although they have risen slightly in recent days.
The shares closed yesterday at $47.875, up 62.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange, but down from $51.75 on the day of the announcement and from the 52-week high of $58.75.


A.M.A. and Insurers Clash Over Restrictions on Doctors
A long-running dispute between doctors and insurance companies boiled over today as the American Medical Association joined a liberal Democratic senator in proposing legislation to regulate the techniques used by insurers to control health costs.
Dr.
Lonnie R. Bristow, the chairman of the medical association, said doctors and patients both suffered when insurers denied payment for medically necessary services and excluded competent doctors from their health care networks.


Mestek Inc.(MCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S., Japan Back Talks On Trade
After four days of talks, American and Japanese trade experts reached broad agreement today on a new format to revive their stalled negotiations intended to open Japan's closed markets to more imports from abroad, American officials said.
Barring any last-minute hitches, the two sides will announce the new negotiating format Tuesday.


G.O.P. Backs a Legislator to Oppose Cuomo
Solidifying his position as the front-runner for the Republican gubernatorial nomination, State Senator George E. Pataki won an overwhelming majority of the vote at the Republican State Convention yesterday and became the only candidate with a guaranteed spot on the Sept. 13 New York primary ballot.
Mr.
Pataki's main rival, Herbert London, fell just short of the 25 percent of the vote required to earn an automatic spot on the ballot.
He said he would try to get on the ballot by collecting signatures on nominating petitions this summer, an arduous and expensive task that is often subject to court challenge.
Three other Republican candidates also said they were considering petition efforts.


Israel Demands Arafat Reaffirm Peace Accord
After new disclosures that raised questions here about Yasir Arafat's willingness to keep his word, Israel demanded today that the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization reaffirm his commitment to the peace agreement he and the Israelis have struck.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said through a spokesman that he wanted a statement of commitment from Mr.
Arafat himself.
A leading Cabinet minister warned that "if the crisis of trust continues," Palestinian self-rule would not go beyond the test phase just begun in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Tech Data Corp.(TECD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Harris Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
New Format in Trade Talks
U.S. and Japanese trade experts reached agreement on a new format to revive stalled negotiations on opening Japan's markets.
Page D1.
Tobacco Industry Sued
The State of Mississippi sued the tobacco industry seeking reimbursement for its expenses in medical treatment for smokers.
Page A12.
Riches in Mother's Milk
Researchers are gaining a new appreciation of the variety of hormones and antibodies that are found in breast milk.
Science Times, page C1.
Rangers Are At the Brink
The Devils defeated the Rangers, 4-1, and can clinch a berth in the Stanley Cup finals with a victory tomorrow in New Jersey.
Page B9.
Rockets Win Opener
Hakeem Olajuwon scored 31 points to lead the Houston Rockets over the the Utah Jazz, 100-88, in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals.
Page B11.


They're Off! Would-Be Race Callers Share a Dream
It was the last class on test day at the Meadowlands Race Callers Fantasy Camp.
Juggling binoculars, programs and tape recorders, 10 students were getting last-minute tips from their instructor before the final exam.
"Remember to speak clearly and have some expression in your voices," said Ken Warkentin, the fantasy class instructor and an announcer at the track.
"You can worry about establishing a rhythm later on."


Equitable Being Sued By Ex-Agent
The Equitable Life Assurance Society and the head of its Miami office have been accused by a former agent of attracting agents with false promises and teaching them to sell life insurance through misleading statements to potential customers.
The former agent, Mark K. Mason, made the accusations in a lawsuit filed earlier this month in a state court in Miami.
Mr.
Mason, 31, worked for the Suquet/Musibay Agency, which represents Equitable, for about 10 months until he resigned in late April.


Classical Music in Review
I Cantori di New York  Church of St. Luke's-in-the-Fields
With 10 seasons behind it, I Cantori has become one of the most finely blended chamber choirs in New York.
The group, which has been directed by Mark Shapiro since 1991, was heard at its best on Sunday evening, when it closed its season with a program of modern American works.


Mookie Wilson Honored for Charity Work
MOOKIE WILSON, the former Mets outfielder, will be honored by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center with a benefit dinner at Mickey Mantle's restaurant in Manhattan on June 6.
Wilson, a favorite of patients at the center's pediatrics ward, will receive the hospital's Award of Courage for his charitable work at the center.
An auction will also be held at the dinner, benefiting the center's surgical department.
Participants will be able to bid on various sports memorabilia, such as autographed baseballs, and other sports-related prizes, such as private hitting instructions from Wilson, and a chance to be a ball boy for the Knicks.
Tickets are available from Sloan-Kettering at (212) 639-3527.


Medals of Honor for Two Killed in Somalia


Patterns
For Calvin Klein, a Coup
Calvin Klein has hired Gabriella Forte, one of Italy's most powerful fashion executives, to be the president and the chief executive of Calvin Klein Inc.
Ms.
Forte, who had been executive vice president of Giorgio Armani and head of its United States operations, was so closely linked to Giorgio Armani that she often spoke for him in the first person.
As Mr.
Armani's right-hand woman, she personified the tough and articulate buffer needed by creative personalities whose names are on labels.


Donaldson Co.(DCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


National Urban League Names a President
The National Urban League yesterday named Hugh B. Price, a vice president of the Ford Foundation and a widely known commentator on social issues, to be its president and chief executive.
"This is like being asked to come to the mountaintop for me," Mr.
Price said in an interview.
"When you've spent a career relating to social justice and equal opportunity, this is the pinnacle."


Paying for Medical Research Cuts Health Costs; Build on Medicare
To the Editor:
"Mr. Kennedy's Health Compromise" (editorial, May 11) states that Senator Edward M. Kennedy has gone a long way in proposing a useful health care compromise that could bridge differences between President Clinton and his critics.


Owners Propose Givebacks by Players
Major league owners proposed a series of givebacks on non-economic issues yesterday, prompting DONALD FEHR, the head of the players' union, to say management doesn't want an agreement.
"There are a whole series of player benefits that have been negotiated over the last 20 years that they want to restrict or eliminate," Fehr said after a 3 1/2-hour session at an airport hotel in Los Angeles, the second meeting between the sides in five days.


Another Big Merger in Health Care
The Columbia/ HCA Healthcare Corporation, which has already merged and acquired its way into becoming the world's largest profit-making hospital chain, agreed today to buy Medical Care America Inc., the largest chain of surgery centers, for about $850 million in stock.
The planned acquisition demonstrates how cost-control efforts already under way and the prospect of a new national health plan are propelling the rapid consolidation of the medical industry.


Machines With Cachet Get Even More
LAST week the International Business Machines Corporation introduced improved editions of the sleek, black laptop computers it calls Thinkpads.
After years of fumbling, I.B.M. has become very serious about its portable machines.
How serious?
The cover of the company's 1993 annual report displays the words of I.B.M.'s chairman, Louis Gerstner, or his ghostwriter on the screen of a Thinkpad 750c.
On the biggest color laptop display in the business, Mr.
Gerstner's musings are oddly featured in green-on-black lettering reminiscent of an ancient dumb terminal.
Perhaps it's a homage to the old I.B.M.


We Can't Stop Drunk Driving Without Alcoholism Treatment; Toughen Suspension
To the Editor:
"The Law and Murderous Drivers" (editorial, May 6) does not go far enough.
To prevent repetition of the tragedy that befell the Vaccarello family, we must keep suspended drivers from access to motor vehicles during their suspension.


Westchester Loses Bid to Force Cutting of Trees Near Airport
Westchester County today lost yet another bid to force four Connecticut landowners and the Town of Greenwich to cut down trees that the county says interfere with landings at the Westchester County Airport.
But county officials said they would fight on.
In a decision announced today, the United States Supreme Court, without comment, let stand a Connecticut State Supreme Court ruling that blocked Westchester County's attempt to obtain an easement to trim or remove the trees.


Lymphomas Are on the Rise in U.S., and No One Knows Why
NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA, the cancer of the immune system that caused Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' death last week, is one of the fastest rising cancers in the United States, and no one knows precisely why.
Experts are stymied about why this should be.
But three factors can explain part of the overall rise.
One is H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, which somehow increases the risk of lymphoma.
A second is the growing number of people with transplanted organs, who are at increased risk for developing lymphoma because of the immunosuppressant drugs used to prevent rejection of donated organs.
A third is improved diagnostic techniques.


U.S. Investigating Report That Guards Beat Inmate
Federal prosecutors are investigating an incident at the Westchester County Jail in November in which an inmate said he was beaten by several guards while handcuffed, law-enforcement officials said today.
The incident was videotaped by an officer, which jail officials said was standard procedure.
In a separate case, the inmate, Kenneth DeGraffenreidt, 27, was arraigned this month on charges that he had held several guards hostage during an uprising at the jail on Aug. 15.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Rule Repeat Offenders Can't Challenge 'Career-Criminal' Sentences
In a decision that has implications for the "three strikes and you're out" provision in the crime bill before Congress, the Supreme Court ruled today that Federal defendants who face stiff minimum sentences as repeat offenders cannot ordinarily challenge the validity of the earlier convictions that place them in the "career criminal" category of a 1984 sentencing law.
Defendants have a constitutional right to raise new challenges only to those convictions obtained in violation of the right to counsel, the Court ruled in a 6-to-3 opinion by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Failure to appoint a lawyer for an indigent defendant is a "unique constitutional defect" that should be treated differently from other errors at trial, the majority said.


Young Set Designers Show Their Stuff
The official title is the Stage Design Portfolio Review, but in the theater world the event is commonly known as Ming's Clambake.
Ming refers to Ming Cho Lee, the dean of American set designers; clambake refers to his autonomy.
He is the originator and principal benefactor of this annual exhibition of the work of student designers.
For Mr.
Lee, who is 63, it is a case of a man at the top of his profession taking the time and money to reinvest himself in emerging artists.
Last weekend, 45 graduating students from 11 universities exhibited their drawings, scale models and photographs in the Main Gallery of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, at Lincoln Center.
It was a splendiferous showcase and movable colloquium, with scores of the most important figures in theatrical design acting as respondents: John Conklin, Tony Walton, Adrianne Lobel, Santo Loquasto, Mr.
Lee himself and many more.
Together with directors, they sampled the creativity of a new generation of scenic, costume and lighting designers.


Guokas Not Lighting Up Scoreboard
Each time a coach who has been fired or has resigned becomes a TV analyst, you wonder if he will be John Madden or Bill Walsh?
Hubie Brown or Pat Riley?
Will he be candid? Show personality? Bring humor? Offer deep insights?


Sports of The Times; Miller And Mouth Vs. Starks
SWEET, cuddly Reggie Miller, the man who John Starks punched in the mouth with his head last year, is coming to town again.
Lovable Reggie Miller, who whispers such sweet nothings into the other players' ears that he makes their thumbs quiver for his throat, has got his wish.
"I want the Knicks," he said last week, as he waited for the outcome of the Knicks-Bulls series.
And so Miller, who is also the ace of the Pacers, leads his team to the Garden for Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals.


Jolene R. Marion, Lawyer, 53
Jolene R. Marion, a New York lawyer who played a prominent role in the animal-rights movement, died on Sunday at the Queens home of a friend, Marilyn Mason.
She was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.


Kings Pick a New General Manager
The Los Angeles Kings reached into the Ontario Hockey League for a new general manager, SAM McMASTER, yesterday.
McMaster, with a reputation for spotting raw talent, succeeds NICK BEVERLEY in a continuing shake-up of the team's front office.
The moves follow a disastrous season in which the Kings missed the playoffs after making the Stanley Cup finals a year ago. (AP)


Whitman Asks for Time To Solve School Aid Gap
The Whitman Administration today asked the New Jersey Supreme Court to give the Governor a chance to solve the problems that have created financial and academic gaps between rich and poor districts.
But Benjamin Clarke, an assistant Attorney General, could offer no insights into what the Governor or Republican legislative leaders had in mind to resolve the dispute about financing that has perplexed the state's leaders for two decades.


Trade Center Bombers Get Prison Terms of 240 Years
The four men convicted of bombing the World Trade Center were sentenced yesterday to prison terms that assure they will remain in custody for the rest of their lives.
To do that, Judge Kevin T. Duffy imposed the extraordinary sentence of 240 years on each of the men -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- and said they would have no possibility of parole.
The sentence means that unless the rules of the court change or the verdicts are reversed on appeal, there is virtually no chance that any of them will ever spend another day free.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  IN GAZA'S FREEDOM, SIMPLE JOYS  Perhaps the most dramatic measure of the first week of self-rule in Gaza has been the sudden normalcy in Palestinians' lives: barbecuing at the beach, leaving home without I.D. cards and chatting in coffee shops long past the old curfew.
A1  EUROPEANS SKIRTING RWANDA  Western Europeans are increasingly horrified by the slaughter in Rwanda, but their governments are not sending peacekeepers troops there.
In a conflict between their humanitarian impulses and cold calculation of national interest, realpolitik is winning.
A1


School Board Is Undergoing A Reshaping
New York City's borough presidents have begun reshaping the Board of Education in a way that will force Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to deal with the Queens or Brooklyn presidents to maintain his majority control.
The new seven-member board that will take office July 1 will most likely continue the 4-3 division that has characterized board proceedings for two years, officials and political consultants said.


Brazil: Prima Donna Image Lurks
With a World Cup soccer team composed of stars drawn from club teams throughout the world, Brazilians often lament that, every four hours, their national team enters the field "de salto alto" -- on high heels.
Although four days of practice left no heel marks on the meticulously groomed playing fields of the Brazilian Soccer Federation in this mountain resort, off-field action indicates that Brazil's team, one of the world's highest ranked, once again suffers from the prima donna problem.


Castro Sofa Heiress Selected By G.O.P. for Moynihan Race
New York State's Republican Party yesterday selected Bernadette Castro, whose family manufactured convertible sofas, to run for the United States Senate against the three-term Democratic incumbent, Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
At their convention in Manhattan, the Republicans also lined up behind a candidate for lieutenant governor: Elizabeth P. McCaughey, an academic whose articles criticizing the Clinton Administration's health-care plan drew a storm of protest from the White House earlier this year.


Microsoft and Rogers Plan Interactive Cable Venture
The Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent with Rogers Cablesystems Ltd., Canada's largest cable television company, to provide software for an interactive cable system that will be deployed in the first half of 1996.
The agreement is a significant victory for Microsoft, which had been negotiating with big cable and telephone companies for more than a year to try to stake out its turf in an emerging national system to provide digital video, home shopping and other interactive services through telephone and cable networks.


No Headline
"Your intention was to kill, and you did. You didn't cause as much havoc as you intended, but you did kill." JUDGE KEVIN T. DUFFY, as he passed sentence in the World Trade Center bombing.  [ B4:3. ]


Bowe Names Donald His Foe for July
Opponent No. 2 in RIDDICK BOWE's triad of monthly fights surfaced yesterday: LARRY DONALD, undefeated, 27 years old, and a wise guy.
Bowe, the former heavyweight champion, will face Donald at Hollywood Park, the horse track outside of Los Angeles, on July 15.
The bout comes barely a month after Bowe returns by facing BUSTER MATHIS JR., and a month before he meets another opponent in August.
Bowe said he was working harder rather than taking it easier because the fights are so close together.
He said he weighed 248 pounds and expected to come in at 240 "for all of them."


Offshore Pipelines Inc.(OFP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Pacers Just Need Time, But It's Already Fleeting
The Indiana Pacers had jumped all over the Knicks, up by 8-0 at the start and clicking toward an early rout, when all of a sudden the Pacers last night began playing like what they are: first-time entrants in a big-time show.
They have never advanced this far in the National Basketball Association playoffs.
They have battled adversity this season but they have not trudged through the same trenches the Knicks have.
The Knicks had just buried a demon by dumping the Chicago Bulls in seven games, but it was the Knicks' fourth try after three straight years of losses to Chicago.


AT LUNCH WITH: Calvin and Alice Trillin; Derailing the Gravy Train
BITING into a bulky oyster po' boy with plump pieces of oyster overflowing from the side, Calvin Trillin was trying to explain himself, in case anyone at the table was a vegetarian.
"Oysters don't believe in God," he said.
"Everybody knows that."
Mr.
Trillin (his friends call him Bud) sat shoulder-to-shoulder with his wife, Alice, perhaps best known to the public as the title character from "Alice, Let's Eat," the second volume in Mr.
Trillin's three-part culinary and cultural tour through America.
It was an early April day with inklings of spring.
They had left their sunny brownstone in Greenwich Village for a nearby restaurant called Home, where they were tucking into the oyster po' boy (Mr. Trillin) and the homemade chicken noodle soup and a salad with goat cheese (Alice, who really can't be thought of by any other name).


Fox TV Deal Seems to Face Few Official Barriers
Fox Inc., vying to build a television network that rivals the clout of ABC, NBC and CBS, faces surprisingly few regulatory obstacles in its $500 million deal to sign up 12 big-city stations as part of its network.
Officials at the Federal Communications Commission said today that the deal did not appear to run afoul of regulations that prohibit a company from owning more than 12 stations, even though Fox could end up with an ownership interest in more than 20 stations if it consummates an agreement with the New World Communications Group Inc.


Smokers Have Higher Breast Cancer Death Risk
WOMEN who smoke face an increased risk of dying of breast cancer, according to a recently published study.
The study, which does not necessarily mean that smoking causes breast cancer, is nonetheless the first to link cigarette smoking to the second most common cancer killer of American women.
The leading killer, lung cancer, is widely recognized as being due almost entirely to smoking.
The breast cancer study, conducted among more than 600,000 women who were initially cancer-free and who were followed for six years, found that smokers were 25 percent more likely than nonsmokers and former smokers to die of breast cancer.
Furthermore, the more cigarettes a woman smoked and the longer she had smoked, the greater her risk.
Those who smoked two packs or more a day, for example, were 75 percent more likely to develop fatal breast cancer than were nonsmokers.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Kestner and Miller Share Dodge Lead  Darrell Kestner and Jim Miller both fired bogey-free, four-under-par rounds of 61 yesterday to lead the $125,000 Dodge Open Charity Classic after the first round at Rockaway River Country Club in Denville, N.J.
Mike Laudien, Mark Mielke and a former champion, Billy Ziobro, were two shots back on the par-65, 16-hole layout, shortened from the regulation par 72 due to weather-related delays in construction that left the 10th and 11th holes unplayable.
The defending champion, Bruce Zabriski, led a group of eight golfers three shots back.
BOXING  Morrison Wins Decision Over Griffin
Tommy Morrison (41-2) knocked down Sherman Griffin (14-3) in the first round and rolled to a 10-round unanimous decision last night in a heavyweight bout at Tulsa, Okla.
Two judges scored it 98-91 and the third had 97-92. (AP)


Hungary Schools Seeking Past Glory
When cigarette smoking among the students at a local high school spun out of control, in much the way it often does in the United States, the school administration called a referendum, inviting students and parents to vote.
Should 18-year-olds be allowed to smoke?
Should those over 16 be allowed to smoke with parental consent?
The vote was yes to the 18-year-olds and no to the younger students.
Such a vote would not have been unusual in many American schools.
But for Hungary, it was revolutionary.


Devils Fear Building Too Much Confidence
Three victories in the playoffs over the Rangers after losing all six games to them in the regular season have put the Devils in a different frame of mind in the late stages of the Eastern Conference final series between the archrivals.
"Our confidence has built from the start of the series," Devils defenseman Ken Daneyko said today.
"Some of us weren't so sure because we beat them in overtime in that first game, but the way we played Game 4 and Game 5 has given us a lot more confidence."


The Tramp Dined Out To Wind Up in Jail Too; O. Henry Was First
To the Editor:
"Three months on the Island was what his soul craved. . . . There were many easy ways of doing this. The pleasantest was to dine luxuriously at some expensive restaurant; and then, after declaring insolvency, be handed over quietly and without uproar to a policeman. An accommodating magistrate would do the rest."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Called up Greg Litton, infielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Sent Luis Ortiz, third baseman, to Pawtucket.
National League
NL -- Suspended John Smoltz, Atlanta Braves pitcher, for eight games and fined him an undisclosed amount for throwing at John Cangelosi of the New York Mets during a game May 14, and suspended Cangelosi for four games and fined him an undisclosed amount for charging the mound.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
TORONTO RAPTORS -- Named Isiah Thomas vice president.
Continental Basketball Association
CBA -- Announced that the La Crosse Catbirds have been purchased by Robert W. Murphy Jr. and will move to Pittsburgh for the 1994-95 season.
Football  National Football League
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Re-signed Michael Timpson, wide receiver.
Canadian Footbal League
SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Traded Emanuel King, defensive end, to the Winnipeg Blue Bombers for George Bethune, defensive end.
Hockey  National Hockey League
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Fired Pierre Page, coach and general manager.
Named Pierre Lacroix general manager.
East Coast Hockey League
FORT WORTH FIRE -- Named Matt Van Hala director of marketing; Mike Litzelman director of sales; and Kiernan Keating account executive.
College
ALBANY, N.Y. -- Named Kristen Youmans women's soccer coach.
BALL STATE -- Named Tim Buckley men's assistant basketball coach.
IONA -- Announced the retirement of Lou Gallo, men's soccer coach.
Promoted Bob Herodes, men's assistant soccer coach, to men's soccer coach.
Named Mike Jacobs men's assistant soccer coach.
MASSACHUSETTS-LOWELL -- Announced the resignation of Barbara Kierce, women's tennis coach.
MENLO -- Named Delna Lancaster women's volleyball coach.


The Tramp Dined Out To Wind Up in Jail Too
To the Editor:
Re "A Thief Dines Out, Hoping Later to Eat In" (front page, May 19): Gangaram Mahes's ordering of expensive restaurant meals -- which he cannot pay for -- to have himself arrested and put in prison, may be a case of life imitating art.
In "Modern Times," Charlie Chaplin's classic 1936 satire, the Tramp uses the same means to get jailed and escape a world of unemployment, poverty and urban chaos.
Has so little changed in 60 years?
JONATHAN D. REICHMAN  Chappaqua, N.Y., May 19, 1994


Cleaning Up an Oil Spill


The Pop Life
The Eagles, Vintage '94
The Eagles have a funny way of taking it easy.
On Friday night, the country-rock band will kick off its first tour in 14 years at the Irvine Meadows Ampitheater in Los Angeles, and the drummer, singer and songwriter Don Henley says he's looking forward to the "rest and relaxation."
"There's so many things going on," he explained by telephone yesterday from his home in Los Angeles.
"There's lawsuits, record negotiations, the tour, the charities we'll be benefiting. Life is a little too complicated right now. Getting out on the road will simplify things a little bit. All you have to worry about is room service."


Pilot Blamed For Air Crash In Minnesota
The National Transportation Safety Board said today that a pilot's "slam dunk" style of landing a Northwest Airlink commuter plane, and his lack of "altitude awareness," were largely responsible for its crash last December into a mound of iron-ore waste near Hibbing, Minn.
The board found that the captain's "excessively steep" descent while trying to land at the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport in northeastern Minnesota during a light snowfall and freezing drizzle was the major cause for the crash, which killed all 16 passengers as well as the captain and first officer.


Go-Ahead on Altered Crops Is Met by a 'Go Slow'
A genetically altered tomato and a genetically engineered cow hormone are on the market, each winning Federal approval after years of scrutiny.
But other new products are likely to have a much easier journey to the grocery store.
The Clinton Administration is planning to give the agricultural biotechnology industry broad authority to market most other genetically engineered crops without intensive Government review.


A Revised View of Pain of Circumcision
FOR centuries, countless millions of babies have endured severe, lasting and unrelieved pain during and after circumcision, a fact that has just recently been recognized by the medical profession.
In fact, a new study by pediatric researchers at Rochester General Hospital in upstate New York showed that the pain of circumcision was so severe that a popular over-the-counter pain reliever for infants failed to alleviate their suffering during and immediately after the procedure.
Still, while 86 percent of newborn boys in this country are circumcised, the procedure is widely performed without any sort of anesthesia.


Rome Has a Show Of Stolen Artworks To Highlight a Fight
High up in the dank interior of Castel Sant'Angelo, just below the parapet from which Tosca leaped to her death, a curiously eclectic art exhibition is on view until June 15.
Called "Treasures From the Darkness," it consists of stolen artworks that were recovered by the Italian police.
No certified masterpieces are on display.
About the closest the exhibition comes to a well-known artist's name is an 18th-century scene of the Piazza San Marco in Venice "attributed to the school of Canaletto."


All-Female Crew Has Surprises
The initial reaction to Bill Koch's selection of an all-women America's Cup team is more about who was not chosen than who was.
Passed over for the first women's effort in the 143-year history of the cup were two Olympic gold medalists and a world keelboat champion.
Although Koch's America
office in San Diego has declined to say who has made the team until the official announcement, which is expected Friday, the yachting syndicate's letters of rejection have gone out.
Among those who were turned down for crew positions were Allison Jolly, 37, and Lynne Jewell-Shore, 34, both Olympic gold medalists in 1988; and Betsy Alison, 34, a three-time winner of the prestigious Rolex International Women's Keelboat Championship.


Fiber Optic Rival in Phones Turns Its Sights on Europe
The MFS Communications Company, which has built fiber optic networks that compete against the regional Bell telephone companies in more than a dozen cities around the United States, is taking its business overseas.
The company will disclose today details of a plan to take on established telephone companies in London and other cities in Europe.
Executives of the company, which is based in Omaha, say they plan to invest as much as $200 million in the next few years to offer telephone and high-speed data services in Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels and Stockholm.


Jays Are Looking Up But Just How Far Is It?
The American League East can scoff, along with the rest of us, at the American League West, but it wasn't that long ago that the old East looked embarrassingly like this season's new West.
This was 1989, and the month, like now, was May.
For 11 consecutive days, the division-leading team did not have a winning record.
During that span, on three consecutive days, the Yankees, the Indians and then the Red Sox were in first place with an 18-19 record.
The Orioles also got into the act as a nonwinning team in first.


Must Phone Rates Block Information Highway?
To the Editor:
"In Twist, Consumer Group and F.C.C. Back Cable TV" (Business Day, May 12) reports that cable television companies argue that "phone companies are trying to finance their ventures at the expense of ordinary phone customers, who may end up with higher bills and services they may not want." This argument constitutes a serious challenge to those of us calling for a long-range goal of expanded universal service.


William Pearce, 73, A Foundation Head
William Pearce, the chairman of the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame Inc., died on Friday in Hilton Head, S.C., while traveling from his home in Palm City, Fla., to his home in Lawrenceville, N.J.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Uncovered Short Sales Set a Record on Nasdaq
Speculation on a sharp drop in over-the-counter stocks is at record levels, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The latest rise in the associations tally of uncovered short sales continued a long-term trend that was interruped by a brief drop in April, when the total fell for the first time in more than a year.
For the monthlong period that ended on May 6, uncovered short sales in Nasdaq stocks rose 5.1 percent, to a record 751.2 million shares.
That was up from 714.9 million in the previous month, the association reported yesterday.
The previous record was 717.3 million shares in March.


Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.(CIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


California Schools Vying for New Students Under a State Plan for Open Enrollments
The television ad for the high school promotes the computer labs, the caring teachers and the ethnic mix of students.
The school is not a private academy; it is Lincoln High School in downtown Los Angeles.
And the advertisement is the most immediate response to California's new open-enrollment policy in its public schools.


Calls for Whitewater Hearings


Hydro-Quebec reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The G.O.P.'s Fast Gavel
By winning an overwhelming majority of the vote at this week's New York State Republican Convention, State Senator George Pataki of Putnam County became the party's officially endorsed candidate to challenge Gov.
Mario Cuomo, and solidified his status as the front-runner for the Republican gubernatorial nomination.
But his victory is marred by an unseemly display of heavy-handed tactics aimed at shutting out the competition.
When the three-hour balloting ended, Mr.
Pataki's main rival, Herbert London, a New York University professor who ran for governor in 1990 on the Conservative Party line, was just short of the 25 percent of the vote required to earn an automatic spot on the September primary ballot.
State Senator Roy Goodman, the Manhattan Republican leader, walked toward a microphone to ask about a discrepancy in the vote count before consulting his delegation about switching their support to Mr.
London from its favorite son, former Representative Bill Green, as the rules supposedly allowed.
But party leaders banged the convention's final gavel and turned off the microphone before Mr.
Goodman could speak.


CHRONICLE
When WYNTON MARSALIS was invited to dinner at Ralph Ellison's house in Manhattan a few years ago, he discovered that he and the writer had something in common: the trumpet.
After dinner -- "prepared by his wife, Fanny, in the most soulful and Southern style," Mr.
Marsalis said -- Mr.
Ellison brought out a trumpet that he had not played in 20 years.


New Paper to Vie for Readers on Capitol Hill
A company that publishes community newspapers in the New York metropolitan area said yesterday that it would begin a small Capitol Hill newspaper war by starting a weekly to compete with Roll Call, the twice-weekly publication that bills itself as the hometown paper for Congress and Congress watchers.
The new paper, tentatively called The Hill, is to be published by News Communications Inc., a New York City company with more than 20 community newspapers in Manhattan, Queens and the New York City suburbs.


METRO DIGEST
TRADE CENTER BOMBERS GET 240 YEARS
The four men convicted of bombing the World Trade Center were sentenced to prison terms that assure they will remain in custody for the rest of their lives.
To do that, Judge Kevin T. Duffy imposed the extraordinary sentence of 240 years on each of the men -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- and said they would have no possibility of parole.
A1.
Edward Smith, whose wife was killed in the bombing, addressed the court.
B4.
G.O.P.
BACKS BERNADETTE CASTRO
New York State's Republican Party selected Bernadette Castro, whose family manufactured convertible sofas, to run for the United State Senate against the three-term Democratic incumbent, Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
A1.
If there is a poster boy for Republican gubernatorial aspirations, it is Mayor Giuliani.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  MOTHER QUESTIONED IN CHILD'S DEATH
As the investigation continued into the death of an 18-month-old boy whose body was found in a plastic bag in his family's Brooklyn apartment, relatives said that they had repeatedly called the authorities to report that the child's mother had been abusing him.
B3.
YOUTH SERVICES SHOWS DISARRAY
Providing another glimpse of the disarray inside the Department of Youth Services, Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra told a City Council committee that the department had been unable to process a new round of contract proposals for youth programs in time to finance them for the next fiscal year.
B3.
HUMAN RESOURCES OFFICIAL UNDER FIRE
In a contentious budget hearing at City Hall, Marva L. Hammons, the commissioner of the city's Human Resources Administration, was berated by City Council members for being unable to specify what effects the city's proposed budget cuts would have on social services.
B3.
PHILANTHROPIC SPIRIT STAYS AFLOAT
Philanthropic giving in the New York region rose modestly last year, but on a per capita level among employees in 152 major corporations, the increase was 4 percent.
B2.
The New School for Social Research conferred 1,433 degrees.
B2.
REGION  WHITMAN ASKS FOR MORE TIME
The Whitman administration asked the New Jersey Supreme Court to give the Governor a chance to solve the problems that have created financial and academic gaps between rich and poor districts.
B6.
ARGUMENT ARISES OVER COLLEGE LANDS
New Jersey's nine state colleges and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman have been drawn into another tussle with the Board of Higher Education, which Mrs.
Whitman has vowed to abolish.
The issue this time: who holds the title to some $600 million worth of campus land and buildings?
B5.
SCOUT CAMP PRESERVED AS OPEN SPACE
A 1,400-acre Boy Scout camp in Putnam County that seemed destined for development has been preserved under a $2.1 million agreement.
B6.
A Connecticut judge will be nominated for the United States Court of Appeals. B6.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


Underdogs Undermine Sabatini, Edberg
The biggest upsets of the day were significant and they happened in tandem, with two of the most stellar talents in their sport undone by underdogs inside the uneasy confines of Court 1.
But in only one case did the deposed star put up a convincing battle against becoming the latest victim of the French Open.
While Stefan Edberg toiled today, Gabriela Sabatini was foiled.
And not just by her opponent.


Fair Housing Law Safeguards the Disabled
To the Editor:
In "Unlocked Wards Don't Belong in Anyone's Yard" (letter, May 16), Douglas B. Levene misconstrues the principles on which the Federal Fair Housing Act is based.


Denny's Customers Can File Claims
Customers of Denny's who believe that the restaurant chain treated them improperly because they are black will have to file a claim if they want to share in today's proposed settlements.
For customers of Denny's in any state but California, awards are possible for any incidents that occurred from July 1, 1987, through today.
For California customers, the incident must have occurred from Nov. 14, 1988, through today.


Food Notes
Cooking With Hazan
Marcella Hazan, who will be in New York working on her new book this summer, will also teach a few cooking classes at Hay Day markets in Connecticut.
These are the only classes she will give during her stay.
There is still space at one of them, June 28 from 7:15 to 10 P.M., in the Ridgefield store.
Mrs.
Hazan will demonstrate a complete menu that will be followed by a four-course tasting dinner, with wine, prepared by her son, Giuliano.
The cost is $95.
Reservations can be made by calling Nicole Chagas at (203) 221-0100.
New Moon Carnival
The New Moon Carnival, a benefit for the Whole Foods Project, an organization that provides meals and nutritional education for people with life-threatening diseases like AIDS, will be held June 9 in the Synod Hall of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 110th Street.


Ukrainian Accuses Yeltsin of Making Threats
As negotiations continued in Moscow and Kiev over Crimea and control of the formerly Soviet Black Sea Fleet, the Ukrainian President criticized President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today, accusing him of issuing threats to another sovereign state.
Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader, is already under considerable political pressure at home with a presidential election scheduled for next month.
He promised that Crimea would remain Ukrainian and that Kiev would not use force.


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Virginia
The Cavaliers, seeded fifth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, play No. 1 Syracuse in the first semifinal contest at College Park, Md., on Saturday, and Virginia Coach Dom Starsia is candid about the prospect.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DENBRIDGE CAPITAL CORP., Toronto, a merchant bank, acquired a 70 percent stake in Cyberbridge Corp., San Diego, a software development and marketing company, for an undisclosed amount.
HELMERICH &amp; PAYNE INTERNATIONAL DRILLING CO., Tulsa, Okla., an oil and gas drilling subsidiary of Helmerich &amp; Payne Inc., has agreed to acquire the South Texas land drilling operations of Energy Service Company Inc., Houston, for an undisclosed amount.


Rockets' Olajuwon Named Most Valuable Player
Hakeem Olajuwon, by some measures the dominant player of his era, finally received an official measure of recognition yesterday.
The Houston Rockets' 7-foot center was named the National Basketball Association's most valuable player of the 1993-94 season.
In voting by a panel of 101 reporters and broadcasters, Olajuwon, who placed second to Charles Barkley of the Phoenix Suns last year, finished with 66 first-place votes, ahead of David Robinson of the San Antonio Spurs (24), Scottie Pippen of the Chicago Bulls (7) and Shaquille O'Neal of the Orlando Magic (3).
Patrick Ewing was fifth with a single first-place vote, while Barkley was 10th, with a total of three votes, one for fourth place and two for fifth.


Review/Film; Once Again, It's Murphy Plus Cops Plus Beverly Hills
As surely as if it were a McDonald's or a Burger King, "Beverly Hills Cop III" is part of a money-making franchise, though this one has been abandoned for so long it has cobwebs on top of cobwebs.
It has been seven years since "Beverly Hills Cop II," and a decade since the blockbuster original.
But recently Eddie Murphy's career has seen some box-office duds like "Boomerang," so it's no surprise that "Beverly Hills Cop III" has surfaced, a sequel designed to be as foolproof as possible.
The strategy is to bring back familiar characters while throwing lots of cash and special effects at the screen.
This time Axel Foley, the Detroit detective who always outsmarts the villains and the laid-back Beverly Hills police, winds up in an elaborate California theme park called Wonder World, a front for a crime ring that also has the F.B.I on its trail.
The film includes so many explosions, car chases, gunfights and other unnatural disasters -- all played with frenetic energy -- that it takes a while to realize something is off kilter besides the Tilt-a-Whirl.
Axel has lost his sense of humor.


Argument Arises Over Transfer of Land to College Trustees
New Jersey's nine state colleges and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman have been drawn into another tussle with the Board of Higher Education, which Mrs.
Whitman has vowed to abolish.
The issue this time: who holds the title to some $600 million worth of campus land and buildings.
The property is now held by the Department of Higher Education.
The legislation designed to eliminate the department includes language transferring title to the campus land and buildings from the department to the nine colleges themselves.


Russian Sentenced for Mogilny Extortion
A Russian man was sentenced yesterday to jail time already served for trying to get money from the Buffalo Sabres star ALEXANDER MOGILNY.
SERGEI FOMITCHEV, 31, has spent the last two months in the Erie County holding center in Buffalo after being charged with trying to extort $150,000 from Mogilny on March 25.


Medtronic Inc.(MDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Penske Truck Leasing Corp., Reading, Pa., is selling $150 million of 7.75 percent notes due in 1999 priced at 99.965 to yield 7.76 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The issue is noncallable and rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation. *
PNC Funding Corp., Pittsburgh, a subsidiary of PNC Bank Corp., is selling $200 million of 7.75 subordinated notes due in 2004 priced at 99.35 to yield 7.845 percent through Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
The issue is noncallable and rated A-2 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Circus Circus
Circus Circus Enterprises, the casino company, posted first-quarter profit of 38 cents a share, unchanged from the comparable period a year ago.
That was below the consensus Wall Street estimate of more than 41 cents a share.
The stock of Circus Circus fell in advance of the earnings, which were announced after the close of trading yesterday.


INSIDE
Loopholes Aid Rich Haitians
Loopholes in the expanded embargo against Haiti are allowing wealthy allies of the military to continue a lucrative trade in food.
Page A3.
Luring California's Students
In response to California's new open enrollment policy, a number of the state's public schools have begun advertising for students.
Page B9.
Knicks Win Opener
Patrick Ewing scored 20 points to lead the Knicks to a 100-89 victory over Indiana in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals.
Page B11.


Despite Embargo, Haiti's Rich Seem to Get Richer
Large gaps in a worldwide embargo that took effect on Sunday have allowed some of Haiti's wealthiest families, traditionally close allies of the defiant military, to continue a lucrative food trade, diplomats and Haitian business people say.
The situation resulted from a failure by the United States to freeze the assets of leading Haitian business executives and to keep them out of the food trade, and critics of American policy expressed doubts about Washington's willingness to end the political crisis.
The freezing of assets is only being applied to Haiti's senior military officers and their allies in Government.


An Archive Of Louis And Jazz
THEY opened the Louis Armstrong archives yesterday, records, letters and photographs that revealed the jazzman not only as the prodigious trumpeter of our age but also as that rarest of men -- the well-behaved hipster, Prometheus as burgher, Citizen Satchmo of Corona, Queens.
In the 1920's and 30's he had pioneered the basic forms of jazz and hit high C's like no one else.
His raspy voice is believed to have invented scat.
He was the natural, the Babe Ruth of jazz, and before the word crossover had any meaning, he was one of very few black men who were listened to or watched by whites in an America so much whiter than it is now.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about fighting in Rwanda was omitted in some copies and a duplicate article about South Africa appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the Rwanda article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Rostenkowski Would Quit Post in Deal
Representative Dan Rostenkowski's lawyers have told Federal prosecutors that he will step down as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and serve a relatively short prison term if the Government agrees not to seek a multicount felony indictment, lawyers involved in the case said today.
Mr.
Rostenkowski's concessions brought his defense team and Federal prosecutors to the brink of a plea agreement that would probably end the career of one of the most powerful politicians in Congress, but would spare him a long, costly criminal trial and the risk of a long prison term.


Nordiques Replace Page With Lacroix
PIERRE PAGE, who had two jobs with the Quebec Nordiques -- coach and general manager -- now has none.
PIERRE LACROIX was hired as the team's general manager yesterday, and he will pick a new coach.
The announcement at a news conference that Page was out ended speculation about Page's status after a season in which the Nordiques were the major disappointment of the league.


Gaza's Palestinians Revel in Daily Joy of Freedom
Perhaps the most dramatic measure of the Palestinians' first week of self-rule in Gaza has been the sudden normalcy in people's lives: barbecuing at the beach, leaving home without I.D. cards, chatting in coffee shops long past the former curfew and strolling by police stations without throwing a stone.
The 900,000 Palestinians packed into this tiny strip of Mediterranean coast, once described by a Gaza psychiatrist, Dr.
Iyad Elsaraj, as "tribal, conservative, rigid, confrontational, prone to violence and wildly moody," have, in fact, behaved in the most remarkably affable way.
Since May 18, when the Israeli Army began to withdraw, the Palestinians here have immersed themselves in joyful celebration.


Spring's Delight: Footloose and Slumbering


CHRONICLE
The soprano JUDITH ANDERSON and the pianist GARRICK OHLSSON are going to the rescue of the New York Philharmonic, which began an emergency talent search on Friday after it learned that ANDRE PREVIN had undergone bypass surgery.
Mr.
Previn was to have been the guest pianist for a gala event at Avery Fisher Hall tonight, the presentation of the first Mahler Award to Citibank, given in recognition of the bank's "longstanding commitment to the orchestra."
"It's nice to do a favor for the Philharmonic," Ms. Anderson said.


Girl, 15, Shot Near School; Doctors Try to Save Her Eye
Flanked by several classmates, Michelle McKie, 15, was straggling toward Springfield Gardens High School in Queens yesterday for her first morning class.
She was about to go through the school's metal detectors, as she did every morning, when three shots were fired.
"I heard three gunshots, and then everybody started running," said Sonya Jones, 17, who had arrived at school at the same time as her fellow student.
"I thought it was firecrackers first. Then I heard somebody scream, and I saw the blood on the ground."


Coney Island on the Edge; A Region's Venerable Magic Is Buffeted by Modern Times
It is historical fact that nearly every inch of Coney Island has burned to the ground at one time or another.
The amusement rides, rows of shops on the avenues, a few of the antique hotels and long stretches of the Boardwalk have disappeared.
And then they have risen again, reassuring old-timers that Coney Island's magic is somehow invincible, yet making them wistful for the way things once were.
It has always been this way on the tiny peninsula: danger mixed with a cool breeze off the ocean, hurly-burly mingled with the gentle sands, an odd, teetering feeling that leaves many just the slightest bit on edge.


No Newscast, but Plenty of Good News for Fox
At a news conference yesterday morning, Lucie Salhany, chairwoman of Fox Broadcasting, was asked whether her network, given its plans to add 12 strong new affiliates, had any intention of starting a national newscast.
The answer she gave -- "We're not going to jump into this" -- reveals a lot about the changing nature of broadcasting at a time when the bottom line generally takes precedence over public service.
"If you ask someone who really considers himself a broadcaster, a network by definition must have a news division," said Grant Tinker, the former chairman of NBC.
"It's giving something back in return for a license."


White House Diverts Flood of Anti-Abortion Calls
The White House is using its enhanced voice-mail system to divert a flood of phone calls from people complaining about the passage of a bill aimed at curtailing protests at abortion clinics.
The phone calls have largely been orchestrated by an anti-abortion group.


CUC International(CU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Sheffield Pleads No Contest
Florida Marlins outfielder GARY SHEFFIELD pleaded no contest to a reckless driving charge yesterday in Orlando, Fla., and was sentenced to nine months of probation and ordered to perform 40 hours of community service.
Sheffield also had been charged with drunken driving on Dec. 5 after police clocked him traveling more than 110 miles an hour on Interstate 4 in a Ferrari Testarossa.
The driving while intoxicated charge was dismissed after Sheffield's lawyer, JOSEPH H. FICARROTTA, filed a motion arguing a breath test given after the traffic stop was not performed properly. (AP)


Industry Is Learning to Love Agility
The Ford Motor Company's electronic components plant here is a complicated place, producing 124,000 engine controllers, anti-lock brake sensors and speed-control units a day.
Since each product has 400 to 500 parts, managers have to keep track of more than five million individual pieces daily.
Nevertheless, Dudley C. Wass, the plant's manager, says that when an order to change a product is received, the altered units usually can be shipped within 24 hours.


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 7


Must Phone Rates Block Information Highway?; How Britain Did It
To the Editor:
The Federal Communications Commission should reject applications from the telephone companies for a rapid-fire video dial tone to encourage long-term competition.
Cable companies provide the best potential to challenge the telephone monopoly in telecommunicatons, but first the rules must be defined by Congress.
Those rules also must provide for a transitional period to insure fair passage from decades of regulation to free competition and to encourage essential investment.


Warren Dean, 61, Professor on History Of Latin America
Dr.
Warren Dean, a professor of Latin American history at New York University, died on Saturday in Santiago, Chile, where he had been conducting research.
Dr.
Dean, who lived in Manhattan, was 61.
Cooking gas that had leaked from an apparently defective fuel line asphyxiated Dr.
Dean as he slept in his apartment, a colleague, Prof.
Christopher Mitchell, said.


British Scientists Say Excavated Shinbone Belongs to Earliest European Man
British scientists, digging among ancient stone tools and animal bones in a West Sussex gravel pit, have uncovered the shinbone of a strapping six-foot man who lived half a million years ago.
They are calling their discovery the earliest European.
Known as the Boxgrove Man, from the name of the quarry site, he lived at a time when Britain was a peninsula of Europe and populated with many now-extinct species of elephants, deer, bears, rhinoceroses, voles and other animals.
From the stone-cutting tools and flint chips found in the pit in recent years, the presence there of early human ancestors of an uncertain antiquity was apparent but, until now, unsupported by fossil remains.


Bronx Bully Boys: Yanks Sock It to Jays
What had been official in the American League East standing for 16 days was confirmed in convincing fashion last night: There are new bullies in baseball's nastiest neighborhood and they do not wear blue uniforms or play indoors.
They wear pinstripes and live in the Bronx.
They are the Yankees.
If the two-time defending World Series champion Blue Jays lurked as the final barrier to overcome for the Yankees to validate themselves as the favorites in the division, then they succeeded with a flourish by pounding Dave Stewart and cruising to a 6-1 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Bans for Cangelosi and Smith
Ten days after the incident touched off a melee between the Mets and the Braves at Shea Stadium, Mets outfielder John Cangelosi was suspended for four games by the National League today for charging the mound after he was hit by a pitch from John Smoltz of Atlanta.
Smoltz, who had yielded a grand slam to the previous batter, Ryan Thompson, was suspended for eight games for intentionally hitting Cangelosi, guaranteeing that he will miss a start.
Cangelosi, who becomes the fifth player suspended for charging the mound this season, has appealed the decision and will not serve the suspension until after he has a hearing with the league, which will probably occur after the Mets return to New York this weekend.
Smoltz, a mainstay of the Braves' staff, also filed an appeal.


Federal Judge To Be Elevated To Appeals Slot
Jose A. Cabranes, the Chief Judge for the Federal District Court in Connecticut who was seen as a possible Supreme Court nominee, will instead be nominated by President Clinton to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Sen.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York announced yesterday.
The nomination met with praise tinged with bitterness among some Hispanic members of the legal community, who had hoped to see the Puerto Rican-born judge become the first Hispanic justice on the Supreme Court.
The President has instead nominated Judge Stephen G. Breyer of Boston to fill the seat being vacated by Associate Justice Harry Blackmun.


Song of Quacks and Tootles
Katherine Greene studied the dials and the button that controlled the strange, colored wheels all around her.
She twisted a dial and heard a xylophone sneak up behind her.
"Where's that coming from?" she asked.
Another spin and she heard what sounded like a duck quacking.
She smiled and leaned on the button; all five machines sprang into an antiphonal medley, alternating double reeds with flutes.
"Did I compose that?" she asked, delighted.
Actually, the piece, done for three dancers and an organ grinder, is the work of the German sculptor, inventor and composer Trimpin, who also created "Phffft," the five-piece sound sculpture that produced the music in the Frieda and Roy Furman Gallery at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center.


Review/Dance; A New 'Romeo and Juliet,' Streamlined in Washington
Helgi Tomasson's new production of "Romeo and Juliet," performed by the San Francisco Ballet here on Sunday at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Peforming Arts, is a somewhat streamlined, aerated staging of that popular ballet.
Mr.
Tomasson uses the familiar Prokofiev score, judiciously pruning it with only one cut showing.
Jens-Jacob Worsaae's sets are coolly formal with a pleasant period flavor and with Thomas R. Skelton's lighting add a welcome airiness to the ballet.
But this "Romeo and Juliet" is nonetheless on the dull side.
Mr.
Tomasson brings little that is fresh to the choreography, relying on a familiar lexicon of impassioned runs and arabesques, high skewed lifts and cross-stage draggings of the protesting heroine to tell his story in dance terms.
And while he has made elements of the story much clearer, it is not until the last act that the characters break loose at all from prescribed behavior.


Got a Big Fish and a Big Appetite? Grab a Ruler and a Roasting Pan
ROASTING may not be the first method that leaps to mind for cooking fish, but it is ideal for large pieces.
It is quick and adds little fat.
The fish, coated with a little fat or a marinade, stays moist, and there is no messing with lots of boiling.
And it is a fast, easy way to feed a crowd.
No special equipment is needed: Just a roasting pan and two large, solid spatulas for removing the fish from the pan after cooking.


Between Marxism and the Market, A Chinese Manager Finds Corruption
The No. 1 Cotton Mill is probably the best-run textile factory in town, but its labyrinthine production line is in danger of being shut down because, its manager says, corrupt officials are manipulating national supplies of cotton.
It was an extraordinary allegation to make in the middle of a recent interview, but Zhang Baoxin, the 58-year-old director of this state-owned factory, said he was frustrated and fed up with the corruption threatening his plant and its 9,000 workers and retired employees on pensions.


Rise in Key Futures Index Fuels Inflation Debate
With the financial world attuned as perhaps never before to any sign of faster inflation, the commodity futures index popularly known as the C.R.B. suddenly took center stage this week by posting its biggest rise in nearly a year.
The index, formally known as the Knight-Ridder Commodity Research Bureau's Futures Price Index, follows 21 commodities, such as cocoa, orange juice, lumber and pork bellies, and is updated every 15 seconds on computer screens.


'Inner City' Math Exam Stirs Anger
The sixth graders in Room 203 at the May Elementary School here had 30 minutes the other day to complete what their teacher called a math exam.
Derrick Johnson's 12-year-old son refused to take it.
"I teach him right from wrong," Mr.
Johnson said today.
"When he saw that test he knew it was wrong."


Dubious Immunity for a President
President Clinton's private attorneys are considering asking a Federal court in Little Rock to spare Mr.
Clinton -- at least while he occupies the White House -- the duty to defend a civil lawsuit based on alleged sexual misconduct when he was Governor of Arkansas.
That would be a highly dubious claim of Presidential privilege, one the courts would be unwise to adopt.
Presidents are immune from civil liability for their official acts while in office.
But extending that immunity to pre-Presidential conduct is not justified.
Presidents are, in the first instance, citizens, no more above the law than other citizens.
Granting them immunity to civil litigation would deny aggrieved litigants a timely chance at justice.


Trade, the Real Engine of Democracy
The mandatory linkage between trade privileges and human rights is obsolete.
President Clinton and Congress need to replace this cold war relic with a new approach that broadly engages China on human rights while promoting our strategic and economic interests.
U.S.-China relations are shackled by the linkage, which embodies two aspects of old-think that should join the era that spawned them on the dust heap of history.


Commencements; New School Confers Degrees on 1,433
The New School for Social Research conferred 1,433 degrees yesterday on graduates of the Eugene Lang College, the New School, Mannes College of Music, Graduate Faculty of Political Science and Social Science, the Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy and the Parsons School of Design.
A total of 643 bachelor's degrees, 569 master's degrees, 175 associate's degrees and 46 doctorates were conferred by the school.


Sakaiminato Journal; The North Koreans Are Coming, Bearing Seafood
North Korea may have no powerful friends left -- not the Chinese, who are tired of protecting an embarrassing old relative, and certainly not the Russians, who realized years ago that their fiscal and technological future lay on the other side of the Demilitarized Zone.
So when the North Koreans are looking for a warm welcome, mixed, of course, with some hard currency, they head for this busy fishing port on the Sea of Japan, where the North's fleet is always eagerly awaited.


Stocks Post Slight Gains; Dow Up 2.76
Stock traders, taking their cue from a brighter bond market and a better outlook for commodities prices, bid stock prices upward yesterday in below-normal trading.
But the rise in the stock market was anemic, a fact that could be traced to the fluky performance recently of an index that tracks commodities prices and is looked to as an indicator of inflation.


Dallas B. Pratt, 79, Museum Founder
Dr.
Dallas B. Pratt, a retired Manhattan psychiatrist who was the co-founder of the American Museum in Britain, died on Friday at his home in Garrison, N.Y.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, said Shirley Fisher, a friend.


Saul Riesenberg, 82, Micronesia Expert
Dr.
Saul Herbert Riesenberg, a former chairman of the department of anthropology at the Smithsonian Institution and a specialist in Micronesian ethnology, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.
A former resident of Silver Spring, Md.
He was 82 and lived in Miami.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, his family said.


3 African Lands Offer Troops for Rwanda
Ghana, Ethiopia and Senegal have become the first African countries to make a troop offer for the proposed 5,500-member force that the United Nations wants to send to Rwanda to rescue refugees from tribal massacres and oversee relief activities.
The head of operations at the International Committee of the Red Cross told senior United Nations officials here last week that his estimate now is that between 200,000 and 400,000 Rwandans have been killed since warfare erupted between the rival Hutus and Tutsis on April 7 after President Juvenal Habyarimana, a member of the majority Hutu tribe, died in a suspicious plane crash.


Treasury Prices Rise, Ending a 2-Day Slide
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday, ending a two-day skid, following the first decline in commodity prices in five days.
A steady dollar also helped to support bonds as the United States and Japan agreed to resume trade talks.
The closely watched 30-year bond rose 14/32 , to 8613/32 , for a yield of 7.39 percent, down from 7.43 percent on Monday.
In today's trading, the bond recouped less than a quarter of its losses from the previous two days.


AutoZone Inc.(AZO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 7


Personal Health
SEVERAL dinner guests gasped with astonishment as their hostess, who has had diabetes for 15 years, sat down to a dish of ice cream.
But, as she explained, it was well within permissible limits.
New dietary guidelines established by the American Diabetes Association are making life a lot easier, and more enjoyable, for people with diabetes.
After decades of forbidding sugars of all sorts, nutrition experts who treat diabetes have eased this restriction and are now considering all carbohydrates -- sugars and starches -- as a single category of foods among which trade-offs are possible.


Reviews/Television; Remembering D-Day 50 Years Later
Indelible memories and unforgettable pictures come together for a powerful climax to "D-Day." The "American Experience" offering, which marks the 50th anniversary of the Allied invasion of Nazi-held Europe on June 6, 1944, keeps its focus steadily on the men, most of them in their first battle, who did the fighting.
Beginning with Gen.


Miller's Mouth Needed For a Lively Series
Charles Oakley threw out the Knicks' ceremonial first forearm last night at exactly 13 minutes after 8.
Forced to wait 17 seconds into the game for Reggie (The Mouth) Miller to drive the ball to the basket past John Starks on the left side, Oakley drove his right arm into Miller's skimpy chest and drew a well-deserved technical foul.
What the heck.
It was just Oakley's calling card, his version of the high hard one under the chin.


Composers Who Are Farther Than Far Out
It would be easier to call John Cage or Conlon Nancarrow eccentric if we knew what center their orbits had strayed from.
But "American Eccentrics" is indeed the title of the New York Philharmonic's tribute to American music this week.
Panels, readings, lectures and an elusive sound sculpture display surround a chamber-music evening and four orchestra concerts repeating a single program.
The chamber music came on Monday night at Merkin Concert Hall, prefaced by a symposium of composers and including music by Cage, Paul Bowles, Mr.
Nancarrow, Henry Cowell, Pauline Oliveros and Terry Riley.
Mr.
Nancarrow, frail but elegant, appeared briefly at the back of the hall as Ursula Oppens played his "Two Canons for Ursula," then was bundled back to his hotel in an incongruous stretch limousine.


Sar A. Levitan, 79, Economist And Social Policy Scholar, Dies
Sar A. Levitan, an economist widely known for his analysis of social policy and influence on government programs as diverse as employment training and rural development, died on Tuesday in Washington.
He was 79.
Friends said he had died of cancer.


Mandela Describes the Hard Work Ahead
After decades of liberation struggle and weeks of euphoria, President Nelson Mandela used his first "state of the nation" speech today to rally South Africa back to work, avoiding grand promises in favor of a businesslike vision of common national purpose.
The speech would not have sounded strange from the lips of George Bush or John Major.
It promised to avoid "permanent" new taxes, cut the Government deficit, contain inflation, lower interest rates, maintain a stable currency, court investment and promote growth.


In the Grilling Game, Equipment and Technique Are Partners
THE outdoor grill provides the spark to start the summer season.
And though Memorial Day is approaching, there is still time to tune up grills that have been in hibernation since last fall.
Traditionalists say charcoal produces better flavor than gas, especially if high-quality hardwood charcoal is used instead of the cheap kind impregnated with chemicals, and if the coals are ignited without starter fluids.
But many experts contend that the flavor is made by juices dripping on the coals and that a gas grill with lava rocks is as effective as charcoal.


1,400-Acre Putnam County Scout Camp Preserved as Open Space
A 1,400-acre Boy Scout camp in Putnam County that seemed destined for development has been preserved under an unusual $2.1 million agreement announced here tonight.
The camp, the Clear Lake Scout Reservation, is a pristine tract surrounded by the Clarence Fahnestock Memorial State Park.


Commissioner Under Fire Over Job Cuts
In a contentious budget hearing at City Hall, Marva L. Hammons, the commissioner of the city's Human Resources Administration, was berated by City Council members yesterday for being unable to specify what effects the city's proposed budget cuts would have on social services.
Under the plans of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Ms.
Hammons's department will lose 4,305 of its 23,343 workers.
Although administration officials have pledged that the cuts would not affect caseworkers, they have not said specifically which jobs would be eliminated.


Public &amp; Private; To Feed or Not to Feed
In '83 I was on the lam, flagrantly flirting with the law in malls, movie theaters, public parks and restaurants.
The closest I came to arrest was when a security guard suggested that I might want to take my modest state of undress into the ladies' room.
Intimidated, I complied, despite the fact that there were more nudes on the walls of the museum I was visiting than in your average health club locker room.
Yes, I breast-fed in public, often in Chinese restaurants, where I felt guilty not about my exposure, such as it was, but about the way I sometimes dripped oyster sauce on my baby's head while I moved food from my plate to my mouth.
I learned to drape a dinner napkin over his pate, which had the dual effect of protecting him from flying bok choy and foiling the state statutes on indecent exposure, which in New York were not amended to exclude breast-feeding specifically until the year after his birth.


Sports of The Times; Worried If Spike Can Hold Up
IT was winter when the playoffs began.
I distinctly remember ducking my head from a savage gale straight from the Arctic Circle, heading for an Islanders-Rangers playoff.
I remember the grand celebration when I actually removed the lining from my trench coat during the Knicks-Nets playoff.
Now people are running around outdoors in shorts and T-shirts, having real lives.
I see them every day as I make my appointed rounds to Madison Square Garden, the world's most famous arena that used to stage six-day bicycle races and marathon dances and now stages hockey and basketball playoffs.


New World Trade Rules Tilt Against U.S.
To the Editor:
"Mr. Gingrich's False Alarm on Trade" (editorial, May 8) praises the newly created World Trade Organization on several deserving grounds.
The World Trade Organization will strengthen the rule of law in international trade.
It will widen the embrace of its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to include trade in services and intellectual property.
And the World Trade Organization will make it harder to change trade rules.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL PARTNERS, New York, a private investment company composed of former chairman and chief executives, said Robert L. Purdum had joined the company as director, an executive position.
Mr.
Purdum was chairman and chief executive of Armco Inc. until last month.
FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., named John M. Devine, chairman of its First Nationwide Bank unit, as the car maker's corporate controller and vice president.


Drabek Has 3-Hitter, 3 Hits
Astros 8, Braves 0
Doug Drabek pitched a three-hitter for his seventh straight victory and had three hits himself as the Houston Astros beat Tom Glavine and the Braves, 8-0, in Atlanta.


The Diabetic Fat of Choice May Be Monounsaturated
A NEW study suggests that a diet high in monounsaturated fats may be preferable to a high-carbohydrate diet for many, if not most, people with diabetes.
Forty-two patients with Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes participated in the study, which was directed by researchers at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
The results were published in the May 11 issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Tale of Videotape to Decide Where Beukeboom Sits for Game 6
The defenseman was on the defensive.
He is Jeff Beukeboom of the Rangers and he was explaining why he does not think he should be suspended for Game 6 of the Stanley Cup semifinals against the Devils on Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The National Hockey League has requested a videotape of Beukeboom's check that left Stephane Richer woozy and out of action for much of the Devils' 4-1 victory in Game 5 Monday night, a triumph that gave them a 3-games-to-2 lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals.
The winner moves on to face either Vancouver or Toronto in the Stanley Cup finals.


Dell Computer's Earnings Climb Strongly in Quarter
The Dell Computer Corporation reported quarterly earnings yesterday that were surprisingly strong, nearly doubling despite a $26.3 million charge for losses on bad financial investments.
Investors focused on the improvement in operating profits, which were well above analysts' estimates, and were relieved that its losses on financial derivatives and other investments were not higher.
Last month, Dell said that it would lose money on its investments, but did not estimate how much the loss might be.


Bahamian Tug Evades Navy to Land in Haiti
A Bahamian vessel has evaded a United States Navy cordon and slipped into a Haitian port in violation of United Nations sanctions on Haiti, American officials said today.
The incident, which occurred as a near-total economic embargo was imposed on Haiti over the weekend, underscores the vulnerabilities of a policy intended to squeeze the Haitian military leaders from power.


Reporter's Notebook; Giuliani Preserves Neutrality
If there is a poster boy for Republican gubernatorial aspirations in New York this year, it is Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Party leaders figure that if Mr.
Giuliani was able to defeat an incumbent Democrat in a Democratic stronghold last year, maybe it is not farfetched to think that a Republican can beat Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
But with one eye trained on state budget negotiations in Albany, Mr.
Giuliani performed a delicate dance at this week's convention of the Republican State Committee.
He delivered a welcoming pep talk to delegates, assuring them both that their party could win and that his city's streets were safe.
He also was host at a reception for party leaders at Gracie Mansion on Monday night.


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Stokely USA Inc.(STKY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Book Notes
Jack Kerouac's Estate
When he died in 1969, the Beat author Jack Kerouac left behind a house in St.
Petersburg, Fla., countless letters and papers, a following of passionate readers and a daughter he had met just twice.
Now his daughter, Jan, is accusing the Kerouac estate, which is administered by John Sampas, Kerouac's former brother-in-law, of breaking up the estate by selling off pieces for profit.


Thomas to Help Run Expansion Team
ISIAH THOMAS began his second career in the National Basketball Association yesterday, as an executive, with a challenge greater than any he met as an All-Star player.
Thomas, who retired May 11 after 13 seasons with the Detroit Pistons, was introduced as the basketball vice president of the Toronto Raptors.
His job will be to build an expansion team from scratch, something he will have to do without any experience.


Review/Television; MTV Debates Gangsta Rap
Tonight MTV devotes 24 minutes to the incredibly complex phenomenon of "Gangsta Rap." The essay seems aimed less at MTV's regular audience, who will find most of the material overly familiar, than at those of us who wouldn't spend two minutes listening to this music but ignore its existence perhaps at our peril.
The popularity of gangster rap (let's drop the cute comic-book spelling), with its sometimes violent and sexist content, has reached the point where, as in Congress this year, hand-wringing public hearings abound.


European Leaders Reluctant to Send Troops to Rwanda
In a recent debate in the British Parliament, an opposition member asked Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd why Britain was not sending peacekeeping troops to Rwanda as it had to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"Is there one law for Europeans and another for black Africans?" the member, Kim Howells, inquired.


Mark Lipman, 88, Investigator Who Founded a Private Agency


White House Lawyer Urges Delay of Suit
Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House special counsel, said today that the sexual harassment suit against President Clinton should be postponed because it would harm President Clinton's ability to carry out his official duties if he had to deal with it while he was in office.
Such a strategy in the case brought against Mr.
Clinton by Paula Corbin Jones has been hinted at for some time, but Mr.
Cutler's statement was the first made in public by a White House official.


Mother Questioned in Her Baby's Death
A relative of an 18-month-old boy whose body was found stuffed into a plastic bag in his family's Brooklyn apartment Monday evening said yesterday that she had repeatedly called authorities to report that the child's mother was abusing him.
The mother, Jaqueline Padgett, 31, of 365 Gates Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, was taken into custody late Monday after the body of her son Joseph was found by his aunt.
She was still being questioned by detectives yesterday, the police said.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about an agreement between Fox Inc. and the New World Communications Group Inc., under which New World will switch its television network alliance to Fox, misstated the terms in some editions.
Fox will pay New World $500 million, and receive 20 percent of New World's stock for the first $250 million of that price, paying slightly more than $12 a share, not 12 cents a share.
Fox will commit the other $250 million to two issues of warrants, the first $18 million to be converted to stock when the price reaches $15 a share, not 15 cents a share, and the rest to be held for seven years or until the price reaches $50 a share.


Pennsylvania House Votes To Impeach a State Justice
A State Supreme Court justice convicted on drug charges was impeached today by the Pennsylvania House of Representatives.
If convicted by the State Senate, he would become the first elected official in Pennsylvania in 183 years to be removed after impeachment.
The House, by 199 to 0, approved articles of impeachment against Justice Rolf Larsen, charging the 59-year-old Democrat with "abusing his judicial discretion" in a number of ways.
The charges were sent to the State Senate, whose members will act as jurors in the impeachment trial.


Books of The Times; Houses, Homes and How Women Have Moved On
To Make a House a Home
Four Generations of American Women and the Houses They Lived In
By Jane Davison and Lesley Davison
Illustrated. 298 pages. Random House.  $27.50.
Every house is haunted, as Edith Wharton put it, by "the wants of dead and gone predecessors, who have an inconvenient way of thrusting their different habits and tastes across the current of later existences." In "The Fall of a Doll's House," in 1980, Jane Davison called this the domestic unconscious: the world of the middle-class wife married to house, husband and family; duties defined and pleasures nurtured by finishing schools, women's magazines, advertisers and interior decorators.


Can a Dish Be Too Good? For Chefs, Yes
EVERY so often, a restaurant chef produces a dish that for reasons either gastronomic or histrionic becomes an instant classic.
These creations dominate menus year after year, drawing such ardent followings that restaurateurs dare not remove them for fear of a kitchen siege.
"We tried to eliminate the lamb shank once at Alison's and there was a near riot," said Thomas Valenti, former chef of Alison on Dominick Street, in SoHo.
"We were only trying to be seasonal, thinking that a steaming hunk of meat in your face on a hot August day would be a bit of a turnoff. Obviously, it was not a turnoff."


Russia Tells NATO It Is Ready to Join Peace Partnership
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev of Russia brought NATO ministers assurances today from President Boris N. Yeltsin that Moscow would join the alliance's Partnership for Peace, the program intended to forge closer ties between NATO and its former Warsaw Pact enemies.
But in brief remarks to reporters after a private 90-minute session with NATO officials, he did not say when Russia would sign the plan, and he cautioned that Moscow would put forward its own "more comprehensive" plan on Wednesday on ways it intended to cooperate with NATO.


What, No Profits? Let's Party Anyway
The financial performance of the Chalone Wine Group, a publicly owned company, has not exactly been remarkable in recent years.
So there was some concern among the 1,200 stockholders who had gathered here on Saturday when William Hamilton, the chief financial officer, rose to speak.
"Oysters," Mr.
Hamilton said, "remain unchanged, at 2,500, despite a 25 percent decline in shuckers."


Metropolitan Diary
REMEMBERING JACKIE A REPORTER friend writes:
Some years ago, when I was covering the society-celebrity beat, I had occasion to meet Mrs.
Onassis three times over a period of three years.
All were for the same cause: to raise money to renovate the New York Public Library building in midtown and to bestow "Literary Lion" awards on well-known writers.
The first time, it took a while before I mustered the courage to introduce myself.
When I finally did, she smiled softly and took my noncelebrity hand as graciously as she had those of such lions as Russell Baker, John Gregory Dunne and Joan Didion.
She spoke of the library's glories and gave me a suitable quotation or two.
"If you feel they need polishing, I trust you," she said.
I sometimes think she winked, but I guess not.
The following year I requested another comment and suggested that we change the subject from the library to, say, animals.
"A number of writers are being honored tonight as 'Literary Lions,' " I said.
"If you had your choice" -- gulp -- "what animal would you like to be?"
Mrs.
Onassis looked at me as if I were crazed.
"Oh, dear!" she said with a sigh.
"Can't you just repeat what I said last year? No one will remember." (I'm positive that was followed by a confiding wink.)
We dropped the subject of animals and moved on to fashion.
"Who designed your dress?" I asked.
She said she didn't like such questions.
I told her I didn't either, but that my editor did.
"All right," she said, relenting.
"It's a Valentino."
I avoided fashion at our third, and final, library encounter.
I pushed my reporter's notebook deep into my pocket and walked over to her.
"I always know that each year I'm going to see you at this event," I told her.
"How nice," she said.
Then, with concern, she asked, "But what do you do the rest of the year?"
. . .
Overheard by Marion H. Maidens while leaving the Plymouth Theater following a performance of the Stephen Sondheim musical "Passion."
Woman to man: So what did you think?
Man to woman: I liked it!
Woman to man: You're a liar!
. . .
Sign, seen by Susan H. Llewellyn, displayed at the Museum of Television and Radio:
VIRTUAL REALITY IS OUT OF SERVICE TODAY. SORRY FOR THE INCONVENIENCE.
.. .
Dear Diary:
A recent newsletter from St.
Cassian's High School in Upper Montclair, N.J., included the following announcement: "Our trip to the Liberty Science Center was great! Even with all the excitement at the end of the day, it was definitely a successful trip, and Frank is recovering well." GREGG P. MONSEES
. . .
To be filed under D, as in And the Dog Ate My Homework.
The scene is a No. 2 IRT train.
En route to the Brooklyn Museum, Deborah Bornemann and Elaine Koss notice the long delays and stop-and-go motions of their train.
Finally, an explanation over the public address system:
"We're sorry for the delay, ladies and gentlemen," a male voice says.
"The signals weren't working and our phone was out of order, so I had to go out and use a public telephone and my own Nynex charge card to ascertain that there was a structural defect on the track between Atlantic and Bergen streets. Both the local and express trains have to run on the local track. We apologize for the delay." With that, the train moves on.
. . .
SOUNDS OF WRITING  You once knew writers were at work  By the sound of their typewriters.
Daytimes in the spring or summer,  Whole streets in the Village  And on the West Side were filled  With the music of clacking and bells.
Now there is silence -- windows closed  For air-conditioning, computers  Beeping too quietly to be heard  Below.
It may be possible to compose  Even poems on computer screens,  But something in me doubts it.
Yet even quills dipped in ink  And scratching across parchment  Were a technological advance  Over chanting voices in firelight  And with the same purpose: Understanding  Our fears as the shadows grow.
LEWIS GARDNER
. . .
To be filed under S, as in Signs Seen in Taxis.
Two neatly handwritten notices on the dashboard of a cab recently hailed by Robert Foster Greenstone:
PREPARE NOW TO MEET YOUR MAKER IN HEAVEN
ALL NIGHT TRIPS, 50 EXTRA


Counterpoint to Sweet Soft-Shell Crabs
DESPITE the cool weather this May, it is still soft-shell-crab season, and there is hardly anything more delicious on the East Coast.
After you have had your fill of soft-shell crabs with nothing more than a sprinkle of lemon juice, you will be ready to try them with a sauce that is a spicy counterpoint to their sweetness.
You can make it as spicy as you like simply by increasing the amount of hot pepper flakes.


10 Students Named Churchill Scholars
Ten American college students have been awarded this year's Winston Churchill Scholarships for graduate work in mathematics, engineering and the sciences at Cambridge University in England.
The students, who were selected for outstanding academic and extracurricular achievement, will each receive about $20,000 toward tuition, travel and living expenses.


In a Pinch, Philanthropic Spirit Stays Afloat
Philanthropic giving in the nation rose 3.5 percent, to $126.2 billion, last year, as donors stepped up their contributions to an increasing number of charities, officials said.
In the New York region, gains were more modest, but on a per capita level among employees in 152 major corporations, the increase was 4 percent.


Trade Ties Bind, Indeed
The decision today by the United States and Japan to resume their stalled trade talks was driven by a simple fact: The two nations, whose eight months of fruitless negotiations convinced them that they could not live with each other, learned in the last three months of non-negotiations that they could not live without each other.
Their dispute rattled world financial markets, sent the dollar tumbling to near-record lows against the yen, tarnished both countries' stated commitments to free trade and generally reaffirmed to each a fundamental lesson: In trade wars, both sides shoot themselves in the foot.
The Greater Risk
"I think this has been a very useful period in which both the American and Japanese sides learned, and relearned, the value of their relationship and the dangers involved in breaking it up," said Robert Z. Lawrence, a trade expert at Harvard University.


American Stores Co.(ASC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


ADC Telecommunications Inc.(ADCT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Thomas J. King, 68, English Professor
Dr.
Thomas J. King, a retired professor of English at the City College of New York, died on Friday at his home in New City, N.Y.
He was 68.
The cause was lung cancer, according to his wife, Joan King.


In America; Outrage In Boston
It was the kind of ugliness you expected from the South in the 1950's, but it happened last week in one of the great hotels of Boston.
The Prime Minister of India, P. V. Narasimha Rao, and his entourage checked into the Four Seasons Hotel late on the night of May 16.
Thirty-six rooms were booked for Mr.
Rao and the approximately 50 aides who accompanied him.
There was also a contingent of U.S.
Secret Service personnel assigned to the Prime Minister, who was to speak at Harvard the next day.


Bombing Victim's Husband Speaks Out
Following is the text of the statement by Edward Smith of Seaford, L.I., whose wife was killed in the World Trade Center bombing, before the four defendants in the bombing trial were sentenced.
One night, in the autumn of 1992, I was at school and called home as I did every night between classes, but this call would be different from any other I had ever made.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The decision by the United States and Japan to resume stalled trade talks was driven by an overriding concern: The nations learned that they could not live without each other.
News Analysis.  [ Page D1. ]


New Enzyme By Genzyme Is Approved
The Genzyme Corporation said yesterday that it had won Food and Drug Administration approval to start marketing a genetically engineered enzyme to treat Gaucher's disease, a debilitating and sometimes fatal genetic disorder that afflicts about 5,000 people in the world at any given time.
To be sold under the trade name Cerezyme, the drug was developed to overcome supply constraints of Genzyme's Ceredase, a natural form of the enzyme extracted from human placentas, which had been the only effective treatment for Gaucher's disease.
Genzyme has found that at current dosages, it can make only enough Ceredase to supply about 1,200 patients.


Entrepreneur Steps Down at Merck
Martin J. Wygod, a health care entrepreneur who sold his company to Merck &amp; Company last year for $6.6 billion, resigned yesterday as a director and senior executive of Merck to return to his specialty of deal making and building small companies.
Mr.
Wygod said he would rather be an entrepreneur again.
"I enjoy building businesses," he said in an interview.
He noted that five of the companies he built had earned almost $7.5 billion for investors since the mid-1970's.


Christopher Feels Capitol Hill Heat on China
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came under fire today both by lawmakers who oppose sanctions against China over its human rights record and those who favor tough measures to pressure Beijing.
In a visit to Capitol Hill, Mr.
Christopher indicated that President Clinton would adopt a middle-of-the-road approach, signaling that the Administration would renew China's favorable trade status, while at the same time pinning some lesser sanctions on China.


Mr. Arafat's Identity Crisis
Most Israelis understand the need for a political settlement with the Palestinians.
But most also doubt the trustworthiness of Yasir Arafat to make and keep an honorable and effective peace.
Mr.
Arafat has a perverse genius for inflaming these doubts.
Last week's controversy over a recording of his call for a jihad, or Muslim holy war, to liberate Jerusalem had barely died down when another explosive excerpt was released from the same speech, secretly taped earlier this month in a Johannesburg mosque.


Delay on Health Care Bill Is Now Official
Senator Edward M. Kennedy made it official this afternoon that none of the five Congressional committees with a major role on health care would meet their Memorial Day deadline for acting on a bill.
But to ease concerns that the delay is raising among House Democrats, President Clinton plans to visit the Capitol on Wednesday afternoon.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Market Place; TV Stocks Are Punished for Murdoch's Move
Rupert Murdoch has cast a vote of confidence in the future of network television.
But you wouldn't suspect that from the reaction of the stock market.
CBS's stock was a big loser again yesterday, in the wake of the stunning move by the Fox Network, which is controlled by Mr.
Murdoch's News Corporation, to spend $500 million to get 12 stations to convert to Fox affiliations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a headline on the Patterns column of the Fashion page yesterday about Calvin Klein's new president and chief executive, Gabriella Forte, misstated her former position at Giorgio Armani.
She was the executive vice president of Armani and the head of its United States operations, not the president of Armani.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on Thursday, with a brief report in the Currents column about the 30th anniversary of the Habitat stores in London, misidentified the man shown at the left.
He was Vittorio Radice, Habitat's managing director, not Sir Terence Conran, the stores' founder; Sir Terence stood immediately to the right of Mr.
Radice.


Knicks Score 100 Against Pacers to Pass First Test
The Knicks escaped a potentially dangerous situation last night.
Holding off a fourth-quarter rally by the Indiana Pacers, the Knicks left Madison Square Garden with a 100-89 victory in Game 1 of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals.


Denny's Restaurants to Pay $54 Million in Race Bias Suits
Denny's, a national restaurant chain, agreed today to pay more than $54 million to settle lawsuits filed by thousands of black customers who had been refused service or had been forced to wait longer or pay more than white customers.
The new head of the civil rights division of the Justice Department, Deval L. Patrick, said it was the largest and broadest settlement under the Federal public-accommodation laws.
Those laws were adopted more than 30 years ago to end segregation in restaurants and other places that serve the public.


In School
The fancy name is "site-based management." That's what business professors call it.
In practice, it's tons uglier.
You take all the school district's principals, put them in a room, tell them how much money is available for next year and then, instead of the superintendent dictating priorities, the principals decide among themselves how scarce resources will be divided among schools.
The principals hate it.
"It pits colleague against colleague," said Michael Cox, the junior high principal.


Rose's Stores Inc.(RSTOQ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
MARVIN HAMLISCH will share the program with Aaron Copland, Benjamin Britten and Arthur Honegger when his "Anatomy of Peace," a 30-minute symphonic suite, is performed at Les Invalides in Paris on June 6 as part of a D-day observance.
But Mr.
Hamlisch will miss the performance because of a prior commitment in California: BARBRA STREISAND'S concert tour.
Mr.
Hamlisch, who is conducting Ms.
Streisand's 64-piece orchestra, described life on the road with the singer as "so far, so terrific."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 20
May 13
May 21
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
218.3
221.3
222.6
Distillate stocks
106.8
107.8
100.0
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.9
6.7
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.1
1.4
Crude stocks
336.0
332.2
357.4
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
94.1
95.8
89.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Despite Scandal, Research Trials Thrive
This spring, many leading cancer researchers said that one of their greatest fears seemed likely to come true.
In the wake of scandal surrounding the highly regarded clinical trial network run by Dr.
Bernard Fisher at the University of Pittsburgh, researchers worried that the public would lose faith in these scientific studies, which are essential to determining whether treatments work.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.28
3.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.20
4.23
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.60
4.63
3.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.18
6.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.43
7.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.29
8.32
7.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.42
5.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


I.B.M. TO TRANSFER ADVERTISING WORK TO SINGLE AGENCY
I.B.M., in the largest shift in advertising history, unexpectedly announced yesterday that it would dismiss more than 40 agencies it has worked with around the world and move its entire account to a single shop, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide.
I.B.M., one of the world's biggest marketers, spends $400 million to $500 million annually on advertising.
The decision stunned Madison Avenue and is expected to reverberate for months.
The changes were made without notice, so abruptly that in a couple of cases, some work by the agencies being dismissed has yet to appear.
For most of the agencies, the losses are serious and might necessitate layoffs.
In a couple of instances, they are potentially devastating.


Just in Time, Jones Gets Mets' Support
Bobby Jones didn't bother to head to the clubhouse to watch the ninth inning this evening, even though he knew his job was done.
He had pitched his guts out for eight innings, just him against the Pittsburgh Pirates, with Bobby Bonilla's solo homer his lone means of support.
And so he stayed in the dugout to watch the top of the ninth inning, to watch how this game would play out.
The Mets made it worth Jones's wait.


A Father's Snapshots of His Son
The father dates the son's hockey career from the time he took him to the Montreal Forum for the first time.
"It was Christmastime," Denis Brodeur said.
"I took his picture with Jean Beliveau. He was sitting on top of a goal."
Did Martin Brodeur remember the occasion?
No, but he knows the photograph.
"I think I was about 3," he said.


Eating Well
ROSIE DALEY'S cookbook is doing so well that her publicity agent doesn't care whether newspapers want to interview her.
Why bother, when she has already had several appearances on her boss's television program?
Her boss is Oprah Winfrey.
"In the Kitchen With Rosie" (Alfred A. Knopf, $14.95) is jogging -- in this case, out of the bookstores -- even faster than Ms.
Winfrey is these days, so fast it is breaking records on everyone's best-seller lists.
Industry estimates place average sales at more than 200,000 a week for the first five weeks of publication.
It is now climbing toward the half-million mark and has surpassed books by such popular fiction authors as Stephen King and Frederick Forsythe.


Off the Menu
The $19.94 Lunch
June is becoming the month of restaurant promotions.
Heading the list is the week of lunches for $19.94.
This is the third year for the discount lunches, which began in conjunction with the 1992 Democratic National Convention.
More than 100 restaurants, most of them in Manhattan, will have special lunch menus for $19.94 from June 13 to 17.
Some are also serving dinners for $19.94.
There are also further deals: at the Carnegie Deli, $19.94 will buy lunch for two; at the Second Avenue Deli, $19.94 will buy all you can eat.
The Promenade bar in the Rainbow Room will serve light food for two for $19.94 from 3 P.M.


Clinton's Not Immune From Civil Suits
To the Editor:
In "Later Will Also Do" (letter, May 18), Arthur Liman proposes, in connection with Paula Jones's lawsuit against President Clinton for sexual harassment, that courts should stay litigation against an incumbent President if a plaintiff's claims are based on events predating election.


Citing Time Pressure, Segarra Proposes Partial Financing for Youth Services
Providing another glimpse into the disarray inside the Department of Youth Services, Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra told a City Council committee yesterday that the department had been unable to process a new round of contract proposals for youth programs in time to finance them for the next fiscal year.
As a result, she said, the Giuliani administration is considering providing money to existing programs for three months to prevent a break in services during the summer.


Public Flocks to Former First Lady's Grave


DEERE &amp; CO. (DE,N)
Shares of Deere &amp; Company jumped by $2 in early trading yesterday after it reported earnings for its second quarter ending April 30 that were well above Wall Street's projections.
The stock then slumped to end the day down $2.375, to $71.625, as investors worried about the company's cautious projections for growth.
Deere's reported earnings of $2.20 a share were substantially above Wall Street's consensus estimate of $1.95, and the company projected that worldwide production in 1994 would exceed last year's level by 16 percent -- up from the 13 percent it had previously announced.
But Deere, a farm, lawn and garden and construction equipment maker based in Moline, Ill., also noted that production during the second half of this year would be down 3 percent from the first half because of normal vacations and the introduction of a new tractor line.


All-American Boy Who May Be a Buddha
Living in pre-Industrial Light and Magic times, the Buddha attained spiritual enlightenment the old-fashioned way: sitting beneath a bodhi tree until he arrived at perfect knowledge.
But in Bernardo Bertolucci's "Little Buddha," a rapturous $35 million epic about rejecting worldly excess to embrace simpler values, there is a better way.
Or at least a bigger one.
And so, as Prince Siddhartha (Keanu Reeves), who will evolve into the Buddha (or Enlightened One) through this experience, is seen beneath the tree during this film's most staggering sequence, all the wonders of the special-effects world are unleashed to convey his visions.
If this dazzling mixture of Buddhist thought and cinematic fireworks had been possible a couple of decades ago, it would have prompted the "Oh, wow" heard round the world.
Even today, in less giddy times, it makes for a gorgeous, grandly presumptuous spectacle that really deserves to be seen.


Fighting in Rwanda Capital Blocks Distribution of Food
More than a week of heavy fighting in Kigali has made it impossible to distribute food to tens of thousands of people stranded in the Rwandan capital, relief officials say.
Only a couple of United Nations cargo flights have been able to land at the airport in the last week, and United Nations troops have not been resupplied for six days, said Roger Carter of Unicef, part of a three-man United Nations relief team in Kigali that just arrived in Nairobi.
On Monday, a United Nations relief convoy trying to reach food warehouses came under heavy fire three times and was forced to turn back.


John Wain, British Novelist, Poet and Critic, Is Dead at 69
John Wain, a poet, novelist and critic who was one of Britain's antiheroic "angry young men" in the 1950's, died on Tuesday at John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England.
He was 69.
The cause was a stroke, the hospital said.


Music Notes
A Melodiya Agreement
Melodiya, the Russian state-run record label, has agreed to license recordings from its vast archives, as well as future recordings, to BMG Classics, a division of the Bertelsmann Music Group of Munich, Germany, and the parent company of RCA Red Seal.
The contract runs through 2012, and gives BMG exclusive rights to the Melodiya catalogue everywhere in the world except in countries that were part of the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc.


U.S. Envoy to Haiti Sees Glaring Gap in Embargo
Surveying the border with the Dominican Republic this morning, the United States Ambassador to Haiti declared what has seemed obvious for many weeks to the reporters accompanying him.
"It looks like a staging area for some of the contraband coming across," the Ambassador, William L. Swing, said, lowering his binoculars.
While the traffic in gasoline had stopped momentarily because of his visit, all around stood the clutter of a makeshift smugglers' city.


METRO DIGEST
A 'NO' ON DOCTOR-AIDED SUICIDE An influential New York State advisory panel has recommended that the state not legalize physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill, despite rising support for the practice.
The panel concluded that legalization would benefit only a few and would open the door to widespread abuse, like prescribing deadly drugs rather than trying to improve substandard care.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  KILLED AT RANDOM WAITING FOR A GAME A young Bronx man who was killed on a basketball court became the third victim of stray gunfire in New York City in a week, the police said.
But despite the cluster of such shootings, police statistics indicate that such random shootings have actually declined significantly in the last few years.
B3.


AMC Entertainment (AEN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For House-Spotters
DO you know the style of your house, or why Americans designed dwellings that looked like Swiss cuckoo clocks, Greek temples or Italian villas?
If the answer is no, a new book can help.


As Senators Go, So Go College Presidents
To the Editor:
Re "Why I Am Leaving the Senate" (Op-Ed, May 13) by Senator David Boren, I predict:


Woman Is Assaulted In Forest Hills Home
A woman was raped yesterday in her home in Forest Hills, Queens -- usually one of the city's safest neighborhoods -- while her baby daughter slept in the house, the police said.
The rapist confronted the woman, in her 20's, about 10:35 A.M. in her home, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
He said the police did not know how the man had gained entry to the house.


Economic Scene; Economists see an intellectual ally in Supreme Court nominee.
WHO is Judge Stephen Breyer, and where does he stand?
While groups at war over social issues ranging from abortion rights to discrimination have yet to take the measure of the President's Supreme Court nominee, both economists and lawyers well versed in economics are dancing in the aisles.
"Breyer is better educated in economics than any justice in the Court's history," said William Landes, an economist at the University of Chicago's law school.


Ugly Is as Ugly Does, So Actress Tries to Look Her Very Worst
Donna Murphy, a smooth-complexioned woman, keeps her moles in a little plastic sewing box.
It's an unusual thing, a special makeup kit for carrying ugliness around, even for an actress.
But as Fosca, the dying woman obsessed with a handsome army officer, in the new Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical, "Passion," Ms.
Murphy must convey the impression that she is homely, melancholic, frail and diseased.
And the moles -- brownish bits of putty, a couple of which she glues to her face every night -- help.
One wants to say she needs the help.
Ms.
Murphy has a lovely, complicated face: large eyes and a wide nose set in a smallish oval frame, features that are asymmetrical, unconventional, slightly askew and compelling in a darkly Mediterranean way, in spite of an Irish heritage.
Where her Fosca, onstage, is shriveled, Ms.
Murphy is both graceful and lithe.
Where Fosca's voice bespeaks her agony and self-pity, Ms.
Murphy's is husky and lush.
Where Fosca's expression is set in a permanent dour downturn, Ms.
Murphy smiles rather easily.


A Region Without Oil Is Redefining Venezuela
In the oil boom of the 1980's, the Venezuelan state of Lara was a slighted stepsister.
Lara had no oil wells, no refineries, not even a petrochemical plant.
Without oil, workaday Lara trudged along -- growing potatoes, picking coffee, bottling beer, forging steel, exporting onions and assembling vacuum cleaners.


A Loving Tribute
To The Home Section:
My friend handed me a carefully cut article ("A Loyal Friend, a Link to Paradise," April 28) and told me not to cry.
I looked at the photograph of Molly and knew my emotions would run high.
I had not yet completed the second paragraph when a soft and steady stream of tears rolled down my face.
Anne Raver's gentle words touched an emotional chord only a true dog-lover could know.


Reagan Forced South Africa Sanctions Issue
To the Editor:
In "South Africa Sanctions Didn't Undo Apartheid" (letter, May 15), Herman W. Nickel, Reagan Administration Ambassador to South Africa, gets one point exactly right: the credit for South Africa's remarkable political change belongs "overwhelmingly" to Nelson Mandela, F. W. de Klerk, and millions of their South African supporters.


Wilbert Walker, 83, U.S. Steel Executive
Wilbert A. Walker, who retired in 1975 as president of the United States Steel Corporation, died last Friday at his home in Belleair, Fla.
Mr.
Walker, a former resident of Short Hills, N.J., Manhattan and Ligonier, Pa., was 83.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Ambiguity Saves Trade Talks
The trade agreement announced this week by President Clinton and Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata does not obligate Japan to stimulate its economy so that it will absorb more imports or open up markets or settle any other dispute.
But it does get trade talks back on track -- a welcome reversal after the breakdown in February.
Talks should relieve the friction that has focused undue attention on a secondary issue -- the $50 billion bilateral trade imbalance -- that drives these allies apart rather than on Mr.
Hata's stalled agenda of political and economic reforms that can pull them together.
Though Japan's overall trade surplus results from its high savings rate, the imbalance with the U.S. is in part because of barriers that shut out U.S. exports and investment.
Most economists agree that the harm to the U.S. economy is small.
But Japan's practices undermine confidence in trade rules and, most important for Mr.
Clinton and Congress, hurt powerful constituents -- like Motorola in the cellular phone market.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.(WCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Perpetuating Biases?
To The Home Section:
As the parent of a school-age daughter, I read with interest the Parent &amp; Child article concerning gender bias in the classroom ("Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud," April 28).
However, in the admirable cause of combating such bias, the City and Country School has instead perpetuated it.
By encouraging children to play with blocks and not allowing them to play housekeeping and dress-up, the school invalidates activities perceived as female.
Why can't boys play housekeeping or dress-up too?
Why does gender-equality always seem to mean that girls can play like boys but boys cannot play like girls?
ROBYN BURLAND  Long Island City, Queens


Getting Better at Things That Go Bad


Univa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 23


Reviews/Theater; Recalling a Masculine Self, With a Voice Like Cagney's
Near the end of her one-woman show, "You're Just Like My Father," Peggy Shaw dons a man's business suit and strolls from table to table at the Club at LaMama, flirting with various women and singing "To All the Girls I've Loved Before."
For a woman to impersonate a Las Vegas lounge lizard is nothing new.
One of Lily Tomlin's most memorable caricatures is an oleaginous crooner with conspicuous chest hair named Tommy Velour.
In her recent show, "Hot August Phranc," the folk-pop singer Phranc did a devastating deconstruction of a Neil Diamond concert.


New 'Nutcracker' Staging, With a Few Adjustments
The real magic in American Ballet Theater's new staging of "The Nutcracker" lies in the dancing.
That became clear when several soloists took over some major roles at recent performances at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Since the production was introduced in December in Costa Mesa, Calif., changes have been made in Wendy Wasserstein's libretto and Kevin McKenzie's choreography.
For instance, the story of how the Prince becomes the Nutcracker is now told in a prologue, rather than in a flashback during the first act.
And whereas the Snowflake scene used to begin the second act, it now concludes the first, as Tchaikovsky intended.


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Promotional Tie-Ins For 'Jurassic' Video
MCA/Universal Home Video said yesterday that it had teamed up with six marketers for an elaborate advertising and promotional campaign to publicize the release of "Jurassic Park" on home video
The promotional partners for the videotape, which is due to be released on Oct. 4, are Kraft General Foods, for Jell-O brand puddings and gelatins; McDonald's; Kenner Products' line of "Jurassic Park" toys; Ocean of America's "Jurassic Park" video games; Tiger Electronics' hand-held "Jurassic Park" video games, and Compuserve.


Raiders May Seek Refuge in (Gasp!) Oakland
The focus of the first day of the National Football League owners meeting shifted from realignment and how to stock the two new expansion teams to the possible shift of the Raiders from Los Angeles to Oakland for a season.
A strong earthquake last January caused $35 million in damages to the Los Angeles Coliseum.
Al Davis, the Raiders' managing general partner, wants the N.F.L. to consider a proposal to allow his team to play the 1994 season in Oakland -- the city the team left in 1982.
Such a move would require the approval of 21 of the 28 owners.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday with an article about the Westchester and Nassau County Medical Centers reversed the figures for medicare and medicaid patients at the Nassau hospital.
Medicaid patients make up 54 percent of the hospital's patient load, and Medicare patients 16 percent.


Zurn Industries(ZRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CLINTON REJECTS PENALIZING CHINA
President Clinton has decided to extend China's trade privileges even though the country has not made as much progress on human rights as the United States had hoped for, senior Administration officials said today.
They said Mr.
Clinton, who will announce the decision as early as Thursday, will not impose sweeping tariffs on goods made by China's military.
Such a move had been recommended by a number of influential Democratic lawmakers.


Leyritz Says Latest Abuse By Yankees Goes Too Far
Jim Leyritz is consistently teased, taunted and even berated by his teammates.
It comes from behavior ranging from being a hot dog on the field to constant appearances at Knicks and Rangers games to being readily accessible for interviews.
Leyritz is the whipping boy in the clubhouse.
Yesterday, an anonymous coach or player whipped him too hard.
When Leyritz arrived at Yankee Stadium for last night's game with Toronto, after hitting a two-run homer Tuesday that helped vault the Yankees to a 6-1 victory, there was a sign taped above his locker which read: "There is no 'I' in team."


CHRONICLE
Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF underwent surgery for prostate cancer at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington yesterday.
Tonight, he is to be seen in a taped appearance in a two-hour "CBS Reports" documentary, "D-Day."
A statement issued by the public affairs office of the medical center said, "All indications are that the cancer was discovered in the early stages, and doctors are optimistic for a full recovery."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CLINTON FAVORS CHINA'S BENEFITS  President Clinton has decided to extend China's trade privileges even though the country has made less progress on human rights than the United States had hoped for, Administration officials said.
They said an announcement is expected today.
A1


Senate Passes Tax Cuts
The Connecticut Senate gave final approval today to a $380 million election-year tax cut, including a streamlining of the state income tax to smooth out increases in tax brackets, and a gradual reduction of the personal property tax on motor vehicles.
But the details, and the money to actually make good on the cuts, was left to future lawmakers.
The 23-to-11 vote, following approval by the House of Representatives last week, is predicated on the belief that the huge loans taken by the state to pay off its accumulated deficit in 1991 will gradually be paid off as the decade closes out.
The cuts would phase in over eight years as that debt is paid off.
Republicans Are Critical
Republican opponents in the Democratic-controlled legislature criticized the plan as insulting to voters, who will see little or no benefit this year or next, and unrealistic in any case because almost every provision will have to be passed again by future legislators under future governors.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who has indicated he will sign the tax-cut bill, is not seeking re-election, and the 187 seats in the General Assembly are all up for election in November as well.


Philip Morris Decides Not to Split Its Units
The Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday, after a much-anticipated meeting of its board of directors, that it would take no action for the moment on splitting its tobacco business from its food and beer operations.
But the company announced executive changes that prompted some analysts to speculate that such a split might still be in the offing.
Company executives would make no clarification beyond a tersely worded press release that relegated information on the breakup to a single sentence.
But sources close to Philip Morris said the company would probably not take up the issue again at the next scheduled board meeting on June 29.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the resignation of a Merck &amp; Company director misstated the location of its headquarters.
The company is based in Whitehouse Station, N.J.


Executive Changes
CHECKMATE ELECTRONICS INC., Roswell, Ga., appointed John J. Neubert chief operating officer.
He will continue as chief financial officer and senior vice president of finance and administration/treasurer.
OLD LYME HOLDING CORP., New York, named Daniel Benjamin chief financial officer.


Paris Journal; For the Bosnian Cause, Some French Brainpower
Whether it was Emile Zola denouncing the French Army in the Dreyfus Affair or Andre Malraux supporting the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War or Jean-Paul Sartre campaigning against the Vietnam War, French intellectuals have a long history of influencing French public opinion.
All the stranger, then, that they should have been so silent of late.
But the problem is that students, their natural audience, now worry more about finding well-paying jobs than about changing France.
And with the end of the cold war, the traditional debate between left and right has also lost its sting.


CML Group Inc.(CML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


All Who Live Must Die
To the Editor:
"Gaps in Geriatric Medicine Alarm Health Professionals" (front page, May 16) overlooks one fact: Old people are going to die.
So are young people, of course.
But not soon, if their doctors are successful.
Death in youth is unnatural; in old age it is the normal end of life.
It can be postponed, but at considerable expense and discomfort, and the postponement raises questions about the quality of the extended life.
Doctors for the young, the mature, the middle aged are working with nature.
With old people they are working against it.


Devils Stunned As Lead Is Erased
Except for Coach Jacques Lemaire, the Devils looked shocked after a 2-0 lead turned into a 4-2 loss to the Rangers tonight.
"It is a bit shocking right now," Bill Guerin said in a narrow hallway underneath the stands at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"We had a 2-0 lead and we didn't think we'd let it get away."


For Traffic-Jammed Drivers on Long Island, 12 Miles of Relief
The Long Island Expressway has long been a road that dashboard-pounding, stuck-in-traffic commuters love to hate.
The world's longest parking lot, they call it.
The Long Island Distressway, they call it.
Today, wonder of wonders, it was possible to drive the 12 miles from here to Melville without stopping.
At 55 miles an hour.
During rush hour.


Big-Time Tourism Courts Vietnam
Da Nang is now a stop for cruise ships.
Cam Ranh Bay may get Club Med as a neighbor.
And the Hoa Lo Prison, nicknamed the Hanoi Hilton by Americans held there during the Vietnam War, is really becoming a hotel.
The travel industry, which has been slowly discovering Vietnam as a tourist destination over the last few years, is scrambling to cut more deals there since President Clinton lifted the American trade embargo in February, making it easier for Americans to invest and travel.


Harnischfeger Industries(HPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


A victim of I.B.M.'s big account shift, a small fledging agency believes in life after Big Blue.
THE executives of the smallest, and newest, agency that I.B.M. will dismiss in the biggest account shift ever are gamely trying to pick themselves up, dust themselves off and start, well, not all over again, but somewhere that takes advantage of their brief, tempestuous tenure as an I.B.M. agency.
"It's just a fascinating piece of business to work on," Jane Newman, the executive vice president and director of strategic planning at the agency, Merkley Newman Harty in New York, said yesterday.


Books of The Times; Life of a Salesman and the Pursuit of the Grail
The Force  By David Dorsey  315 pages. Random House. $23.
Selling is the subject of David Dorsey's nonfiction book, "The Force," which manages to combine some of the chilling fascination of David Mamet's play about Florida land salesmen, "Glengarry Glen Ross," with the sympathy of that play's forerunner, Arthur Miller's "Death of a Salesman."


Imperial Holly Corp.(IHK,A) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Reviews/Dance; Tragedies That Follow The Trumpets of War
The language of classical ballet is just that, a lexicon of movement that stretches to the extreme.
American Ballet Theater taught this lesson eloquently on Tuesday night when it revived Antony Tudor's brutally dramatic antiwar ballet, "Echoing of Trumpets," and contrasted it with the purity of the 18-year-old Paloma Herrera in her brilliant debut as the ballerina in George Balanchine's "Theme and Variations."
"Echoing of Trumpets," which is to be performed again tonight at the Metropolitan Opera House, is a major revival and its epic resonance always shines through.
The ballet's images are bleak and grim.
But as is so typical of Tudor, who was Ballet Theater's leading choreographer until he died in 1987, it places the sordid and the beautiful side by side.


Hewlett-Packard Predicts Slower Growth in Orders
Shares in the Hewlett-Packard Company dipped today after its executives told analysts that the rate of growth of both orders and revenues would slow.
Still, many analysts said the computer maker continued to outperform rivals of comparable size.
Shares of the company, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., fell as much as $3.375 before rallying to close at $81.25, down 62.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Volume was 2.77 million shares, more than triple the daily average of 814,077 shares in the last three months.


Thai Legislators Enmeshed in U.S. Charges of Drug-Trafficking
Parliamentary sessions in Thailand have degenerated into a jittery guessing game as lawmakers struggle to figure out who else among them has been labeled a drug dealer by the United States Government.
One member of Parliament was forced to resign this month after a Federal court in California unsealed a 1991 indictment in which he had been charged with smuggling more than 45 tons of marijuana into the United States.
His assets in the United States, including a home in Beverly Hills and a Mercedes-Benz, were seized under a court order.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Mark Lipman, a private investigator, referred incorrectly to Robert Daley, a former New York City police official.
Mr.
Daley, who worked with Mr.
Lipman on the book "Stealing: How America's Employees Are Stealing Their Companies Blind," was a deputy police commissioner of New York City, not the Commissioner.


Review/Cabaret; Morgana King Still Offers Sensuality and Honey
Three decades after Morgana King made a splash with her feverishly intense version of "A Taste of Honey," the singer, who will be 64 next week, still conveys the aura of a woman in the throes of a sensual obsession.
Her style, so calculated as to risk seeming mannered, consists of pinching her voice into an ethereal hum and spinning out improvisations that suggest prolonged, half-stifled cries of passion.
In Tuesday's opening-night show of her two-week engagement at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea), Ms.
King sang a version of "A Taste of Honey" that recaptured the tumultuous dreaminess of her original recorded version.
Two other songs from "With a Taste of Honey," her landmark 1964 album -- "Corcovado" and "Lazy Afternoon" -- were among the high points of a set dominated by ballads.
Among the more recent songs to receive the grand coloratura treatment were "A Song for You" and "Everything Must Change."


Neutrogena Corp.(NGNA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


If Rosty Goes
House Democrats have been in denial about Representative Dan Rostenkowski's legal troubles.
But with plea-bargain talks under way, it seems inevitable that his days as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee are about to end.
The departure of the Illinois Democrat, a brusque master of the legislative process, would leave an enormous void as Congress tackles health care reform.
His colleagues now have an urgent duty to make sure his Ways and Means successor is someone with the political skills for effective leadership.


Thomas Nelson Inc.(TNEL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Recital; An Opera-House Voice In the Service of Intimacy
In both its scope and its timbre, Marie Plette's soprano seems made primarily for the opera house.
A winner of the Metropolitan Opera's National Council auditions in 1992, she has sung in productions of "Die Zauberflote" and "Gotterdammerung" in the house.
But at her recital debut on Monday afternoon at the Kaye Playhouse, Ms.
Plette explored the ways in which a powerful voice and a taste for grand gesture could be put to the service of intimate expressivity.
She posed some interesting challenges for herself in songs by Poulenc, Griffes and Richard Strauss that rely, to varying degrees, on currents of delicacy and nostalgia.
Had she merely scaled back her sound, she would have seemed restrained, not persuasive.
Instead, she followed her instincts and shaped each song on her own terms.
She found the perfect lilt for Poulenc's "Chemins de l'Amour," and in Griffes's "Three Poems by Fiona McLeod" she suggested the hazy, impressionistic atmosphere without making any sacrifices in power.
The Strauss songs were better still: her graceful changes in coloration were entirely responsive to the texts, and made for exquisite, moving accounts of "Befreit" and "Morgen."


Versa Services reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CES-CARD ESTABLISHMENT SERVICES INC., Melville, L.I., a provider of payment processing, has acquired three health care information services companies: MedE America Inc., Mitchel Field, L.I.; Medical Processing Center Inc., Twinsburg, Ohio, and Wellmark Inc., Westlake Village, Calif.


From Bumper to Bumper to a Rush-Hour Smile


S. Garry Oniki, 73, Minister to the Poor
The Rev.
S.
Garry Oniki, a Protestant clergyman who ministered to congregations in poor urban neighborhoods for more than 30 years, died on Monday in Elmhurst Hospital in Elmhurst, Ill.
Mr.
Oniki, who lived in Bensenville, Ill., was 73.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Smoking Out the Tobacco Industry
Americans generally think it unsporting to kick an opponent who is down.
But the sellers of cigarettes, given their history of arrogance and mendacity, provide a target too tempting, and deserving, to resist.
So here is a cheer for the state of Mississippi, which is suing 13 cigarette manufacturers for the cost of medical programs that support victims of smoking-related illnesses.
The tobacco industry, a resourceful opponent, is of course hitting back -- with a libel suit here, a ballot initiative there and, all over the country, an advertising campaign disputing Government claims that secondhand smoke is a health hazard.


School Official Sent to Prison Over False Asbestos Reports
The former head of the asbestos task force for New York City schools was sentenced yesterday to two and a half years in prison for falsely reporting that the schools were free of contamination.
The later discovery of asbestos set off a crisis that delayed the opening of school for almost a million children last year.
The official, Robert Pardi, the first Board of Education official to be convicted in the asbestos scandal that emerged last summer, admitted certifying reports that inspections had been finished on hundreds of schools where federally mandated checks and laboratory tests had not been completed.
At one sitting in May 1989, Mr.
Pardi admitted, he signed more than 100 blank inspection forms as his staff watched.


Calendar: Benefit Talk, Show House and Tours
Preservation Benefit  Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street); (212) 995-5260.
The New York Landmarks Conservancy is sponsoring a lecture on Wednesday at 6 P.M. by Prof.
Vincent Scully, an architectural historian at Yale University.
After the talk, there will be a dinner at the Metropolitan Club, at which Professor Scully will be given an award for his preservation efforts.
Proceeds from the lecture and dinner will benefit the conservancy.
Reservations are required.
Tickets, lecture only, $75; with dinner, $250 or $500.
Tours and Tea  CIII Restaurant at the Washington Square Hotel, 103 Waverly Place (Macdougal Street); (212) 254-1200.
Arthur Marks, an urban historian, will lead a series of walking tours in downtown Manhattan, starting with political sites in the Greenwich Village area, on Saturday from 1:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Other tours will include film locations in Greenwich Village (June 4); art galleries and boutiques in SoHo (June 11), and a tour commemorating the Stonewall rebellion (June 25).
Reservations are required.
Fee, including high tea at the restaurant following the tour, $20.
Designer Show House  Deshon-Allyn House at the Lyman Allyn Art Museum, 613 Williams Street (near Route 32), New London, Conn.; (203) 443-7133.
Twenty-five designers will participate in a show house to benefit the Child and Family Agency of Southeastern Connecticut and the museum, which owns the house, from June 4 through July 3.
No children under 6.
Open daily, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tickets, including admission to the museum, in advance, $12; at the door, $15.
History in Providence  Providence (R.I.) Preservation Society; (401) 831-7440.
The 15th annual Festival of Historic Houses, from June 3 through 5, will feature three tours: a candlelight walking tour of the Power and Cooke streets national historic landmark district, a house and garden walking tour and a bus tour of historic neighborhoods.
Tickets, walking tours, $18.50; bus tours, $12.50.
Reservations and schedules are available by calling the society.


Essay; Third Manassas
When word reached the nation's capital that the first major battle of the Civil War was to be fought at Bull Run, a little stream near Manassas, Va., all of social Washington packed luncheon baskets and turned out in buggies to witness it.
Hours later, they streamed back in panic.
The rebels had won; the capital itself was in danger.
That first battle of Bull Run, as well as Second Manassas later, sent a frisson of fear into the heart of the Union.


We Can Help Give Kids a Safe Place to Play
To the Editor:
"When Trouble Starts Young," your youth violence series, could not be more timely or more disturbing.
The references to the role of sports in keeping kids out of trouble are noteworthy.
You note that "young people turn to mischief and aggression because they have few other diversions and little supervision" in your May 16 front-page article, adding: "The old police athletic leagues are gone, and recreation centers sit empty because of cities' fiscal trouble."


Dr. King's Assassin Loses Bid for Parole


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Cole Taylor Financial Group Inc., Wheeling, Ill, is selling $25 million in junk bonds due in 2001 at 100 to yield 9 percent through Chicago Corp.
The subordinated notes, payable monthly, are nonredeemable for three years and rated BBB- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $40 million of index amortizing notes due in 2004 priced at 100 to yield 45 basis points more than the three-month London interbank offered rate through Paine Webber Inc.
The issue is callable in two years and the notes have a 9.75 percent maximum coupon.


Review/Art; The New Warhol Museum: A Shrine for an Iconoclast
The fame of the Pop artist and impresario Andy Warhol, rarely mentioned without running his best-known remark on being famous a little deeper into the ground, now seems guaranteed in perpetuity, at least in Pittsburgh.
The Andy Warhol Museum, the first museum devoted exclusively to a postwar American artist, opened on May 15 in this city of his birth, a place he revisited as seldom as possible once he departed for New York.
It is an impressive triumph, but not an unmitigated one.
The museum is a joint venture of two Manhattan-based organizations, the Dia Center for the Arts and the Andy Warhol Foundation (caretaker of the artist's estate), and Pittsburgh's own Carnegie Museum of Art.
Its remarkable, singularly appropriate new home, a handsomely renovated 1911 industrial building redesigned by the New York architect Richard Gluckman, may be the apotheosis of the 25-year-old tradition of the renovated SoHo loft.
But its austere, open spaces and contrasts of quietly sensuous materials -- tinted plaster, galvanized iron, brushed aluminum and etched glass, as well as cork and concrete -- also make it one of the best-looking and most comfortable museums to come along in some time.


Solzhenitsyn Looks Home, to Russia
At age 75, after 20 years in exile, nearly all of it spent in solitude in this mountain town, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn today began the long journey home, to Russia.
He is returning to a country where he was once imprisoned and his books banned, a country, in tumult and confusion, that he has said he hopes to understand again.


Bank of Montreal (BMO) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Rock; Chrissie Hynde, Back and Battling
Chrissie Hynde chose the perfect moment to reconvene the Pretenders and recharge her career.
Nearly all the female rockers who emerged in the late 1980's and the 90's owe something to Ms.
Hynde.
Her catchy, confident, idiosyncratic songs introduced a character who was both sultry and tough; back when female rockers were rarer, she led a band without flinching or special pleading.
The Pretenders have just released "Last of the Independents" (Sire), their first album since 1990 and their best album in a decade.
On Tuesday night at Irving Plaza, they made Ms.
Hynde's latest songs sound as good as her old ones.
It didn't hurt that Martin Chambers, the Pretenders' original drummer, has returned to the band, once again splashing water, hurling sticks into the air (one fell back down on his head) and giving the music a laconic yet adamantine foundation.
The other three band members -- Adam Seymour on guitar, Andy Hobson on bass and Zeb Jameson on keyboards -- are new, but they determinedly recreate the recorded versions of the songs; in "Precious," Mr.
Seymour even copied James Honeyman-Scott's original guitar solo.


U.S. Criticizes Arafat's Claim to Set Aside Current Israeli Laws
Secretary of State Warren Christopher today joined the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, in criticizing Yasir Arafat for statements that they said seemed to violate the self-rule agreement with Israel.
At a joint news conference, Mr.
Christopher supported Mr.
Peres's contention that Mr.
Arafat had no power to decree, as he did on Tuesday, that Israeli law would no longer apply in Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Hats Off to Messier! He Never Doubted It
The ones who had seen Mark Messier at his best knew that tonight ranked with his finest moments.
His newer teammates, the ones who had not lived through the championship seasons in Edmonton all those years ago, were the ones who marveled at what he accomplished.
"We were all talking about it," Brian Leetch said, after Messier's third-period hat trick turned a 2-1 deficit, and the potential end of the Ranger season, into a 4-2 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was a victory that their captain had promised would happen.


Fox Shuffles Its Shows To Compete in Prime Time
Shortly after announcing plans to acquire 12 new affiliates from its rivals, Fox has drawn up an unusually aggressive fall television schedule that moves some of its established hits to new nights.
Fox, which programs fewer hours in prime time than the other networks, also announced seven new shows for the fall.
An usually high number of them, five, are hourlong dramas.


Paying Courtesy Calls


Good Houses Make Good Neighbors
CASCADE COURT, in the First Hill neighborhood of Seattle, is an anomaly, an architecturally handsome complex for low-income people that fits easily into the neighborhood.
It was made possible by Priscilla Collins, a philanthropist and the owner of the Stimson Green Mansion, the Tudor-style house next to Cascade Court.
The 100 low-income apartments at 1201 Summit Avenue opened on March 10.
Residents of the complex have incomes ranging from $17,000 for a family of two to $21,600 for a family of four.
Rents range from $350 for a studio to $525 for a three-bedroom apartment.
Condominiums in the neighborhood sell for $250,000 to $1 million.


Durable Orders Up Just 0.1% As Home Resales Rise 1.2%
Orders for long-lived factory goods languished in April, more evidence of slowing business expansion, Commerce Department figures showed today.
Durable goods orders, which lead to activity in coming months, edged up one-tenth of 1 percent, below most expectations, and would have been solidly in negative territory without a presumably temporary surge for military aircraft.


Derivatives Get a Key Supporter
Strongly disagreeing with a new Congressional study, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, said today there was "negligible" risk that the rapidly growing market for financial derivatives might someday require a taxpayer bailout.
In testimony before a House subcommittee, Mr.
Greenspan and other senior financial regulators said there was no need for new legislation to supervise derivatives.


Market Place; Old patterns no longer apply in trading auto-supplier stocks.
PICKING stocks in auto suppliers used to be mostly a matter of timing: If you bought almost any supplier before a boom, you could enjoy fattening earnings and then, when the recovery ripened, reap a nice profit.
But during this recovery the changing relationships between the domestic auto makers and their suppliers have added several wrinkles to the game.
To cut costs, the auto makers are using their leverage as mammoth purchasers to push down the prices charged them by suppliers.
And at the same time they are forcing suppliers to pick up more of the work and expense of designing and engineering components.


Accounts
*
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, was named to handle 12 regional marketing cooperative accounts of the Arby's fast-food chain, in regions including Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Tennessee, previously handled by various local agencies.
Doner has been handling Arby's national account and the Richmond regional co-op account.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


Saberhagen Hurts Back; Mets Win
Bret Saberhagen spent the final three innings of tonight's game against the Pittsburgh Pirates closeted in the Mets' clubhouse, his back spasming in pain.
The Mets' bullpen spent it struggling to survive.
With Saberhagen chased from the mound with back problems that may cost him a start, three Mets relievers struggled through messy outings before John Franco took over and recorded the final five outs for a 6-3 victory.


Hudson's Bay Co.(HBC) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Violence to Animals Signals Severe Disorder
To the Editor:
Residents of Manlius, N.Y., are right to be grieved and angry over the brutal slaying of a village swan (news article, May 14).
Not only was this act ruthless and cruel, but it also suggests a mental disturbance in the two youths and indicates their potential for other violent behavior.


Roar of the Belmont Crowd Is Music to Krone's Ears
Nine months after she tumbled to the track at Saratoga and was trampled in the dust, her right ankle shattered, her left elbow pierced and her heart bruised, Julie Krone bounced down the gravel ramp into the paddock at Belmont Park yesterday afternoon to a wave of applause.
Shining in yellow silks and a smile beneath a yellow helmet, her ankle held together by two metal plates and 13 screws, her right boot fortified by a built-in fiber cast, she was back on stage.


Improper Safety Review Cited In a Fire at a Nuclear Reactor
The nuclear physics experiment that caught fire at the Brookhaven National Laboratory here on March 31 was not properly analyzed for safety when it was installed 16 years ago, and technicians added parts that made it more dangerous, the Federal Department of Energy said today.
The fire, at a research reactor owned by the department, spread radioactive material inside the reactor building and contaminated seven workers, although it did not result in any significant radiation exposure, laboratory officials said.


Rate Ruling on Nuclear Plants Favors Utility
In a decision that could have a national impact as electric utilities prepare for a new era of competition, the California Public Utilities Commission yesterday let Southern California Edison pass through to its customers at a faster rate the cost of two nuclear plants.
The decision means the utility will be able to pay off the huge construction bill years earlier than planned, reducing its expenses more quickly and giving it more flexibility to compete with other utilities.


Green Forest Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bridge
The Eastern Regional Championships begin today at the Sheraton New York Hotel, 7th Avenue at 53d Street.
The schedule of major events is:
Today, Green Point Imp Pairs (preregistered) and Stratified Open Pairs 1:30 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Imp Pairs 7:30 P.M. (continues next evening).


One Standard For Courses Is Presented
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday tried to bring order to what gets taught in New York City's 1,100 public schools, issuing a new 200-page curriculum guide that suggests minimum standards for what every student in each grade should learn.
The new document represents the first attempt to impose instructional standards across the city's public schools since William H. Maxwell, the first schools superintendent, ordered a similar curriculum guide for lower schools in 1903, Board of Education officials said.


Commercial Intertech Corp.(TEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Why Economic Systems Need Overhaul
To the Editor:
No political-economic system or theory is applicable at all times to all situations.
That maxim might have leavened "Life's Hard? Blame the Market" (The Week in Review, May 8), on the confused economic scene.


Four Officers Found Guilty In Two Unwarranted Raids
Four New York City police officers last night were found guilty of a series of crimes stemming from an incident in 1990 when they barged into two apartments in East Harlem, held the occupants captive for nearly four hours and ransacked the homes in search of a missing police radio.
After hearing evidence for three weeks, a jury in State Supreme Court in Manhattan found the officers guilty of 31 of 73 counts.
All were convicted of criminal trespass, unlawful imprisonment and official misconduct, and two officers were also convicted of lying under oath to try to cover up their actions.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, credits were omitted in The Living Section yesterday for pictures of the chef Terrance Brennan and the restaurateur Vincent Sardi, with an article about chefs' most successful creations.
The photographer was Philip Greenberg, for The New York Times.


CHRONICLE
There is medical news from the West Coast, too.
BARBRA STREISAND was ordered by doctors to cancel the opening performance of the California leg of her international concert tour last night because she has viral tracheolaryngitis.
In other words, she's lost her voice.
Ken Sunshine, her public-relations consultant, said yesterday afternoon: "She has not been feeling well for the last few weeks, but her throat was fine until now. Her last show was in Detroit on May 19. She then flew to Los Angeles, was getting ready for the opening in Anaheim tonight when her vocal cords felt strained, and she ran a fever."


Republicans and Conservatives Solidify Efforts Against Cuomo
New York Republicans cemented a potentially vital alliance with the Conservative Party yesterday to rally behind one candidate, George E. Pataki, to challenge the three-term Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, this fall.
In a muscular display of old-fashioned ticket-balancing, the Republicans completed their three-day convention in Manhattan by endorsing for comptroller a Conservative favorite, Herbert London, the New York University economics professor.
The convention had resoundingly rejected Mr.
London two days earlier for governor when it instead chose Mr.
Pataki, a 48-year-old State Senator.


SPACE TELESCOPE CONFIRMS THEORY OF BLACK HOLES
The strange and awesome cosmic phenomenon known as a supermassive black hole, a gravitational monster that gobbles up everything around it and is so powerful that no light or matter can escape, moved from the realm of theory to reality yesterday.
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had found conclusive evidence for the existence of an extraordinarily powerful black hole in the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87, which is 50 million light-years away in the constellation Virgo.
This attractive force of collapsed matter weighs as much as three billion Suns but is concentrated in a space no larger than the solar system.


Boutros-Ghali Angrily Condemns All Sides for Not Saving Rwanda
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali expressed exasperation today at the refusal of most countries to send troops to Rwanda.
He called the continuing slaughter there "genocide" and said it was a "scandal" that the world has not acted speedily to end the blood-letting.
At a news conference in New York, the Secretary General described the United Nations efforts in Rwanda in harsh terms, saying: "It is a failure not only for the United Nations; it is a failure for the international community. And all of us are responsible for this failure. Not only the great powers but the African powers, the nongovernmental organizations, all the international community.


Scoreless Tie Shows Dents in U.S. Armor
On an afternoon when the threat of lightning proved greater than the threat of scoring, the United States soccer team had to settle for a somber 0-0 tie today against Saudi Arabia.
A number of defensive lapses, the inability to finish off 15 scoring chances and a lack of familiarity created by the continuing integration of players returning from foreign leagues left the United States unable to defeat one of the weaker teams among the 24 World Cup finalists.


What the Pacers Learned From Game 1
The Pacers watched film yesterday morning, the good and the bad, of their Game 1 loss to the Knicks in the Eastern Conference Finals on Tuesday night, and what they saw was too much ugliness in between and toward the end to topple the focused and hungry Knicks.
Too tentative on the drive.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about on-line information services misstated the ownership of Dialog Information Services.
It is owned solely by Knight-Ridder Inc.
The News Corporation, headed by Rupert Murdoch, owns the Delphi Internet Services Corporation.


Wherehouse Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


No Headline
"We are sending a clear warning signal to the nation that legalizing assisted suicide would be profoundly dangerous to many patients." -- TRACY E. MILLER, head of a New York panel that studied assisted suicide.  [ A1:5. ]


AT HOME WITH: Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy; The Driven Mr. and Mrs. Daisy
Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy have often held the stage by themselves in two-character plays, which the English call two-handers.
Although they have a close bond with their family and friends, their life has itself been a two-hander.
Individually and together, they have been showered with awards: Tonys, Emmys, Obies, Kennedy Center honors, the Common Wealth Award -- by Mr.
Cronyn's count 50 or 60 prizes.
They seem to be missing only a Nobel Prize ("What for?" Miss Tandy asks. "Court jester?") and, in his case, an Oscar.
He was nominated once, in 1944, for "The Seventh Cross." His wife won for "Driving Miss Daisy" in 1990.
This year when the Tony administration committee decided to give its first lifetime achievement award, the choice naturally was America's first acting couple.
Although Mr.
Cronyn can joke, "It's a little like a premature obituary: Better give it to them while they're still vertical," they will accept it with alacrity (on June 12) because the theater is, in his words, "home and mother."


Devils Forced to Go to Garden For Seventh Game on Friday
Of course this splendid series will go the distance, these epic seven games in May between the Rangers and the Devils.
It should not be any other way to see which team survives and moves on to the Stanley Cup finals.
The Rangers assured such a finale tonight with a come-from-behind 4-2 victory in Game 6 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
They rallied from an early two-goal deficit.


Clinton Agrees to Welfare Financing
After months of struggling over how to finance his welfare proposal, President Clinton has decided to spend about $9.3 billion over five years, with about $7 billion of that coming from cuts in other social programs, Administration officials said today.
Most of the remaining money would come from the corporate environmental income tax, which is currently devoted to the Superfund program.
Officials called the move an accounting measure that would not reduce the amount actually spent on environmental clean-up, because the program is accruing more than it is allowed to spend.
But environmental groups criticized the action, saying the tax money should be used to expand environmental programs.


Dr. Dorothy F. Berezin; Child Psychologist, 81
Dr.
Dorothy F. Berezin, a child psychologist who served as a municipal welfare official from 1969 to 1978, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 81.
The cause was kidney disease, said her daughter, Judith A. Berezin.


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Citing a Rule, A Grand Jury Does Not Indict Two Officers
A grand jury yesterday urged the New York City Police Department to dismiss two officers for corruption, but said it could not indict them because the only witness to the crime was a fellow police officer who was also an accomplice.
The officers were accused of stealing tens of thousands of dollars from the trunk of a car in Washington Heights.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said the unusual grand jury decision underscored the difficulty of prosecuting police officers for corruption because of a state law that prohibits the conviction of a defendant based solely on the testimony of an accomplice.
In the case of the two officers, the only evidence against them was the testimony of a third officer who prosecutors said initially shared the loot, which was evidence in a 1992 double homicide.  'An Ideal Example'
"This case is an ideal example of how the accomplice-corroboration rule creates a shield for the guilty in this state," Mr.
Morgenthau said.
"Possibly, with this report, the Legislature will understand how detrimental this rule is to the cause of justice."


Sonics President May Go
The Seattle SuperSonics' president, BOB WHITSITT, the National Basketball Association's Executive of the Year, may be leaving the franchise and could be taking another general manager's job in the league.
The Sonics' owner, BARRY ACKERLEY announced yesterday that Whitsitt has submitted a written request to be released from his contract.
Ackerley said he will take Whitsitt's request under advisement.


Despite Frustrations, Boutros-Ghali Plans to Stay


Moody's Upgrades Nassau Bond Rating
A credit rating agency today raised Nassau County's bond rating one grade in response to improvements in the county's fiscal situation.
The agency, Moody's Investors Service, announced that it had raised the county's general obligation rating to Baa1, from Baa.
It attributed the upgrade to a decline in the county's general fund deficit to slightly under $18 million at the end of 1993, from $120 million at the end of 1992.


GC Cos.(GCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Father of Confessed Mexican Assassin Hints at Government Plot
Hinting that the presidential candidate of Mexico's governing party was killed in a Government plot, the father of the confessed assassin now asserts that his son met before the shooting with a federal security agent who was arrested at the scene.
A lawyer for the family said today that Ruben Aburto Cortez, the father of Mario Aburto Martinez, had not spoken up before about his son's reported meeting with the agent because he feared for the lives of relatives still in Tijuana.


CHRONICLE
It's a boy for ROGER CLINTON, the President's half-brother, and his wife, MOLLY MARTIN CLINTON.
The baby, TYLER CASSIDY CLINTON, was born in Torrance, Calif., on May 12.
"Everybody is doing great," NEEL LATTIMORE, deputy press secretary to Hillary Rodham Clinton, said yesterday.
He added that word of the birth had not got out "because nobody asked."


Plant for Flat-Panel Screens Opening
The Kopin Corporation, a tiny maker of high-definition imaging products based in Taunton, Mass., plans to open today the nation's largest factory yet for production of flat-panel display screens used as monitors in small computing devices.
The company said the plant, opening with state support at a site in Westboro, Mass., would be capable of turning out one million flat-panel screens a year.


Riley Still Sees A Tough Series
Both the Knicks and the Indiana Pacers are unbeaten at home during the playoffs.
And the Knicks have some impressive facts to throw at Indiana as they try to retain their home-court advantage over the Pacers in the Eastern Conference championship series, which continues with Game 2 Thursday night at Madison Square Garden.
Over the last two seasons, the Knicks are 14-1 at home during the playoffs -- 7-1 last season and 7-0 this year.
And the Pacers, including the playoffs, have lost 10 consecutive games in New York, dating to 1991.


Rostenkowski Indictment Possible Next Week
As talks on a possible plea agreement bogged down today, Federal prosecutors prepared to seek a broad felony indictment against Representative Dan Rostenkowski as soon as next week, lawyers in the case said today.
But the prosecutors have not set a deadline while there is a chance that negotiations will produce a settlement, the lawyers said.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday, about a rescue of the New York Philharmonic's gala performance last night, misstated the first name of the soprano who answered the call along with the pianist Garrick Ohlsson after Andre Previn, who was to perform, underwent bypass surgery.
The soprano was June Anderson, not Judith.


Released by the Dodgers, Strawberry Stands Alone at Test Time
For the first time in 12 years, Darryl Strawberry does not have to worry about baseball.
All Strawberry must do now is concern himself with Darryl.
As if his life depends upon it.
Because it does.


Report Urges Reversal of Policy on Flood Control
A year after the Mississippi River and many of its tributaries spilled over their banks, devastating much of the nation's midsection, a committee of Government experts is urging the Clinton Administration to abandon the Army Corps of Engineers' longstanding preference for dams and levees as the main means of controlling floods.
The committee's draft recommendations, to be made public on Thursday after a review that began in January, call instead for greater efforts to promote the evacuation of risky flood plains, the relocation of businesses and farms to higher ground and the restoration of natural flood cycles.


Panel Tells Albany to Resist Legalizing Assisted Suicide
An influential New York State advisory panel has recommended, unanimously, that the state resist pressure to legalize physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill.
The report comes amid escalating support for the practice, as voiced in polls, state legislatures and courts around the country.
The panel, the New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, released a report yesterday concluding that legalization would benefit only a few and would open the door to widespread abuse.
In particular, they said it might lead some doctors to prescribe deadly drugs rather than trying to improve the generally substandard care of patients who are dying, in severe pain or seriously depressed.


Parent &amp; Child; Study Finds Benefits In Emotional Control
A NEW study suggests that how parents handle their own and their children's emotions may have striking and wide-ranging effects on their children's physical health, academic achievement and emotional well-being.
The study, conducted by three researchers at the University of Washington in Seattle, found that when parents paid attention to their emotions and could teach their children self-awareness and self-control, children scored higher on math and reading achievement tests, had longer attention spans and had fewer behavior problems in school, at home or with friends.
These children also had lower levels of stress hormones in their urine and a lower heart rate.


A Top Bell Atlantic Official Resigns
Arthur A. Bushkin, a principal architect of the Bell Atlantic Corporation's plunge into interactive television, resigned today and offered little explanation except that he wanted to pursue "entrepreneurial" ventures.
The departure comes as the telephone company, still regrouping after the collapse of its proposed merger with Tele-Communications Inc., prepares to build advanced video networks that will offer movies on demand, interactive home shopping and other services to 8.5 million homes by the end of the decade.


Spartech Corp.(SEH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Seeking Peace of Mind or Shelter From the Storm?


In-Wall Speakers: Heard but Not Seen
IT used to be said of children in more mannerly times that they should be seen but not heard.
The opposite holds for loudspeakers, especially in the newly popular home theater systems.
Surround-sound effects are fine for watching movies or listening to music, but who wants to clutter a room with loudspeakers?
This explains the current trend toward virtually invisible loudspeakers that fit flush with the walls.
In the typical home theater installation, the sound moves about the room, reaching the viewer from various directions, depending on the action on the screen.
In effect, the soundtrack of the movie is presented at home exactly as it is in a well-equipped theater.
And when the system is used to play music, surround-sound equipment simulates the ambiance of the concert hall, nightclub or whatever acoustics fit the music.


Review/Television; Examining The Abuse Defense In Trials
The sharpest moments come early in "Don't Blame Me," when Bernard Goldberg, the program's reporter, listens with an air of profound disbelief to a lawyer for one of the Menendez brothers explaining what drove her client to kill.
The point of tonight's entertaining yet not unserious edition of "Eye to Eye" is that Mr.
Goldberg's skepticism was not shared by jurors who bought the defense argument that sexual abuse early in life, not simple greed, had compelled Erik and Lyle Menendez to do away with their parents.
And the assertion by the resourceful William M. Kunstler that his client Colin Ferguson shot up a car on a Long Island commuter train because of something known as "black rage" sends Mr.
Goldberg's eyeballs through the top of his head.


Oneida Ltd.(OCQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Gtech Holdings
Shares of Gtech Holdings, a maker of lottery equipment, lost more than a third of their value yesterday.
The company disclosed that earnings for the year ending next February may be flat or lower than the $1.29 a share in the 1994 fiscal year.
It attributed the projection, in part, to lost bids for equipment in Canada and Germany.
The stock was the most active on the New York Stock Exchange, with 6.26 million shares traded.


Work by New Film Makers
A free showcase of work by new and student film makers is to be presented today at noon at the Cineplex Odeon Worldwide Plaza, Eighth Avenue and 50th Street.
There will be special showings of animated films and of films by women at 4:30.
The series is presented by the School of Visual Arts and sponsored by Cineplex Odeon, Eastman Kodak and Hanna-Barbera Productions.
Information: (212) 592-2180.


Wal-Mart to Change Its 'Always' Slogan
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said yesterday that it would modify its slogan after it was challenged before the National Advertising Review Board, a watchdog panel that is part of advertising industry's self-regulation efforts.
The board said Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, should change the theme "Always the low price. Always" because, the board said, it implied that its prices were always the lowest and could mislead some shoppers.


A.A.A. Picks Shop For TV Campaign
The American Automobile Association said yesterday that it had selected McFarland &amp; Drier Inc. of Miami as the first agency to develop a national television advertising campaign.
Billings were estimated to exceed $14 million.
Jill Mross, a spokeswoman for the association in Heathrow, Fla., said that McFarland &amp; Drier was awarded the account after a three-week review, but she declined to identify the other participants.


Albany Says Foster-Care System Fails to Give Required Services
New York City's foster-care system often fails to provide abused or troubled children with services required under state and local laws, according to a two-year audit by the State Comptroller released today.
After what officials described as an extensive review of city records for 80 foster children, the auditors found widespread evidence of poor record keeping, inadequate monitoring of foster children and their caretakers, slow placement of children up for adoption and slipshod handling of accusations of abuse involving children in foster care.
No Follow-Up
In one such case, the auditors found that city child welfare officials became suspicious that a foster mother was using drugs in December 1990, but failed to report those concerns for six months.
The child was later placed in another foster home.


Watson Among 3 Banned
ALLEN WATSON and BERNARD GILKEY of the St.
Louis Cardinals, as well as ORESTES DESTRADE of the Florida Marlins, were issued suspensions yesterday by the National League for participating in a bench-clearing brawl last Sunday.
All have filed appeals but only Watson and Gilkey will continue playing until hearings are held.
Destrade, who hit the most home runs in the Marlins' inaugural season last year but was batting only .208 this year, had his contract designated for assignment, which gives Florida 10 days to determine his status.
Options include trading or releasing the 32-year-old Cuban-American first baseman.


Southern Rebels Set Terms for Talks in Yemen


The Decor Is Enigmatic
"NOTHING is to match," Martin Izquierdo said of Mona Lisa, the Greenwich Village cafe he designed.
And except for the glassware and flatware, nothing does.
Not the chairs.
Not the marble tabletops.
Not the gilded mirror frames, the dishes, the coffee cups.
Even the upholstery -- 30 fabrics on 60 chairs -- seems random.
"When things break or fabrics get stained, you can just replace them with anything," Mr.
Izquierdo said.


Stray Gunfire Kills Man in Bronx
A young Bronx man who was killed on a basketball court yesterday was the third victim of stray gunfire in New York City in a week, the police said.
But despite the cluster of such shootings -- and the constant fear in some neighborhoods that an innocent stroll can lead a bystander into a deadly crossfire -- police statistics indicate that such random shootings have actually declined significantly in the last few years.
In a densely populated city where easy access to guns has reached down to schoolchildren, bystanders have been killed or wounded by bullets intended for others, or by shots fired randomly for target practice or fun.
And the risk of such shootings rises as the weather turns warm and sends large groups of people milling in the streets, the experts say.


Where to Find It
AUCTIONS held periodically by moving and storage companies to clear out unclaimed or impounded goods are a popular resource for people who traffic in things secondhand, like used-furniture sellers, people with booths at flea markets and, occasionally, antiques dealers.
But anyone can attend these, and for the sharp-eyed, or the lucky, the right auction can be a treasure hunt of sorts, yielding items ranging from the welcome to the worthless.
"A lot of what we auction off is stored records of bankrupt companies," said Jack Fuchs, owner of Whitehall Storage in Manhattan.
But interesting items do turn up, like good second-hand furniture, CD's, near-new televisions and computers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Sharply disagreeing with a Congressional study, the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, testified that new legislation was not necessary to supervise derivatives, the rapidly growing and sometimes profitable family of products offered by banks and brokerage firms to corporations and investors.  [ Page D1. ]
Orders for durable factory goods edged up one-tenth of 1 percent in April, below most expectations, Commerce Department figures showed, more evidence of slowing business expansion.
Separately, home resales climbed 1.2 percent.  [ D1. ]


Journal; The Jackie Mystery
In my own informal poll, everyone old enough to remember her husband's Presidency had the same response to the death of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, conveyed in almost identical words: "I never expected to be as upset as I was." And my own was no different: After the announcement was dropped midway into another numbing 11:00 broadcast of crime-sotted local news, my tears caught me by surprise.
A week later I'm still puzzling over my reaction, and I feel that in this, too, I'm far from alone.
Though the grief feels deep, its object remains a mystery.


Sports of The Times; The Man Known As Mess
IN the swamps of the Meadowlands an icy grave had been dug for the Rangers' eternal quest.
In last night's sixth game of the Eastern Conference finals, the Devils had a 2-0 lead late in the second period of their opportunity to bury the Rangers' hope of capturing the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1940, a hope that had been nurtured by the National Hockey League's best record during the recent regular season, a hope that was still burning in Mark Messier's mind.


Quinlan Case Is Revisited And Yields New Finding
Nearly 10 years after her death, Karen Ann Quinlan, who was the subject of a landmark court case on refusal of medical treatment, is the topic of an unusual scientific report today.
Using laboratory techniques that were unavailable at the time of her death in 1985, scientists have performed an autopsy on her brain and come up with a surprising finding.
The researchers said they had expected to learn that the most severe brain damage leading to Ms.
Quinlan's persistent vegetative state was in the cortex, the gray outer layer where many higher brain functions take place, because autopsies on others in this state had shown extensive damage in that area.
But contrary to expectations, the new autopsy found that the major damage was to the thalamus, a structure that is deep in the brain and whose role is less well defined.
There was no damage to the brain stem, which controls heartbeat, breathing and other vital functions.


Russian Aide Says Gangsters Try to Steal Nuclear Material
A senior Russian law enforcement official said today that organized crime in Russia was trying to infiltrate military installations to steal nuclear material and sell it on the black market.
"These crime groups in recent years are demonstrating more and more interest toward the defense facilities of the former Soviet Union," Mikhail Yegorov, head of the organized crime control department of the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs, said in an appearance before a Congressional committee.


No Surgery (Yet) for Kelly
Buffalo Bills quarterback JIM KELLY yesterday acknowledged that he has bone spurs in his throwing shoulder, but added that he might not need surgery to remove them.
Coach MARV LEVY said in a statement issued yesterday that Kelly will be examined by Dr.
RICHARD HAWKINS in Vail, Colo., on June 2.
Kelly told The Buffalo News that the examination will determine whether he should "go on further with the rehab program or have the shoulder scoped."


12 Pilgrims Find Furniture Heaven
SUE ZESSIN of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., shopped till she dropped, then got up and shopped some more.
Visiting Hickory, N.C., on a furniture-buying expedition in mid-May, the 34-year-old mother of four got so carried away studying a home entertainment center at a Henredon outlet that she backed up to get a better look, dropped off a loading platform, and plummeted six feet to the ground.
She was stunned by the fall, but before a gathering crowd could take her to a doctor, she wobbled to her feet, dusted off her Bermuda shorts and made her way back upstairs to continue contemplating the big purchase.


Health Care Panel Struggles Over Public Fall of Its Leader
Officially, the House Committee on Ways and Means is making its way through the various alternatives for health care restructuring.
Unofficially, it is struggling to deal with one of the most painful rituals on Capitol Hill: the slow fall of a public man.
Each day, the masses of reporters and photographers inside the committee room grow larger, the lobbyists in the corridors less discreet as they talk about the passing of the man they feared and cultivated for 13 years.
Each morning, Dan Rostenkowski bounds in to take the chairman's seat, trying another performance of business-as-usual.
But each time he moves, or confers with a colleague, or engages in a quasi-metaphorical gesture like biting his nails, he hears the whir of a dozen motor drives and looks up with a jolt to a wall of photographers.
In such moments, he looks haunted, trapped in his own committee room.


Events: Flower And Photo Exhibitions
A Gardener's Photographs  Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (718) 549-3200.
A show of 70 photographs by the British horticulturist and landscape designer Gertrude Jekyll, taken between 1885 and 1914, will continue through July 10.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission on weekdays is free.
Admission on weekends is $4; students and those over 62, $2; members and children under 6, no charge.
Architecture Exhibitions  New York School of Interior Design, 170 East 70th Street; (212) 472-1500.
An exhibition of projects by students at the school starts today and continues through June 23.


Treasury Issue Prices Gain After an Early Dip
Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly yesterday, after erasing early losses.
The turnaround came after a more than three-point decline in the Commodity Research Bureau index and a solid Treasury auction.
Some of the early decline in bond prices here, Michael Krauss, fixed-income technical analyst with Lehman Brothers, said, was the result of carry-over weakness from the Eurobond market, but as that market closed "it was one less distraction for this market to be concerned about," he said.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Fragrant Tuberose
Q.
Many years ago, my mother grew tuberoses.
I've tried in vain to find these fragrant flowers.
I don't have a very big garden, but for tuberoses I'd find the space.
Do they still exist? -- Charlotte Harm, Teaneck, N.J.


Solzhenitsyn Leaves Vermont and Begins Long Journey Home


Agassi Has The Flair But Match Is Muster's
Somehow, with a vintage blend of celebrity charisma and good old-fashioned elbow grease, Andre Agassi transformed the French Open's new stadium court into a Hollywood extravaganza instead of a straight-laced Grand Slam edifice.
He ripped off his shirt, he blew kisses to the wildly partisan crowd, he swore at the umpire, he drove his opponent, 11th-seeded Thomas Muster, to distraction, he twice came back from the dead.
He did everything but win his second-round match against the most prolific clay-courter on the men's circuit.
On a cloudy afternoon that segued into a cloudy evening over the roller-coaster course of this 3-hour-43-minute dogfight, Muster tamed his flashy challenger, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 7-5, 2-6, 7-5 with a mixture of stalwart serving and steady ground strokes.
Expectations Are Dashed
"I've had a rough clay-court season, and to have to play a guy like Muster wasn't easy for me mentally," said a crestfallen Agassi, who arrived in Paris with a 3-3 record on clay and a set of high expectations that defied it.
"I did improve as the match was going on, and to get through something like that would have been quite beneficial. I think I could have done some great things here again, but it just didn't happen.


Party Chairman Attacks 4 Democrats Who Failed
Stung by the loss of a House seat in Kentucky that had been held by Democrats for 129 years, the Democratic Party chairman today turned against his party's candidate as well as three others who have lost high-profile elections since 1992.
In a highly unusual breach of party decorum, David Wilhelm, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, leveled a harsh attack against the candidate in Kentucky, Joe Prather, saying that he waged "a lackadaisical campaign," was "caught flat-footed" and "explicitly refused Democratic Party help."


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the Knicks' victory over the Indiana Pacers, and a front-page summary of it, misstated Patrick Ewing's point total in some copies.
He scored 28, not 20.


CHRONICLE
Tyler Clinton will not be the only addition to the First Family this month.
Mrs.
Clinton's brother TONY RODHAM will marry NICOLE BOXER, the daughter of Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, on Saturday at the White House.
"So the President became an uncle on May 12, and is becoming a brother-in-law on May 28th," Mr.
Lattimore said.
He said that the bridegroom's mother, Dorothy Rodham, and President and Mrs.
Clinton would give the rehearsal dinner tomorrow night.


Sculpture Garden Rises in a New Patch of Green; The Latest Addition to New York City's Park System, Named for a Philosopher
One man's dream to clean up a garbage dump and build a park -- a sculpture garden beside the East River with the jagged skyline of Manhattan a distant backdrop -- officially became a reality yesterday.
Since Mark di Suvero first wondered a decade ago whether there was a better way to make use of the littered lot beside his Queens studio, hundreds of his neighbors have worked tirelessly to help him create Socrates Sculpture Park, already a powerful draw for art aficionados from the city and beyond.
Yesterday, it was formally dedicated as a city park, the first major addition to the park system in more than a decade.


Dr. George Nemethy; Scientist, 59
Dr.
George Nemethy, a scientist who conducted research on the structures of proteins, died on May 18 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
Dr.
Nemethy, who lived in Pelham, N.Y., was 59.
The cause of death was brain cancer, said his wife, Judith.


Furon Co.(FCBN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


China Ready for a New Hydrogen Bomb Test
China is going forward with plans to detonate a hydrogen bomb at its underground test range at Lop Nor, Western diplomats say, and the test could come within days of President Clinton's decision to renew China's favorable trade access to the American market.
Communist Party leaders appear to be delaying the explosion for political, not technical reasons.
Western diplomats believe that it could come at any time.


Rudolf Muhsam; Bridge Club Official, 88
Rudolf Muhsam, a leading behind-the-scenes figure in the world of bridge, died on Tuesday at the Fort Tryon nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 88 and died of cancer, said Patricia Muhsam, a relative.
Mr.
Muhsam worked as an engineer in his native Berlin, where he was also a bridge tournament organizer and a respected player just below the top rank.


Fleetwood Enterprises (FLE,N) reports earnings for Year to Apr 24


Russian Clarifies Hopes for a Link With NATO
Russia told NATO defense ministers today that their plan for closer military ties with Moscow and the former Warsaw Pact nations was only a first step toward European security, and that Moscow wants to consult regularly with NATO on issues ranging from nuclear arms to crisis management.
The Russian proposal for a wider relationship was presented by the Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, the day after he said President Boris N. Yeltsin was ready to join the program, which NATO calls a Partnership for Peace.


Reagan Forced South Africa Sanctions Issue; Yes, They Worked
To the Editor:
As a former senior South African Government official assigned the task in the 1960's and 70's of countering sanctions, and having recently completed a doctoral dissertation on the political and economic effect of United States sanctions against South Africa, I find myself on middle ground between Anthony Lewis ("Help From Outside," column, May 6) and Herman Nickel ("South Africa Sanctions Didn't Undo Apartheid," letter, May 15).


Curbs on South Africa End
The Security Council lifted its arms embargoes against South Africa today in response to the first elections open to all races in the country last month.
Speaking to the Council before the vote, Thabo Mbeki, a Deputy President of South Africa, welcomed the move "as an acceptance by the world body that we have become a democratic country." Arms embargoes were imposed between 1977 and 1986 to press for an end to apartheid.


Review/Rock; Heavy Metal, With an Emphasis on Heavy
A little guitar goes a long way.
When the right chord is played with the right amount of distortion at the right time, a passionless song can transform into a rousing anthem.
On Tuesday night at Limelight, Sister Machine Gun, Chemlab and KMFDM -- three bands known for their hard-edged electronic, or industrial, dance music -- added life to their music with heavy-metal riffs.
When the German band KMFDM formed 10 years ago, it was an electronics outfit that didn't use any guitars.
At times on Tuesday, however, there were four guitarists grinding away.
As a thick drumbeat pounded in the foreground, the guitarists played power chords and driving rhythms.
Sascha Konietzko, the drummer, and En Esch traded off on vocals, both growling as diabolically as possible.
Their voices were filtered through so much distortion that they sounded nearly identical.


Clinton Stokes Party Fires For His Health Care Plan
Conducting pep rallies with Democrats and taking the pulse of Senate Republicans, President Clinton promised Congress today that he would keep pushing this year for passage of health care legislation that would provide insurance for every American.
The tone in the closed door meetings switched back and forth, said those who took part.
To the Republican senators, he stressed his readiness for compromise, so long as his basic goal of universal coverage was met.


INSIDE
Head of Federal Reserve Offers View of Derivatives
Disagreeing with a new Congressional study, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, said the risk was "negligible" for a taxpayer bailout caused by the growing market for financial derivatives.
Page D1.
A Change in the ABC's
The Schools Chancellor has issued a 200-page curriculum with minimum standards for what every New York City student should learn.
Page B1.
Russian Bases and Gangs
An investigator told Congress that Russian criminals were trying to infiltrate military sites to steal and sell nuclear material.
Page A5.
The Arithmetic of Welfare
President Clinton wants to spend $9 billion over five years on his welfare plan, about $7 billion of it from cuts in other social programs.
Page A14.
Rangers Force Game 7
Mark Messier delivered on his guarantee of a victory by scoring three goals as the Rangers beat the Devils 4-2 last night.
Page B13.


Boggs Cracks 2 Home Runs And Abbott Goes Distance
Rain, rain, please, please, go away.
Wade Boggs might have whispered those words over and over in the fourth inning last night.
Maybe Boggs even shouted them.
Maybe Jim Abbott joined him.
Actually, the entire Yankee dugout might have provided backup vocals.
Go away rain, and let us finish this game.
Their rain stance succeeded.
The downpour at Yankee Stadium subsided and the Yankees resumed playing after a 90-minute delay, maintained the lead they had constructed before the inclement weather arrived and sloshed to a 5-2 victory over Toronto.


Clinton Bids Navy Graduates Heed World War II Lessons
President Clinton called on graduates of the United States Naval Academy today to heed the lessons of their World War II forebears and honor responsibilities to duty and service.
Looking ahead to the 50th anniversary next month of the D-Day invasion of Europe, Mr.
Clinton spoke with admiration of the "era of sacrifice" that is to be honored.
He said the newest class of Navy ensigns and Marine Corps lieutenants would ultimately be judged by whether they could accomplish so much.


Andretti's Run at History
JOHN ANDRETTI took a big step forward last night in his bid to become the first person to run in the Indianapolis 500 and the Coca-Cola 600 on the same day.
Andretti, who has already earned the 10th spot in the Indy 500 starting grid on Sunday morning, assured himself of a spot in the 42-car field for Sunday night's Winston Cup race at Charlotte Motor Speedway. (AP)


Philharmonic Names General Manager
The New York Philharmonic has announced that Catherine Cahill will become the general manager of the orchestra on July 1, with responsibility for orchestral affairs, personnel, artistic administration, educational activities and operations.
She succeeds Stephen R. Vann.


Kovalev Helps Out Just by Being Forceful
Sometimes, Mike Keenan outsmarts himself.
But tonight he made two bold moves with the Rangers down by 2-0 that helped propel them to a Game 7 in their Eastern Conference final against the Devils.
First, he stunned most observers in the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
He called a timeout -- he is allowed only one all game -- before eight minutes of the second period had elapsed.
His team was down and barely making plays.
Every little move the Rangers tried backfired against a Devils team that loves to play with the lead.


Car Seizures Sought Against Scofflaws
The New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, called on the State Legislature yesterday to toughen the penalty for repeatedly driving without a license by letting the police seize a scofflaw's automobile after 3 violations instead of 10.
Mr.
Vallone said the seized cars would be sold to help increase enforcement of traffic violations.


Breaking With Tradition, Smithsonian Chooses Lawyer as Head
After a behind-the-scenes struggle involving Vice President Al Gore, the Smithsonian Institution has gone outside the scholarly world for its 10th leader, choosing a lawyer in the Clinton Administration.
The new secretary is I. Michael Heyman, a legal adviser to Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and former chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley.
He was chosen by the Smithsonian's Board of Regents over Mr.
Gore's candidate, Thomas Lovejoy, an environmental biologist who is the Smithsonian's assistant secretary for environmental and external affairs.


Olajuwon Pours It On, Putting Jazz Down, 2-0
A day after winning the National Basketball Association's Most Valuable Player award, Hakeem Olajuwon turned in another brilliant performance that pulled the Houston Rockets closer to the National Basketball Association Finals.
Despite being double- and triple-teamed all evening, Olajuwon scored 41 points, pulled down 13 rebounds and had 6 assists as the Rockets defeated Utah, 104-99, and took a 2-games-to-0 lead in the 4-of-7 Western Conference final.


Hotel Admits It Let Only Whites Serve Official
The Four Seasons Hotel admitted today that it had assigned an all-white staff to wait on the visiting Indian Prime Minister last week and, in a settlement with the state, agreed to issue a public apology.
Michael Duffy, chairman of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination, said that based on the hotel's explanation, his agency was "satisfied this was an isolated incident."


Fit Penalty for Terror, and Murder
Terrorism is theatrical violence, aimed at frightening people for political gain.
It is also plain murder, as Federal Judge Kevin Duffy dramatically recognized in sentencing the four men convicted of bombing the World Trade Center last year.
To derive consecutive prison terms that will keep these terrorists locked up for life, Judge Duffy chose an unusual but appropriate measure of punishment.
Not a life for a life, as when a judge imposes the death penalty.
Instead, a year in prison for each year of life expectancy denied to the six people who died in the midday explosion.
Then an extra 30 years thrown in for each of two other counts, for a total of 240 years each.


Surgery for Andre Dawson
ANDRE DAWSON of the Boston Red Sox, who has had nine knee operations, is scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee, which "locked up" while while he was running out a grounder on Tuesday night.


Maximum Term Imposed in Killing Over Bike
The encounter lasted only seconds, but in a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday the consequences were tolled in decades.
Last June 1, a sparkling, sun-drenched day, Allyn Winslow, a 42-year-old drama teacher from Brooklyn, was shot to death while resisting a group of teen-agers trying to steal his bicycle in Prospect Park.
It was one more murder in a city where a day that goes by without a killing seems as rare as a snowstorm in May.
But at the sentencing yesterday of Jerome Nisbett, the 17-year-old recently convicted of firing the fatal shots, it was clear that however common murder has become in New York City, there is no obscuring the individual pain left by such violence.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.19
3.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.20
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.56
4.60
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.16
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.39
6.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.29
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.39
5.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Instructions on Instructions
To The Home Section:
Your article on instruction manuals gave me reason to feel that someone out there is trying to help those of us who are considered hopeless by most of the thirtysomething generation.


Stocks Rise Modestly, With Dow Up 10.13
The stock market yesterday again followed the wobbly path of the bond market, which sank then rallied after demand for the Government's debt issues proved brisk.
Other factors also lifted stocks.
The outlook for commodities prices improved for a second day and yet another economic report, for durable-goods orders, showed the economy was growing only moderately, good news for bonds.


Jack Barbash, Economist, 83; Helped in A.F.L.-C.I.O. Merger
Jack Barbash, a labor economist and educator who was an architect of the 1955 merger of a divided trade union movement into the A.F.L.-C.I.O., died on Saturday at a hospital in Madison, Wis.
A resident of Madison since 1957, he was 83.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Reviews/Theater; 90's Teen-Ager Musical With Music of the 70's
Urban teen-age life is so fraught with peril nowadays that an inspirational musical like "Bring In the Morning," which purports to reveal the hopes and dreams of mostly disadvantaged youths, risks being a candy-covered exercise in denial.
The show's credibility is not helped by the fact that except for two rap numbers written by Bertin Rowser, the music sung by its contemporary teen-age characters belongs mostly to a 1970's genre that suggests a sophisticated hybrid of Burt Bacharach and the score for the movie "Fame" with a dash of Kurt Weill.
Yet despite its sugarcoating, "Bring In the Morning," which opened on Monday at the Variety Arts Theater, frequently crackles with life.
Directed by Sheldon Epps, with music by Gary William Friedman and lyrics by Herb Schapiro, the show features an exceptional cast of young performers who portray a cross section of city youths from 16 to their early 20's.
About half the time the actors break through the sentimental gloss to express their confusion and defiance, along with a tough humor and an enthusiastic determination to make something of their lives.


Planning Committee For Saatchi Unit
Bill Muirhead, who recently became chairman and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi North America and chief executive of its New York office, has formed a committee of five executives to assist him in developing and executing a plan to restructure the office.


Review/Music; Matching String Quartets to the Players
The Juilliard String Quartet had much in common with the three Brahms quartets it played at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Saturday night.
Dominant in this music, even in its allusions to folk dance and simple song, is a dour earnestness, one that invents and orders on a high level of originality and according to its own stern terms.
Brahms has his moments of seduction, and indeed, the Hungarian flavors of the familiar A-minor Quartet are inviting.
Yet asceticism and lean muscle are the real fabric of all three pieces.
In much the same way, an evening with the Juilliard Quartet is rarely a restful experience.
These are intensely thoughtful musicians for whom color is a minor priority and hedonism out of the question.
Long legato spans are punctuated, often interrupted, by the Juilliard's surging sense of accent.
Music, its four musicians seem to be telling us, is an endless source of information for those with the determination and vitality to look for it.
Rarely is it fun.


Proffitt's Inc.(PRFT) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Sceptre Resources (SRL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Man's Killing By Policeman Leads to Suit
The family of a man who was shot to death last week by a Suffolk County police officer filed a $25 million wrongful death suit yesterday, accusing the officer of "wanton misconduct" and charging that the Suffolk police lied about the incident.
The police said the man, Miguel Rodriguez, was driving his van without headlights and refused to pull over, touching off a chase that ended when the van crashed into shrubbery along the Northern State Parkway.
They said Mr.
Rodriguez, 38, was shot in the head after he ignored an order to put his hands up and started to reach down instead.


A Return To Coziness
IN the 1950's, kitchen linens were printed with apples, cherries and strawberries dancing across striped or gingham backgrounds.
The cozy design is back, resurfacing not only at flea markets but also in new fabrics made into slipcovers, potholders and tea cozies.
The cotton-slipcovered chair at right has plums, cherries and black raspberries on a blue-and-white or red-and-white gingham.
The chair, which will be available in August, is $225 from Mitchell Gold's Designline in Hickory, N.C.; (704) 632-9200.


Memories in Normandy


Sports of The Times; Blues Hope Messier Can Do It Again
LET'S get it straight right away.
Mark Messier makes no guarantee for tonight.
He's not saying the Rangers are going to beat the Devils, the way he did for the sixth game and then backed it up in one of the most astonishing performances a New York athlete has ever made in a crucial game.
A guarantee is much stronger than a prediction.
Messier flat-out promised that the Rangers would beat New Jersey Wednesday night, and then he contributed one assist and three goals -- and some locker-room exhortations, too -- as the Rangers scored the last four goals in a 4-2 victory that kept their season alive.


Saberhagen's Back Is Better
Bret Saberhagen was experiencing substantially less pain in his lower back this afternoon and said he hoped to make his next scheduled start without problem.
Saberhagen suffered from spasms in the lower left part of his back during his start Wednesday night at Three Rivers Stadium and was forced to leave the game before the bottom of the seventh inning.
He allowed just one run over six innings and was the winner in the Mets' 6-3 triumph over the Pirates.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CHINA'S TRADE STATUS RENEWED  President Clinton renewed China's favorable trade status, saying he would stop using trade as a lever to force Beijing to make progress on human rights.
A1  In wrestling with China, economic interests are the victors.
A1


Sounds Around Town
Mary Cleere Haran  Mary Cleere Haran, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
In "An Affair to Remember," her affectionate survey of 1950's movie songs, Mary Cleere Haran balances gorgeous jazz-inflected performances of popular standards with witty, barbed commentary on Hollywood's portrayal of romance four decades ago.
A high point is her impersonation of Marilyn Monroe singing Irving Berlin's "Lazy." Backing the singer is a pop-jazz trio led by Bill Charlap that gives the material a lift while leaving Ms.
Haran plenty of room to shine.
Shows are at 8:30 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $35 cover charge, and dinner is required for the early shows.
STEPHEN HOLDEN 'Jelly Roll Morton'
Vernel Bagneris in "Jelly Roll Morton: Hoo-Dude," Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Vernel Bagneris, a performer steeped in New Orleans jazz culture, creates an absorbing portrait of the seminal jazz pianist and composer as a charming wheeler-dealer who is proud of his Creole roots and is deeply superstitious.
The dialogue, adapted from Morton's taped reminiscences for the Library of Congress, is smoothly interwoven with vigorous piano performances of many of his pieces by Ray Smith, who is substituting this weekend for the show's regular pianist, Gunnar Larsen.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9:15 and 11:15.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
S.
H.


Treasuries Are Mixed; Long Bond's Price Dips
Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with the long bond's price bouncing up and down before ending lower.
Many market participants said trading drew tentative near the close in New York because the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, is scheduled to testify today about monetary policy before the Senate Banking Committee.


Art in Review
John Thomson  China Institute in America 125 East 65th Street Manhattan  Through June 11
In the early 1870's John Thomson, a Scottish photographer based in Hong Kong, traveled throughout China, recording the people and sights he encountered.
When he returned to London in 1872, he took with him 1,200 glass-plate negatives, which he proceeded to publish in elaborate volumes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton renewed China's favored trade status and said he would no longer use trade to force China to improve human rights.  [ Page A1. ]  With the decision, economic interests won over America's self-image as the world's human rights advocate.  [ A1. ]


Williams-Renault Selects a Rookie
DAVID COULTHARD, a Williams-Renault test driver who has never driven in a Formula One race, will be the team's interim replacement for the three-time world champion, Ayrton Senna.
Coulthard, 23, will drive in the Spanish Grand Prix on Sunday, four weeks after Senna died when his car slammed into a wall during the San Marino Grand Prix at Imola, Italy.


Market Place; Some aggressive investors say Stone &amp; Webster is a sleeper.
STONE &amp; WEBSTER is an engineering company whose business -- building nuclear power plants -- has dried up.
Its earnings are thin, and its prospects have been so dismal that no Wall Street analyst even follows the company.
That, however, has not stopped a hardy band of investors lead by the shareholder activists Robert A. G. Monks and Nell Minnow of the Lens Fund.
They are buying shares of the company and agitating for changes they say should push up Stone &amp; Webster's stock by at least $20 a share in the next year or so.


Mackenzie Financial Corp.(MKFCF) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ex-Leaders of '89 Uprising Send a Petition to Beijing
A group of former student leaders of the 1989 Tiananmen Square uprising petitioned the Communist Party leadership today to begin healing the national wounds from the lethal confrontation.
In defiance of the current clampdown on dissent in China, the seven young dissidents called upon the country's leaders to lift the harsh indictment that branded the pro-democracy students as guilty of "riot and counter-revolutionary rebellion."


Runs, Hits and Errors: Plenty to Go Around
For a while, it seemed as if the Mets could survive anything, no matter how ugly it got.
Jim Lindeman booted a ball?
Jose Vizcaino dropped a throw?
Mike Maddux threw a lousy pitch?
No matter, the Mets kept coming back.
They got the clutch hits and Pittsburgh made the crucial mistakes, and, when the game truly got tight, the Mets got brilliant pitching from Josias Manzanillo, their fourth relief pitcher.


Review/City Ballet; Nothing More Than a Frolic? Think Again
The New York City Ballet danced two quirky works by Jerome Robbins on Sunday night at the New York State Theater.
At first, "Concertino" appears to be nothing more than a frolic for three dancers to two compositions by Stravinsky: the Concertino for 12 Instruments and Three Pieces for Clarinet Solo.
Like many comparable balletic entertainments, it begins with a scene for everyone in the cast.
But contrary to tradition, there is no grand finale.
Instead, "Concertino" ends with three solos.
This makes the ballet trail off in a slightly anticlimactic manner.
But Mr.
Robbins appears to enjoy breaking with convention and responding to Stravinsky in any unusual way he wishes.


New York and U.S. Pledge To Help Buy Major Park
After months of stalemate, a financial package began taking shape today for the public acquisition of most of Sterling Forest, a rugged 17,500-acre private woodland 40 miles northwest of New York City.
New York State and Federal officials testifying in Washington revealed the amounts they would be willing to contribute.
If most of Sterling Forest were acquired for public use, it would constitute the largest new public park created in the Northeast in the last 50 years, New York State officials said.


Devils' Owner Is Still Boxing With a Shadow
A day after the Devils' 4-2 loss to the Rangers Wednesday, the lasting memory of the Devils' owner, John McMullen, was of the thousands of interloping Rangers fans who jammed his team's home ice at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"I don't know how many were there, but when they won, the numbers went up," he said.
"You can't always tell the real fans from the clandestine ones. But most people in New York and New Jersey are born with Ranger genes."


Carmichael Wins 3 Magazine Awards
Carmichael Lynch of Minneapolis won top honors, taking three of five awards, including one for general excellence, when the Magazine Publishers of America presented its revamped Stephen E. Kelly Awards for creativity in magazine advertising at a ceremony in New York last night.
For campaigns that appeared in 1993, the association broadened the scope of the awards by adding four honors to the prize for general excellence given since 1982.
The three awards won by Carmichael Lynch -- general excellence, which carries a $100,000 prize; best design and graphics, and best at meeting the objectives of a campaign -- were all for the same campaign for Schwinn bicycles.
The agency was also a finalist for a campaign for Harley-Davidson motorcycles.


Boeing Stock Rises on Report of Deal in China
Shares of the Boeing Company rose yesterday after a published report said the company was about to receive a $5 billion order from China for more than 50 commercial jetliners, including some of Boeing's largest aircraft.
Boeing officials declined to comment, except to say that China remained an important customer.
After President Clinton approved China's trading status yesterday, Larry Clarkson, the senior vice president for planning and international development at Boeing, said the company believed that if China's trading privileges had not been approved any deal would have been off.


Daly Plugs Assistants as He Leaves
After coaching almost 1,500 games, Chuck Daly decided it was time to leave the bench.
Daly, 63, resigned today as Nets coach with a year remaining on his three-year contract.
He will pursue limited broadcasting opportunities with the Nets and with Turner Broadcasting System.


Review/Theater; Five Characters in Search of an Identity
There's no doubting that as an actress, Phyllis Yvonne Stickney can create a lively series of portraits.
In "Big Momma 'n' 'Em," her one-woman show at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, she renders five very different women with the sort of vital physical detail that inspires an instant sense of familiarity.
But by the evening's end, there's an inescapable feeling that these women are all dressed up, in a way that compels attention, with no place to go dramatically.
They are five characters in search of an author who can do them justice.


Digital Equipment Loses Another of Its Top Officials
In the midst of a painful struggle to return to profitability, the Digital Equipment Corporation lost yet another executive when the chief financial officer, William M. Steul, resigned yesterday.
The company announced that its controller, Vincent J. Mullarkey, 46, who has been at Digital for 23 years, would become a vice president and the chief financial officer.


Canstar Sports (HKYIF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coney Island Beach Opens on a Hazy, Lazy Note


Jorgensen (Earle M.) Co.(JOR) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Books of The Times; Portrait of a Killer in a Violent Family's Embrace
Shot in the Heart
By Mikal Gilmore
Illustrated. 403 pages. Doubleday. $24.95.
The photo on the cover of Mikal Gilmore's astonishing new memoir is a family portrait, much like many family portraits from the 1950's: Dad and Mom look like updated versions of Grant Wood's stolid farm couple in "American Gothic": he wears the beginnings or endings of a tired smile on his face; she looks weary, stoical, a little worse for wear.
The oldest son, Frank Jr., is making a face at the camera, while the youngest, Gaylen, offers us a bright, affectionate grin.
Gary, the son in the middle, has adopted a classic Western gunslinger's pose: one hand on his pocket, as though ready to pull an imaginary pistol from a nonexistent holster, an outlaw's scowl pasted on his 10-year-old face.
Their baby brother, Mikal, the author of this book, has not yet been born.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  17 IN BRONX FACE EXTORTION CHARGES
The Federal Government charged 17 people with running a sophisticated extortion ring in the South Bronx that required drug dealers to pay for the right to sell heroin.
The gang grossed more than $100,000 a week for seven years, the authorities charged, killing and torturing those who did not cooperate.
A1.


Toll Brothers Inc.(TOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


For Children
'Invention Adventure' Super Heroes: A High-Tech Adventure'
Liberty Science Center  Liberty State Park  251 Phillip Street  Jersey City  (201) 451-0006  Recommended for all ages
These new exhibitions pay close attention to two facts of a child's life: Legos and superheroes.
Most children can't live without either, and the Liberty Science Center knows it.
The Legos and superheroes are meant to disguise the learning aspects in these shows so that children will understand elements of science without gazing off into the sunset.


Yanks Flying High In a 30-13 Balloon
When Wade Boggs imitates Babe Ruth, Terry Mulholland pitches his first complete game of the season while weakened with the flu, Jim Abbott follows with another complete-game effort in pitching as if he loves New York and the Blue Jays resemble a sputtering team for two games, things can't help being wonderful for the Yankees.
They have been like that for seven weeks.
Before the Yankees humbled the defending two-time World Series champions at friendly Yankee Stadium, Pat Gillick, Toronto's executive vice president, had mentioned how his rivals had "been doing everything right." Then the Yankees insured the accuracy of his analysis by maintaining the elite record of baseball.


Daly Quit to Avoid Really Turning Gray
At the height of his fame, on his way to the French Riviera and the Barcelona Olympics to player-sit the best basketball team ever, Chuck Daly stopped off in New Jersey to sign on as coach of the Nets.
He was a couple of months short of his 62d birthday, though he could have lied about his age, lopped a decade off, and no one would have guessed the truth.
His full head of gray hair, Reaganesque, was even more impressive than that of the walking GQ cover across the river.
He appeared robust in his trademark dark blue suit, striking, but the most telling aspect of Chuck Daly's persona was the sheer energy he exuded, his rat-a-tat coachspeak almost lifting people right out of their chairs.


Edison Dick Industrialist, 93
Edison Dick, a retired Chicago industrialist, died on Wednesday at his home in Lake Forest, Ill.
He was 93.
Mr.
Dick was chairman of the executive board of the A. B. Dick Company of Niles, Ill.
The company, founded by his father, Albert B. Dick, originally made mimeograph machines but kept updating its product lines over the decades.
It is now a subsidiary of the General Electric Company and manufactures copying and electronic printing equipment, among other things.


Schools Official to Leave
Amy Linden, the director of the Board of Education's Facilities Division, said yesterday that she would be leaving her post July 1.
Ms.
Linden said she had asked Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines for a six-month leave of absence from the Board of Education and that he had granted her request.
"I'm just plain tired," Ms.
Linden said.
"I need a rest."


Novell Inc.(NOVL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30





Holiday on Monday
Monday is Memorial Day. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and city government offices will be closed.
POST OFFICE: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
The main post office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue will be open.
BANKS: Banks will be closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules will be suspended.
SANITATION: There will be no street cleaning or pickups.
SCHOOLS: School will be closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: All domestic markets will be closed
TRANSPORTATION: New York City subways and buses will be on a weekend schedule.
Long Island Rail Road will be on a weekend schedule.
Metro-North will be on a holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and municipal offices will be closed.
POST OFFICES: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Banks will be closed
SCHOOLS: Schools will be closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Jersey Transit will be running on a Sunday schedule.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and municipal offices will be closed.
POST OFFICES: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Banks will be closed.
SCHOOLS: Schools will be closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North will be running on a holiday schedule.
Weekend Traffic Advisory
GEORGE WASHINGTON BRIDGE: The Manhattan-bound upper roadway will be closed from 8 P.M. tonight until 6 P.M.
Monday for construction.
Delays of up to one hour are expected, particularly Monday afternoon, when there is a 4 P.M. baseball game at Yankee Stadium and a surge of holiday travel.
New Jersey-bound motorists are advised to use the lower roadway.
F.D.R.
DRIVE: Northbound from  61st to 96th Streets and south-bound from 73d to 63d Streets will be closed Sunday from 12:01 A.M. to 8 A.M. for construction.
QUEENS MIDTOWN TUNNEL: One of two tubes may be closed from 10 P.M. until 6 A.M.
Sunday through Wednesday.
NEW JERSEY APPROACHES TO MANHATTAN: Traffic will be slowed from 11 P.M. today until 6 A.M. tomorrow by sobriety tests at police checkpoints.


Clinton Votes For Business
President Clinton's decision to renew China's trade benefits was the culmination of a titanic clash between America's global economic interests and Washington's self-image as the leading advocate of human rights.
In the end, economic interests won the day.
It wasn't really even close.
Faced with a choice between disrupting the vast American economic relationship with China or eating a little crow on his human rights promises, Mr.
Clinton chose crow.
Many foreign policy experts feel that President Clinton made exactly the right decision.


Review/Art; African Genesis: What Western Artists Like
In 1906, when Matisse showed Picasso an African sculpture he had recently bought, a fresh chapter opened in the history of both European and African art.
European modernism took a gigantic step in visually rethinking the natural world, and the art of Africa found a market in the West.
Now as then, many of African art's most ardent collectors are artists, and this acquisition pattern is the theme for "Western Artists/African Art" at the Museum for African Art.
A gathering of African objects owned by 28 contemporary artists, the show is certainly a study in personal taste. (And with Martin Puryear, Ellsworth Kelly and Brice Marden among the owners, it is no surprise that many of the objects have tremendous visual appeal.) But it is something else, too: a subtle gauge of the ambiguous status that African art still occupies in Western culture.


Miller Carrying Burden, Not Team
From the first play in this series, when Reggie Miller scored on a layup and Charles Oakley gave him an extra bump that drew a technical foul, Miller's game has been off.
It was again in Game 2 last night.
Miller, in 35 minutes, shot 8 of 21 from the floor and 1 of 5 on 3-point attempts, grabbed 2 rebounds and made no steals.
His 23 points in the Pacers' 89-78 loss to the Knicks last night at Madison Square Garden was 1 point more than his playoff average entering this series and better than the 14 he scored in Game 1.
But after tossing in an average of 31.6 points per game against the Knicks in last season's playoffs and after saying -- before the series -- that he badly wanted to play the Knicks, something is not adding up here.


Police Say Rape of 6-Year-Old Fits Pattern of Other Assaults
A 6-year-old girl was raped on Monday on the roof of a Chinatown apartment building, the police said, and investigators believe the same man has accosted at least four other girls in the area in the last year.
The most recent attack occurred about 6:45 P.M. when the man entered a building by asking the girl to let him in.
Threatening her with a knife, he forced the child into an elevator and took her to a rooftop landing, where he raped her, the police said.


She Was a Myth, a Symbol and Finally Mortal; What the Film Shows
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen repeats in "An Era Ends" (column, May 21) a widespread view of Jacqueline Kennedy's response to the fatal gunshot wound suffered by her husband Nov. 22, 1963.
Ms.
Quindlen says that "she came out of her seat and onto the back of the car, on her hands, on her knees, on some desperate journey never fully understood." A segment on "20/20" on ABC News reported that Mrs.
Kennedy had been "saved" at that moment by a Secret Service agent.


Clinton Signs Bill Banning Blockades and Violent Acts at Abortion Clinics
Saying it is up to the Government to prevent violence and coercion directed at women seeking abortions and the medical personnel who provide them, President Clinton today signed a bill enacting broad new penalties against some abortion protesters.
Mr.
Clinton used the bill-signing ceremony at the White House to speak forcefully in favor of abortion rights, casting it as a Constitutional issue that demands Federal protection.


Computer Associates' Profits Top Expectations
Computer Associates International Inc., the nation's second-biggest software maker, surprised Wall Street yesterday with higher than expected sales and earnings for its fiscal year and fourth quarter.
Wall Street analysts applauded the performance, and shares of Computer Associates rose $6, to $43.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Good Timing


Fear of Muslims in Bosnia Raises Its Head
To the Editor:
At long last, "U.S. Clashes With Russia Over Bosnia" (news article, May 18) articulates what Muslims have known all along: The real reason the French and the British oppose lifting the arm embargo against the Bosnian victims of the Balkan war is not that it will level the killing field, but that it may result in the "emergence of a Muslim-dominated state in Europe." The Russians are at least honest.
They make no bones about their total support for the cause of their co-religionists, the Serbs.


CHRONICLE
If denizens of the Hamptons have any time to read this Memorial Day weekend, chances are they will be reading about one of their most treasured institutions, Guild Hall, in a new book by one of their own, ENEZ WHIPPLE.
From 1945 to 1981, Mrs.
Whipple was the executive director of Guild Hall, the combination museum, theater and cultural center in East Hampton, L.I.
So, she was in a good position to write "Guild Hall of East Hampton: An Adventure in the Arts," which is being co-published by Harry N. Abrams and Guild Hall.


Wilkens Rewarded for Hawks' Success
LENNY WILKENS, who accomplished more than he thought was possible in his first season with the Atlanta Hawks, was chosen yesterday as the National Basketball Association coach of the year.
In his 21st season as a head coach, Wilkens guided the Hawks to a 57-25 record, an improvement of 14 games over last season's 43-39.
His team won Atlanta's first Central Division title since 1987 and tied the Knicks for the best record in the Eastern Conference.


Proposal Gains to Impose Antitrust Rules on Insurers
Efforts to modify the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which exempts insurance companies from antitrust rules, advanced yesterday when Representative Jack Brooks, a Democrat of Texas, said he would introduce such a bill when Congress returned from the Memorial Day holiday.
Mr.
Brooks, who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee and a longtime critic of the insurance industry, has already gained the support of many insurance companies, consumer groups and the Justice Department.
Supporters say the bill will produce more diversity in the prices and types of insurance policies.


Albertson's Inc.(ABS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 5


Tobacco Council's Objectivity Questioned
The chairman of the Council for Tobacco Research, which identifies itself as an independent research organization run by a board of distinguished scientists, testified today that in addition to financing legitimate scientific research, the council had also carried out "special projects" that tobacco company lawyers recommended.
Congressional staff members who closely monitor the tobacco industry said it was the first time they had heard an official associated with tobacco companies publicly acknowledge that the council had served as a conduit for research suggested by lawyers for the tobacco companies.


On My Mind; Bill Clinton's Teachings
China's 75 million Christians are forbidden to worship how and where they see fit.
Protestant and Catholic clerics are often imprisoned and tortured.
President Clinton is a religious man.
He talks of how much his religion means to him.
He goes to church regularly.


Holocaust Poll Analyzer Named
The American Jewish Committee has named Tom W. Smith of the University of Chicago's National Opinion Research Center as a consultant to analyze the committee's follow-up survey on the Holocaust.
The survey, which has not yet been released, was conducted by Roper Starch Worldwide in March.
An earlier Roper poll, taken in late 1992, had a widely publicized finding that one in five Americans doubted that the Holocaust had happened.
The wording of the question that yielded that finding has recently been termed flawed by Roper officials.


JLG Industries(JLGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "JOSEPH AND THE AMAZING TECHNICOLOR DREAMCOAT," Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A new staging of the 1972 musical based on the biblical story of Joseph and his 11 brothers; music by Andrew Lloyd Webber; lyrics by Tim Rice; starring Michael Damian; directed by Steven Pimlott.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 1 and 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Texas Plans to Sue U.S. Over Illegal Alien Costs
Following the lead of three other states, Texas announced plans today to sue the Federal Government to recover costs of public services for illegal immigrants.
In doing so, Gov.
Ann W. Richards and other Texas officials appeared to go out of their way to refrain from casting the lawsuit as a direct attack on the immigrants themselves, as such moves have often been interpreted elsewhere, especially in California.
Florida has already filed a suit against the Federal Government to recover money spent on educating, housing, hospitalizing and jailing illegal immigrants, and California and Arizona, which have already sued over prison costs, have also announced plans to broaden their lawsuits.


Canucks Are Playing the Waiting Game
Pat Quinn, the Canucks' architect and coach, is planning to watch from his sofa at home, without pad and paper.
Some of his players might check the score from a sports bar and grill part-owned by left wing Geoff Courtnall.
And Pavel Bure?


Restaurants
Our waiter tonight in this cool, beautiful room has the slightly frowning, preoccupied air of a young intern.
He has a haughty doctor's demeanor, too: he acts as if we are extremely lucky to have his attention.
The fact is, we don't have it all that often.
The service is agonizingly slow.
This is a surprise; lunch here has always been a delight.
But now we order aquavit all around and sit watching as the bright liquid is delivered to the adjoining tables in tiny triangular glasses.
It takes a long time for our drinks to arrive, and when they do they are hardly worth the wait.
The cranberry version glows through the glass like some wonderfully rosy Christmas libation, but it does not taste nearly so good as it looks.
The lemon-lime version is filled with the bitter flavor of citrus peel.
The vanilla aquavit is clear, but the liquid lacks even the aroma of the bean.
If aquavit is what you're after, best to have it straight.


Gay Games Bring Protest And Support At City Hall
A group of conservative politicians and advocates of traditional values yesterday denounced the Gay Games, which are expected to attract large crowds to New York City next month, as a threat to the morals of children and a scourge on the city.
The group of about 10 protesters that took to the steps of City Hall included the Rev.
Ruben Diaz of the Bronx, a member of the Police Civilian Complaint Review Board who drew criticism from some officials in recent months for what they described as homophobic remarks.


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Reportedly Presses Egypt on Lawyer's Death
The United States is encouraging the Egyptian Government to make public an investigation into the death in police custody of a prominent Muslim militant lawyer, a New-York based human rights group said.
Representatives of the group, the Lawyer's Committee for Human Rights, said the State Department had instructed the American Embassy in Cairo "to make representations to the Egyptian Government about the concern of the United States Government about the death" of the lawyer, Abdel Harith Madani.


No Issues Are Resolved During N.F.L. Meetings
The National Football League owners left here today, after two days of meetings, with no clear idea of what the league might look like under realignment and still not certain whether the Los Angeles Raiders will play their 1994 home games in the Los Angeles Coliseum or in Oakland.
For the second consecutive day, the plight of the Raiders grabbed the attention of the owners, who came here to reach a consensus on a re-alignment plan and a player-stocking plan for the two expansion teams, Carolina and Jacksonville.
As they left this afternoon, they didn't have a concrete realignment proposal, but there seemed to be agreement for a proposed revenue-sharing concept that would allow teams to benefit from a pool of money if they were disrupted in any way by realignment because of expansion.


Saatchi to Handle British Lottery
The London office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising has been named to be the first agency to handle advertising for a new national lottery in Britain.
Billings on the account, which is said to be the single largest product account and advertising assignment ever in Britain, were estimated at $80 million.


Lechters Inc.(LECH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Goodby Is Awarded Baseball Campaign
Major League Baseball said yesterday that it had selected Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners of San Francisco as the first agency to handle an advertising campaign meant to publicize the community-involvement activities of baseball players.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications had estimated them at $5 million to $8 million.


U.S. Agrees To Exchange With Vietnam
The United States and Vietnam announced today that they would set up diplomatic missions in a move that the two longtime enemies said was an important step toward normalizing relations.
The agreement comes two decades after the two countries fought a war that divided the United States and cost more than 1 million Vietnamese lives and more than 58,000 American lives.


Celebrating The Sounds Of the World
THE world converges on New York City from within and without.
New York's neighborhoods are international bazaars and crossroads; New York's institutions are magnets for international performers.
Because there are so many different kinds of people in the city, performers can usually count on audiences who aren't complete strangers to their work.
There's usually someone among the spectators for whom imported cultural events are not exotica, but dispatches from home.
For the next two weekends, it will be easier than ever to hear the city's international connections.
On Memorial Day beginning at noon, Riverbank State Park, at 145th Street and Riverside Drive, will celebrate its first anniversary with the New York Ethnic Music Festival, eight hours of music and dancing from four continents that happen to have close ties to the neighborhood.
And on June 4, from 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., the American Museum of Natural History will celebrate its 125th anniversary with a cornucopia of international performers and artisans, inside the museum and outdoors on Central Park West.
Both events are free.


The Spoken Word
READING AND LECTURE, Sufi Books, 227 West Broadway, at White Street, SoHo.
Susham Bedi, an author from India, reads from her novel "The Fire Sacrifice," then discusses the cultural challenges facing Indians living in the West.
Today at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 334-5212.
MICHELE WALLACE, Museum for African Art, 593 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo.
The author, an assistant professor of English at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, will lead a discussion on African esthetic influences on Western popular culture.
Tomorrow at 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 966-1313.


Beijing Praises Decision
The Foreign Ministry today welcomed the renewal of China's trade privileges, especially President Clinton's separation of trade and rights issues.


Pippig Enters New York Race
Germany's UTA PIPPIG, winner of last year's New York City Marathon and the 1994 Boston Marathon, has entered the June 4 Advil Mini Marathon, a 10-kilometer (6.2-mile) road race for women in New York.


Philip Morris
Shares of Philip Morris dropped sharply yesterday after not trading on Wednesday.
Wall Street had hoped that the company would spin off its highly profitable but controversial cigarette business from its food business.
After the company's board took no action at a meeting on Wednesday, the stock plunged when it opened yesterday.


FCB/Leber Gets More AT&amp;T Work
FCB/Leber Katz Partners of New York has further expanded its relationship with AT&amp;T after being awarded the lead creative role on AT&amp;T's giant consumer long-distance account in November.
The AT&amp;T Global Information Solutions subsidiary, formerly known as the NCR Corporation, said yesterday that it had formally awarded its account to FCB/Leber Katz, which had handled the account on a project basis.
Billings were estimated at $30 million to $40 million.
Mark Siegel, a spokesman for the AT&amp;T Corporation in Dayton, Ohio, said "it seemed the next logical thing to do" because FCB/Leber Katz had handled the introduction of the Global Information name and the new strategy of the computer and communications subsidiary earlier this year.


Art in Review
Sylvie Fleury  Postmasters Gallery 80 Greene Street SoHo Through June 4
As an art-making process, shopping has its limitations, which Sylvie Fleury is trying mightily to overcome.
Her second show reflects a dilemma facing many artists: how to move from the appropriation of flashy commodities to actually making art objects.
While her previous work straighforwardly deployed such things as sleek designer shoes and chic shopping bags in ways that were both beautiful and pointedly feminist, her latest efforts take a more hands-on approach, with results that tend to be distressingly half-baked.


After So Many Firsts, St. James Seeks One More
Lyn St.
James has traded in two of the more burdensome titles any Indianapolis 500 driver must live with: rookie and pioneer.
The race on Sunday will be her third straight here, and the novelty of being the lone woman in the 33-driver lineup has worn so thin, even the news media are beginning to ignore it.
The only barrier she broke at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway this month was by receiving the first Mother's Day card posted in a driver's garage.


A Policy Reversal
President Clinton renewed China's favorable trade status today with virtually no conditions, and said he would abandon his effort to use trade as a lever to force Beijing to make progress on human rights.
While Mr.
Clinton said there had been some improvement in human rights, he acknowledged that China's actions had fallen far short of the steps he set forth a year ago as conditions for renewing the trade privileges.
But he said that as punishment he would do little more than prohibit imports of Chinese guns and ammunition.


Art in Review
Guillermo Kuitca  Sperone Westwater Gallery 142 Greene Street (near Houston Street) SoHo Through June 11
The works in Guillermo Kuitca's current show are wan and so all over the place that one almost wants to combine the strengths of each type to come up with something substantial.
The two paintings that depict beds, cribs, chairs and other furniture, suggestively strewn about a vast stagelike space and billowing smoky flames, are the most emotionally gripping, and a huge map of a city where the basic unit of measure is the hypodermic needle makes its political points with efficiency.


'Liars' Attacking Health Plan To Scare Elderly, Groups Say
Two large consumer groups charged today that conservative direct-mail organizations were scaring elderly people with inaccurate attacks on President Clinton's health plan.
Lawrence T. Smedley, executive director of the National Council of Senior Citizens, denounced the direct-mail organizations as "liars for hire." He said they were trying to raise money with "fright mail" warning elderly people that they might lose Medicare benefits under Mr.
Clinton's health plan.


It's the Winner's Circle For Krone at Belmont
It took Julie Krone exactly four rides to reach the winner's circle after nine months on the disabled list.
She made it in a six-furlong allowance at Belmont Park yesterday aboard the 6-5 favorite, Consider the Lily, her first winner since she shattered her right ankle in a violent spill last August at Saratoga.
The 30-year-old, 4-foot-10-inch jockey made a clamorous but winless comeback on Wednesday, finishing third and eighth.
She was back on the job again yesterday with four mounts, starting with Miss Diana A in the fifth race, a 6-1 shot who was bet down to 3-1 by post time because of her celebrated rider.
Alas, they ran third.


U.S. SUES BRITISH IN ANTITRUST CASE
Signaling a new tactic in the Clinton Administration's trade policy, the Justice Department reached a settlement today with a British glass company whose patents and licenses had prevented American glass businesses from operating overseas.
The antitrust suit against Pilkington P.L.C., the world's largest maker of flat glass, accused the British company of monopolizing the technology for making sheets of glass like those used in windowpanes or car windshields.
The Justice Department argued that Pilkington fell under American jurisdiction because it owns 80 percent of an American glassmaker, the Libbey-Owens-Ford Company.


I'll Fly Away
Did you ever see a White House crowd that had more trouble with transportation?
Sure, George Bush had John Sununu and his Government-financed dental expeditions to Boston.
But Mr.
Sununu's mobilization against plaque pales beside the adventures of David Watkins, until yesterday the Director of Administration.
President Clinton sacked Mr.
Watkins after learning that he had used a Marine helicopter to hop over to Frederick, Md., for a golf game.
It takes an hour or so to drive to Frederick, but if you go by car you do not get saluted by a Marine escort the way Mr.
Watkins and his buddies did.


CHRONICLE
One of the premier cultural institutions in New York is about to acquire a new leader with a familiar name.
MARY RODGERS GUETTEL, a composer, an author and a daughter of Richard Rodgers, has been named the chairwoman of the Juilliard School's trustees.
She will take over from June Noble Larkin, the chairwoman since 1985, at the end of June.


Jazz Owner Won't Face Charges
Prosecutors in Salt Lake City have decided not to file charges in the confrontation between the Utah Jazz owner, LARRY MILLER, and a group of Denver Nuggets fans.
Salt Lake City police said yesterday there was no compelling reason to bring the Denver fans to court to face minor charges, and it would be inappropriate to prosecute Miller "when other parties would not be held to answer for their disorderly acts."


New Records Outline Favor for Hillary Clinton on Trades
The White House today released new records showing that Hillary Rodham Clinton received preferential treatment from her commodities broker in the late 1970's, when she was allowed to trade in cattle futures without depositing the cash that normally would have been required.
Mrs.
Clinton ultimately turned a $1,000 investment into profits of nearly $100,000.
The records showed that she had earned her initial $5,300 in profits without depositing $12,000 in cash that ordinarily would have been needed for the purchase of a contract for 400,000 pounds of cattle.


Schlesinger Sees Free Speech in Peril
In a commencement address yesterday that also served as his farewell to the City University of New York Graduate School, the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. condemned campus speech codes and "the agitation for censorship" in the name of multiculturalism.
"It is ironic that the celebration of diversity concludes in a demand for conformity," he told a capacity audience at Town Hall in midtown Manhattan, where 332 students received doctoral or master's degrees at the Graduate School's 30th annual commencement.


Art in Review
Ross Bleckner  Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through June 25
In his latest show, his 12th solo in a New York gallery, Ross Bleckner's ambition as a painter continues to surpass the results.
His goal seems to be a deeply felt abstraction that signals specific themes -- especially loss and mourning -- not only with its preferences for black, silvery grays and evocations of light, but through fleetingly representational details and motifs: his signatory urns, doves and flowers and, new to this show, first names, written in cursive and then rubbed out.
But such devices regularly give Mr.
Bleckner's work a too-simple sense of both beauty and meaning; they inject sentimental subject matter without enhancing content, letting themselves, and us, off easy.


She Was a Myth, a Symbol and Finally Mortal; The TV Vigil
To the Editor:
The spectacle of journalists gathered outside the home of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis to cover her death was sad and sobering.
Early in Mrs.
Onassis's post-Presidential years I had to stand in front of 1040 Fifth Avenue on stakeout, and I now live nearby.
As she lay dying neighbors asked me to defend the tumult caused by a dozen television minivans, several large satellite uplink trucks and bright lights playing on the building's Fifth Avenue facade.
The television journalists who had to do the difficult job also felt the loss.
They were orderly and respectful.
They hoped their lights would not disturb Mrs.
Onassis or her family.
Yet it should have been possible to reduce redundant equipment.
Pool cameras could have provided adequate coverage at the front of the building.
Reporters could have made separate on-camera comments from unilateral camera positions close enough for "presence," but distant enough to reduce the glare.
It's probably fair to say Mrs.
Onassis had a love-hate relationship with the press, particularly the still photographers.
If she was aware of the television congregation nearby perhaps that provided a comforting sense of the world's affection for her.
I hope so.
STEVE YOUNG New York, May 20, 1994 The writer is senior correspondent, business news, CNN.


Using Clinton's Helicopter Costs an Official His Job
The green helicopter was standing at the ready as a knot of men approached.
The Marine guard snapped to a smart salute as one of them boarded Marine One.
A very Presidential scene, indeed, except for one problem: President Clinton was not there.
And the White House official who had appropriated the craft for 18 holes of golf near Frederick, Md., lost his job today.


Gay Games Denounced and Defended


White House Aide Resigns After Golf Outing by Helicopter


Review/Photography; Re-evaluating the Work Of W. Eugene Smith
In the 1940's and 50's, W. Eugene Smith became famous as the model of the committed photojournalist, renowned for the extended picture essays he made for Life magazine on such subjects as a country doctor in Colorado and the life of a Spanish village.
Smith would immerse himself in his stories, sometimes spending months working on one; his essays, combining equal measures of reportage and sentiment, were hailed as classics of the medium.
Since Smith's death in 1978, at the age of 59, his reputation as a photographer has been somewhat eclipsed by stories of his troubled personal life, which was punctuated by battles with editors and struggles with alcohol and amphetamines.
This valuable show offers a chance to reconsider Smith's work, presenting as it does many of his best-known images, from his 1950 shot of a Spanish woman, clad in black, spinning thread, to his 1958 picture of a woman in a Haitian mental asylum, her eyes gleaming out of the darkness around her.


Red Sox Get 8 Doubles To Ease Umpires' Load
Red Sox 13, Indians 5
Damon Berryhill homered and doubled as the Boston Red Sox scored eight runs in the second inning and beat the error-plagued Cleveland Indians, 13-5, last night at Boston.
The Red Sox had eight doubles in the game.
Two umpires injured in an auto accident were sidelined again last night, leaving the crew one man short for the start of the game.
Ken Kaiser, 48, and Mark Johnson, 43, were treated at hospitals Wednesday after the rental car Kaiser was driving was hit about two blocks from Fenway Park.
Wednesday's game, which began with two umpires, was called after two innings because of rain.


COMPANY NEWS: Hard-Charging Vehicles; An Electric Car Goes More Than an Extra Mile
The glaring weak spot of electric cars has always been their limited range.
But a Geo Metro converted to electricity by Solectria Inc. has completed 214.2 miles without stopping for a battery recharge, according to officials of the American Tour de Sol, the weeklong race for solar- and electric-powered vehicles in which the car is competing.
The car runs on nickel metal hydride batteries, which are becoming common in laptop computers but are not yet commercially available in a size big enough for electric automobiles.
The batteries were developed by Ovonic Battery of Troy, Mich.


For Memorial Day Weekend, Things to Do and Places to Go
Memorial Day is observed on Monday.
Here is a sampling of activities planned in the New York metropolitan region for the holiday weekend.
NEW YORK CITY Today  BILL SIMS AND THE COLD-BLOODED BLUES BAND AND BUDDY MILES, blues and rhythm-and-blues, South Street Seaport, Ambrose Stage, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan. 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
SEAPORT LIBERTY CRUISE, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, lower Manhattan.
One-hour cruises around the southern tip of Manhattan.
Tickets: $12 today; $16 tomorrow through Sept. 5; half-price under age 12.
Schedule and other information: (212) 630-8888.
"D-DAY: THE LIBERATION OF EUROPE," Intrepid Sea-Air-Space-Museum, West 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Manhattan.
An exhibition celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Allied landing at Normandy, with videos, newsreels, combat film, photographs and memorabilia.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for the elderly and veterans; $4 for those under 12.
Information: (212) 245-0072.
SALT 'N' PEPA AND R. KELLY WITH KID CAPRI, Radio City Music Hall. 8 P.M. and midnight.
Ticket: $35 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
CIRCLE LINE, Pier 83, Hudson River and 43d Street, Manhattan.
Daily three-hour cruises around Manhattan and two-hour "star attractions" and "harbor lights" cruises.
Tickets: $18; $9 under age 12.
Schedule and other information: (212) 563-3200.
WORLD YACHT, Pier 81, Hudson River and 41st Street, Manhattan.
Daily two- and three-hour dining and music cruises.
Prices range from $27.50 to $75 for dinner and cruise, $16 to $25 for cruise only.
Reservations: (212) 630-8100.
"CAN'T TOP THE LINDY HOP!," Roosevelt Hotel, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
Four days of parties, dance instruction, lectures and discussions, sponsored by the New York Swing Dance Society.
Tonight at 9; tomorrow and Sunday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $75 for all events; $15 for each party.
Information: (212) 696-9737.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
CINCINNATI REDS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens. 7:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Fireworks after the game.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
ASTROLAND AND THE CYCLONE ROLLER COASTER, 1000 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
The amusement park will be open tonight from 7 to midnight; tomorrow through Monday, noon to midnight.
Rides are $1.50 to $3; a single admission of $12.99 allows unlimited access to major rides today and tomorrow.
Information: (718) 265-2100.
Tomorrow  THE ROY GERSON BAND FEATURING HAYWOOD GREGORY, big band, South Street Seaport, Ambrose Stage, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
LOWER SECOND AVENUE FESTIVAL, Second Avenue from St.
Mark's Place to 14th Street. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 809-4900.
WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBIT, sidewalks surrounding Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village.
Noon to sundown, tomorrow through Monday and June 4 and 5.
Free.
Information: (212) 982-6255.
GREENWICH VILLAGE WALKING TOUR, Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 6 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
TURKISH PARADE, Madison Avenue, between 47th and 55th Streets.
Sponsored by the American Turkish Society. 2 P.M.
"A LOVELY WAY TO SPEND AN EVENING," Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
A concert produced by the jazz pianist Barry Harris, with singers from public schools around the city and Chris Anderson, pianist; Charles Davis and Jimmy Heath, tenor saxophonists; Scoby Stroman, dancer; Roberta Davis, singer, and others.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 in advance; $25 at the door.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
RICHMOND HILL MEMORIAL WEEKEND FESTIVAL, Jamaica Avenue, from Lefferts Boulevard to 108th Street, Queens.
A celebration in honor of the area's 100th anniversary. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 995-9412.
IRISH-AMERICAN FEIS, Floyd Bennett Field, Gateway National Recreation Area, southeast Brooklyn.
A festival featuring the Irish tenor Frank Patterson and other Irish musicians, a storyteller, children's pony and amusement-park rides and food and cultural exhibitions.
Hours: tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 8 P.M.; Monday, noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 338-3799.
LITTLE ODESSA WALKING TOUR, Brighton Beach, Brooklyn.
A tour of the area with an optional lunch.
Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
The tour starts at noon in Manhattan or 1:15 P.M. in Brooklyn.
Fee: $5, lunch and subway fare not included.
Information: (212) 265-2663.
"SKY HUNTERS '94," Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, the Bronx.
A variety of free-flying birds of prey to demonstrate various flying maneuvers.
Beginning tomorrow, daily, except Wednesday, at 11:30 A.M. and at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with zoo admission: $5.75; $2 for the elderly and children 2 to 12 years old; free under age 2.
Parking: $5.
Information: (718) 367-1010.
"HAPPY BIRTHDAY, WALT WHITMAN," Fort Greene Park, Visitors Center, Dekalb and South Portland Avenues, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A walk and talk about the poet, who helped establish the park. 11 A.M. and 2 P.M.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Information: (718) 287-3400 or (800) 201-7275.
CITY BEACHES, the beaches operated by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation open for the season.
The beaches are Orchard Beach in the Bronx; Rockaway Beach in Queens; Wolfe's Pond and Midland Beach on Staten Island, and Brighton Beach and Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn.
Daily through Labor Day, 10 A.M to 6 P.M.
"THE ESTUARY: ARM OF THE SEA," Inwood Hill Park.
The Urban Park Rangers will lead a walk along the last remaining salt marsh in Manhattan.
Meets at 2 P.M. at 218th Street and Indian Road.
Free.
Information: (212) 772-0210.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
CINCINNATI REDS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens. 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
Sunday  SHAWN COLVIN, folk music, South Street Seaport, Ambrose Stage, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan. 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
FIREWORKS BY GRUCCI, South Street Seaport, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan. 9 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
"RITES OF SPRING: PROCESSION TO SAVE OUR GARDENS," Lower East Side.
An all-day procession with stops at more than 50 gardens on the Lower East Side and performances at five locations: Garden of Eden Memorial at Forsyth Street, between Rivington and Stanton Streets; La Plaza Cultural, northwest corner of Ninth Street and Avenue C; northeast corner of Ninth Street and Avenue C; Tree of Life, Sixth Street and Avenue B; El Jardin Paraiso, Fourth Street, between Avenues C and D. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Earth Celebrations.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-8283.
EAST VILLAGE WALKING TOUR, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
Noon.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
GREENWICH VILLAGE WALKING TOUR, led by Joyce Gold.
Meet at the arch in Washington Square, Greenwich Village, at noon.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"THE TENDER LAND," Bryant Park, 40th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
The New York Chamber Ensemble performs Aaron Copland's opera. 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-2439.
FLATIRON DISTRICT WALKING TOUR, midtown Manhattan.
Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
"ROLLER-SKATING REUNION," Wollman Skating Rink, Central Park; entrance at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street.
Nonmember skaters are welcome to join members of the Metropolitan-Manhattan Skate Club, who are to roller skate to jazz and disco music. 5 to 9:30 P.M.
Admission: $6; skate rental, $3.25; Rollerblade rental, $6.50.
Information: (212) 687-1775 or (212) 517-4800.
"TAP EXTRAVAGANZA '94," Haft Auditorium, Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street, Chelsea.
A performance in tribute to the dancers Maceo Anderson, Gene Kelly and Ann Miller.
Scheduled performers include Brenda Bufalino, Buster Brown, Savion Glover, Jimmy Glover and the Rhythm Queens. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22 to $34.
Sponsored by the New York Committee to Celebrate National Tap-Dance Day.
Information: (212) 279-4200 or (718) 597-4613.
LIVABLE WEST SIDE STREET FESTIVAL, Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets.
Sponsored by the Coalition for a Livable West Side.
Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
"A WORTHY USE OF SUMMER: JEWISH SUMMER CAMPING IN AMERICA," Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street.
An exhibition on the history of American Jewish summer camping, told with photographs, letters, clothing and other items.
On view through Aug. 21.
Hours: Sundays through Thursdays, 11 A.M to 5:45 P.M.; Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; free under the age of 12.
Information: (212) 423-3200.
"BERLIN AND FRIENDS," Woodlawn Cemetery, Jerome Avenue Gate and Bainbridge Avenue, the Bronx.
Michael J. Buglio conducts the Bronx Arts Ensemble Orchestra's tribute to Irving Berlin and other American composers. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 601-7399.
SIWANOY TRAIL TOUR, Pelham Bay Park, Pelham Golf Clubhouse, off Shore Road, the Bronx.
A tour of the marshlands, forest and meadows of Pelham Park, led by the Urban Park Rangers. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042 or (800) 201-7275.
"THE WORKS," Central Park.
A five-hour walking tour of Central Park, led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street.
Free.
Information: (212) 772-0210 or (800) 201-7275.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
CINCINNATI REDS, Flushing, Queens. 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
Monday  VINCE GIORDANO AND THE NIGHTHAWKS, jazz, South Street Seaport, Ambrose Stage, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
TURTLE BAY FAIR, Second Avenue from 42d to 53rd Street. 11 A.M to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 228-8262.
"NEW YORK IN WAR AND PEACE," lower Manhattan.
A walking tour exploring New York's military history.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets on the steps of City Hall at 1 P.M.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 439-1090.
BROADWAY ASTORIA MEMORIAL DAY FESTIVAL, Broadway from 21st Street to 47th Street, Astoria, Queens. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 995-9372.
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, West End Avenue and 72d Street to Riverside Drive and 90th Street. 10 A.M.
Sponsored by the New York City County American Legion.
Free.
Information: (212) 788-7438.
MAHLER'S SYMPHONY NO. 9, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Kurt Masur is to conduct the New York Philharmonic. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
"MEMORIAL DAY WALK IN FORT GREENE," Fort Greene Park, Visitor's Center, Dekalb and South Portland Avenues, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A walk past some of the war monuments, including the Revolutionary War Prison Ship Martyrs' Monument.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400 or (800) 201-7275.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
COLORADO ROCKIES, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens. 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
BASEBALL: YANKEES VS.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX, Yankee Stadium, the Bronx. 4:05 P.M.
Tickets: $11.50 to $17.
Information: (718) 293-6000.
WESTCHESTER Today  "SHELTER AND DREAM: PLAYHOUSES BY ARCHITECTS AND ARTISTS," an exhibition in the sculpture garden, where children can have fun figuring out commissioned play structures.
At the Katonah Museum of Art, Route 22 at Jay Street, Katonah, N.Y.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, and Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 232-9555. 14th WESTCHESTER COUNTY FAIR, Yonkers Raceway.
Rides, races, food and musical entertainment.
Through June 12.
Entertainers this weekend are to be the Tokens tonight at 7 and 9; Sh-Boom tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Larry Chance and the Earls on Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M., and the Regents, the Duprees and the Demensions on Monday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Festival hours: Mondays through Fridays, 5 P.M. to midnight; Saturdays, Sundays and Memorial Day, noon to midnight.
Admission: $6; children under 8, free.
Parking: $3.
Information: (914) 968-4200.
"THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS: REFLECTIONS ON REFLECTIONS," Philipsburg Manor, Route 9, North Tarrytown, N.Y.
An exhibition on things that reflect, including early looking glasses and mirrors, a telescope, a shaving stand and a scientific prism.
Hours: Wednesdays through Mondays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for ages 6 to 17.
Information: (914) 631-8200.
"MEMORIAL DAY WEEKEND BASEBALL CARD AND SPORTS MEMORABILIA CLASSIC," County Center, Bronx River Parkway and Central Avenue, White Plains.
Hours: today, 5 to 9 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (914) 285-4050.
PLAYLAND BEACH, Exit 19 off the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, Rye, N.Y.
A 279-acre amusement park with rides, miniature golf and swimming.
Hours: today through Sunday, noon to midnight; Monday, noon to 11 P.M.
Swimming fees: $3.25; $1.50 for children.
Parking: $3, today; $5 tomorrow and Sunday; $6, Monday.
Information: (914) 967-2040.
Tomorrow  "ANIMALS AND ACROBATS," a 19th-century-style road show featuring elephant and camel rides, musicians, magicians, a slack-rope walker, puppeteers (including a Punch and Judy show) and food.
Tomorrow, Sunday and Monday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Van Cortlandt Manor, Route 9, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y. (within walking distance of Metro-North).
Admission: $6 for adults; $3 for children; free under age 6.
Information: (914) 271-8981.
WOODSTOCK-NEW PALTZ ART AND CRAFTS FAIR, Ulster County Fairgrounds, New Paltz, N.Y.
More than 300 artisans are to display their work.
Hours: Tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: 5.50; $4.50 for the elderly; $3.50 for ages 4 to 12.
Information: (914) 246-3414.
Monday  NATURE WALK, Lenoir Preserve, Dudley Street, Yonkers.
A walk to identify wildflowers, led by by Tim Barton, a naturalist. 10 A.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 968-5851.
LONG ISLAND Today  FIREWORKS AND MUSIC, Bar Beach Park, Port Washington.
Featuring the Impalas, a pop group. 7 P.M.
Information: (516) 327-3100.
CARNIVAL AT THE STATE UNIVERSITY AT STONY BROOK, South Parking Lot, Stony Brook Road, off Route 347.
Games, rides and food.
Sponsored by the State University of New York at Stony Brook University Hospital Auxiliary.
Today, 5 P.M. to midnight.
Also tomorrow and Sunday, 1 P.M. to midnight, and Monday, 1 to 10 P.M.
Fireworks today and Sunday at 10 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 444-2699.
Tomorrow  SPRING FESTIVAL AND HORTICULTURAL EXHIBITION, Old Bethpage Village Restoration, Round Swamp Road, Exit 48 from the Long Island Expressway, Old Bethpage.
Games, dancing and sheep-shearing demonstrations.
Sponsored by the Agricultural Society of Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties and Friends for Long Island's Heritage. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, same hours.
Admission: $5; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (516) 572-8400.
Sunday  INTERNATIONAL JEWISH ARTS FESTIVAL OF LONG ISLAND, Suffolk Y-J.C.C., 74 Hauppauge Road, Commack.
Entertainment, crafts demonstrations, dancing, food. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also Monday, same hours.
Daily admission: $14; $12 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Two-day pass: $20.
Information: (516) 938-4600.
NEW JERSEY Tomorrow  DOG SHOW, Wolf Hill Farm, Monmouth Park, Oceanport.
A juried event with 1,500 dogs from all over North America.
Presented by the Monmouth County Kennel Club. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1 for children.
Information: (908) 264-0658.
COUNTRY MUSIC CONCERT, Six Flags Great Adventure, Exit 7A (Exit 98 off the Garden State Parkway to Interstate 195, Exit 16).
Rides, games and food.
Performance by Sammy Kershaw at 8 P.M.
Admission: $33.92; $21.15 for those under 55 inches.
Information: (908) 928-2000.
Sunday  IRIS SHOW, Quakerbridge Mall, Route 1, Lawrenceville.
Sponsored by the Garden State Iris Society.
Noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Monday  FAMILY FUN DAY, Meadowlands Racetrack, Route 4, East Rutherford.
Clowns, pony rides, a petting zoo and the Tim Gillis Band. 11:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2; $1 for the elderly; children under 12, free.
Information: (201) 935-8500.
CONNECTICUT Tomorrow  MYSTIC SEAPORT'S LOBSTERFEST, Mystic.
Participants may buy lobsters or lobster dinners while being entertained by performers singing sea chanteys.
Tomorrow through Monday, 11:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Seaport hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.
Admission (not including food): $15; $7.50 for ages 6 to 15.
Information: (203) 572-5315.
HOT-AIR BALLOON RALLY, Eastern High School, Route 229, Bristol.
Saturday and Sunday, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday  DECORATION DAY, Mystic Seaport, Mystic.
Services and activities dedicated to the fallen heroes of the Civil War begin at 12:30 P.M.
A parade starts at 2 P.M.
Seaport hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.
Admission: $15; $7.50 for ages 6 to 15.
Information: (203) 572-5315.
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Rocky Hill.
Representative Barbara B. Kennelly is to speak at the ceremonies on the green. 9:30 A.M.
Free.
Information: (203) 529-2379.


Rostenkowski Said to Face More Pressure
Federal prosecutors have turned up the pressure on Representative Dan Rostenkowski, reaffirming their plans to seek a broad felony indictment against him after Memorial Day unless he accepts the Government's terms, lawyers in the case said today.
With the Government's position hardening, the possibility of a plea agreement seemed to hinge on whether Mr.
Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat, would accept an arrangement that would force him to give up his job as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, serve a relatively brief prison term and admit guilt to illegal activities.


Lemaire In a Daze On Morning After Loss
Jacques Lemaire said he lost little sleep throughout the regular season, but the Devils' coach acknowledged today that he slept very little on Wednesday night.
Just as well.
It would not have been sweet dreams for a coach who watched his team collapse in the third period of Game 6 against the Rangers Wednesday night, wasting a chance to eliminate their rivals and advance to the Stanley Cup finals.
The Rangers scored three times in the last period, forcing Friday night's seventh and deciding game of what has been an epic series.


For Rangers and Suffering Fans, Game 7 Means It's Now or Never
Game 7.
The Rangers have won a Game 7 only once in the playoffs -- two years ago, against the Devils.


At the Bar; When sudden baldness is bad for business, a lawyer decides to beard the rumors.
Until about a year ago Jeremiah Gutman, a man with a mane of flowing, slightly unruly white hair, bushy eyebrows and moustache, was periodically mistaken for a famous physicist.
Standing at a bus stop in Los Angeles once, Mr.
Gutman, a fixture in Manhattan's civil liberties bar for 40 years, was even asked for his autograph.
"The guy gave me whatever he was carrying and I signed 'Albert Einstein,' " he recalled.
Almost overnight, however, Mr.
Gutman, who is 70, has come to look more like Telly Savalas or Yul Brynner.
Disease has clear-cut his distinguished head and, for a time, threatened to decimate his law practice as well.
Therein lie several lessons for lawyers about the fragility of small law practices, the fickleness of some clients, the squeamishness of colleagues and the ravages of rumors.


Group Urges Tough Limits on Logging in Southeast
As the Forest Service reassesses policies on logging on public lands, a report released here contends that recreation and tourism in the forests bring in far more money than timber harvests.
The report by the Wilderness Society recommends that the Forest Service strictly limit logging in the 3.8 million acres in six national forests that it manages in five states in the Southeast.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp.(MNDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Assessing the Odds for Carter Hawley's Overhaul
There are two schools of thought on Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc.: One is that the West Coast department store operator is destined to crawl back into bankruptcy protection and the other is that it will be one of the decade's most remarkable corporate turnarounds.
The dubious, Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's Investors Service among them, point to the duct tape holding together the carpeting in many of the company's 83 stores.
And that is only the most obvious sign that the retailer, whose three chains, the Broadway, Emporium and Weinstock's, which operate mostly in the West and Southwest, is overdue for a stem-to-stern overhaul that will require hundreds of millions of dollars.


U.S. Says 17 Ran Murder Gang That Ruled Heroin Sales in Bronx
Seventeen people identified as gang members were indicted yesterday on murder and racketeering charges in what Federal prosecutors called a sophisticated operation that forced dealers to pay rent in order to sell drugs on street corners in the South Bronx.
For seven years in Mott Haven, prosecutors said, the gang, called C &amp; C, controlled drug trafficking in the area by strictly enforcing where and during what hours it could occur.
Those who did not cooperate, the authorities charged, were killed or tortured.


Review/Pop; Huey Lewis and the News, Back and Forth in Time
Huey Lewis's big hits from the mid-1980's are now old enough to be oldies themselves.
But for his new album, "Four Chords and Several Years Ago" (Elektra), he has backtracked even further to perform rock, soul and blues songs from the 1950's and 60's.
At Tramps on Wednesday night, Huey Lewis and the News, plus a three-man horn section and two female backup singers, ran through time-honored songs like "Shake, Rattle and Roll" and "Some Kind of Wonderful," interspersed with Mr.
Lewis's hits from the 1980's.
The lineage was clear.
Mr.
Lewis's songs, which often promise a happy-ever-after love, are steeped in slow-rolling rhythm-and-blues and chugging 1950's rock-and-roll.
As for the vintage songs, the band and Mr.
Lewis ran through them without missing a note.
But most of the time, they completely missed the point.


Abroad at Home; Savaging The Great
Last November Steven Cook filed a Federal lawsuit claiming that he had been sexually abused as a teen-ager by Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, the Roman Catholic prelate in Chicago.
He asked for $10 million in damages.
The charge attracted enormous media attention.
CNN, which had a documentary scheduled on sexual abuse by priests, put in a segment on the suit including an exclusive and tearful interview with Mr.
Cook.
It made highly emotional television.


Whaling Around Antarctica Is Banned by World Body
The 40-nation commission that regulates international whaling voted today to create a vast sanctuary in Antarctica that would permanently bar commercial hunting around the continent, even if an existing moratorium on whaling worldwide is ever lifted.
The measure was approved by a vote of 23 in favor, with Japan the only vote against and with six abstentions.
The vote here at the annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission puts nearly a quarter of the world's oceans, including all waters south of Australia, Africa and South America, permanently off-limits to commercial whaling.


Brown Group Inc.(BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Solzhenitsyn Flies Home, Vowing Moral Involvement 88
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn flew away today from the nation that was his home in exile for nearly two decades.
In an hourlong exchange with reporters at the airport, he paid tribute to Vermont, where he was granted the privacy to write, and promised to "take an active part in the social life" of his native Russia.
"We were very friendly with the Vermonters, and the people and the environment -- all of that put together -- created for me 18 years of so intense creative work that really I could never have dreamed that this would be possible," he said.
"This was the most creative period of my life, the most productive period of my life, and of course I leave with much emotion."


On Denny's Menu: Discrimination
Remember the "Saturday Night Live" skit in which the black comedian Eddie Murphy makes himself up as a white man and marvels as the world falls at his feet?
Service people become fawning and solicitous to a fault.
When Mr.
Murphy tries to pay his bus fare, the driver tells him to keep the money; only black people have to pay.
The humor in that skit is wrought from one of life's most humiliating and nightmarish events.
Ask the thousands of black customers who filed suit against Denny's, the national restaurant chain, for refusing them service or forcing them to wait longer or pay more than white customers.


Richard Walsh, 68, Television Producer
Richard J. Walsh, a television producer, died on Tuesday at Brandywine Nursing Home in Briarcliff, N.Y.
He was 68.
Mr.
Walsh served as a cryptographer in the Army Air Force in World War II and graduated from Fordham University in 1949.
After working for the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency, he joined the National Council of Catholic Men in 1953 and eventually became director of its film, television and radio division.


Cruel and Inhumane
To the Editor:
The May 17 letter of S. R. Nathan, Ambassador of Singapore, is a reminder not to forget the young American prisoner Michael Fay -- not for the allegations of Singapore police coercion or his allegations of innocence, but because of the extremity of the caning punishment in relation to the crime.
Producing graffiti is hardly serious enough to merit permanent bodily harm as punishment.


Bunk Beds, Bug Juice and Cultural Identity; Jewish Museum Exhibit Celebrates Summer Camp as a Crucible of Ethnic Tradition
It never occurred to Susan Addelston that one day, her 1948 camp yearbook might be of interest to anyone but her.
And, well, maybe her mother.
Yet there it is, mounted, labeled and catalogued, a thing to be looked at, puzzled over and commented on, an item in an exhibit at the Jewish Museum filled with the artifacts of summers in the woods and by the lake.
It is all on display: the trunk and the duffel bag, the plaque made for color war and the hand puppet made in arts and crafts, the name tags sewn into T-shirts and the letters home to Mom and Dad, full of tales of homesickness and complaints about the food.


She Was a Myth, a Symbol and Finally Mortal
To the Editor:
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was in her White House days mythological.
In post-White House days, she became a symbol.
In her death, she was a person.


Schools Chief To Reconsider Union Accord
Bowing to the Giuliani administration, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has agreed to return to the bargaining table with the school custodians union to come up with a new contract that meets the Mayor's approval, officials said yesterday.
The Chancellor's agreement gives Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani an opportunity to pursue his own agenda with the custodians union and to push more aggressively for using private companies to maintain city schools.


WNYC, With Its Strong Signal, Promotes the Arts in New York
To the Editor:
I cannot fathom how Irwin Schneiderman, chairman of the WNYC Foundation, thinks that switching WNYC's programming to a noncommercial station (that seems to mean WNYE, the Board of Education station), which cannot broadcast outside New York City limits, is "an elegant solution." That is his reaction, as you report May 10, to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to sell the station's 93.9 spot on the dial.


Cameron Ashley Inc.(CMSH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Ellison Recalled as an Artist of Great Range
Hundreds of people who cared about the novelist Ralph Ellison traveled to Washington Heights yesterday to pay their respects to his life and art.
They received in return glimpses, small and affectionate, of the man's expansive soul.
At a memorial tribute at the American Academy of Arts and Letters, a few blocks from the apartment on Riverside Drive where Ellison lived and, on April 16, died at the age of 80, the authors Toni Morrison, Albert Murray and Stanley Crouch and the jazz trumpeter Wynton Marsalis gathered with others to offer their personal songs of praise.
Letters From Italy
Mr.
Murray shared letters that Ellison, the author of the novel "Invisible Man," had written to him decades earlier.
In one, written from Rome in 1955, Ellison said he had not done much writing lately, only "an article on music and some letters."


Republican Candidates Barnstorm, Outlining Platform
A day after the end of an often contentious Republican State Convention, the party's endorsed candidates for governor and lieutenant governor barnstormed across the state today, talking with reporters, meeting supporters and chanting their campaign mantra: "It's Mario Cuomo's fault."
In four upstate cities, State Senator George E. Pataki, the party's candidate for governor, and Elizabeth P. McCaughey, the lieutenant governor candidate, outlined their bedrock platform: cutting taxes, reducing the welfare rolls and establishing a death penalty.


Woman Testifies That The Citadel Is Unfair
Distilling a complex legal case into a simple statement of distress, Shannon Faulkner, the 19-year-old woman who is challenging The Citadel to give her a place among its all-male corps of cadets, testified today that she had decided to sue the South Carolina public college when she learned that her acceptance had been revoked only because of her sex.
"I didn't think it was fair that they had told me I was qualified, but when they found out I was a girl -- the way I was born -- then they didn't want me," she said, adding that it was the first time she had faced such clear discrimination on the basis of her sex.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed John Coppinger, pitcher.


House Bill on Derivatives Introduced
Two powerful members of the House of Representatives introduced a bill yesterday to tighten the supervision of the derivatives activities of banks.
The bill was introduced by Henry B. Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat who is chairman of the House Banking Committee, and Jim Leach of Iowa, the ranking Republican member on the committee.
It combines, in a somewhat milder form, separate derivatives legislation that each had introduced earlier this year.


Quanex Corp.(NX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Back to Business on China Trade
Now that President Clinton has decided to keep China in the family of America's most favored trading nations, despite that country's human rights violations, sighs of relief are coming from much of Corporate America and from many individuals -- certainly those who think about China as a source of inexpensive consumer goods.
China is booming.
And that means big business for American companies like Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, which together sold $2 billion in aircraft to China last year, and AT&amp;T, which describes China -- not the United States -- as its fastest-growing market.
These companies were loud voices in the lobbying effort for an extension of China's trade privileges.
China Is 'Critical for Us'
"If 'most favored nation' had not been extended, we would have been impacted greatly; it is critical for us to be successful in China," said Susan Berman, a spokeswoman for AT&amp;T, which expects to collect $3 billion in revenues from its China operations by the year 2000, up from $500 million last year and $250 million in 1992.


Art in Review
'Lest We Forget' 'On Nostalgia'  The Gallery at Takashimaya 693 Fifth Avenue (at 55th Street) Through July 9
The exhibition in the art gallery of the Takashimaya department store is portentously titled, but there's nothing dewy-eyed about the work of the Japanese and Western artists on view.
To the contrary, the attitude is irony all the way, though sometimes touched with affectionate humor.


On Stage, and Off
What Happened to 'Kate'? Don't Ask
By the time the much-anticipated New York Shakespeare Festival production of "Kiss Me, Kate" was aborted on Monday, the sets, by Robin Wagner, had been designed.
So had the costumes, by William Ivey Long.
Christopher Durang was at work on a revision of the book by Sam and Bella Spewack, which is, of course, about the backstage marital squabbles of an acting couple starring in "The Taming of the Shrew."
Kevin Kline and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio hadn't signed contracts yet, but there was every reason to believe they'd be the stars.
And, said the director, Michael Ockrent, "We had names penciled in for almost all the other parts."


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Apr 30


Shirt of Man Who Died in Staten Island Struggle Is Lost
New York City police officials said yesterday that a hooded sweatshirt that Ernest Sayon was wearing during a fatal struggle with police officers on Staten Island last month has been either lost or destroyed and was not available for presentation as evidence to a grand jury.
"We're not able to locate it at this time," said John Miller, the Deputy Police Commissioner for Public Information.


Home Video
A Reversal
This week in Del Rio, Tex., cameras are rolling on the set of a western that reverses traditional release schedules and casts home video, normally that dusty trail hand in Hollywood's revenue roundup, in the role of movie mogul.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc.(EAGL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Ex-G.I.'s Relive Drama on Normandy's Beaches
They do not look like heroes, but they are easy to spot as they stand on the windswept beaches of Normandy or pause by the grave of a fallen buddy, quietly reliving the moments of fear, horror and excitement that marked their unannounced arrival here half a century ago.
Now mostly white-haired, occasionally frail, the youngest of them in their late 60's, the veterans of D-Day keep returning like pilgrims to Normandy, because so many of them still remember June 6, 1944, as the most important day in their lives.


Harcourt General (H,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Russia Seeking U.N. Backing for Caucasus Force
Senior Russian officials said today that Moscow was seeking permission from the Security Council to deploy a peacekeeping force of several thousand troops in war-torn Georgia to reinforce a fragile cease-fire there and oversee the return of thousands of refugees.
Diplomats say the Council is likely to give its cautious assent next week to the new peacekeeping operation, which would involve troops from Russia and other former Soviet republics that are now members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Olajuwon A Problem Without A Solution
Although the team's chartered flight to Salt Lake City was scheduled to leave in 15 minutes, John Stockton, the Utah Jazz's All-Star guard, and Karl Malone, an all-N.B.A. forward, lingered in a near-empty locker room Wednesday evening studying stat sheets from the game that had ended 45 minutes earlier.
Utah had dropped a bitterly fought 104-99 decision to Houston and faced a 0-2 deficit in their four-of-seven-game series with the Rockets in the Western Conference finals.
On Monday, Utah was routed, 100-88, in Game 1.
Wednesday night was much better.
Stockton scored 18 points, Malone 32, but it still wasn't enough.


Weicker to Call Special Session on Handguns
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today that he would call a special session of the legislature late this summer to restrict small handguns, which he says are making every Connecticut community unsafe.
While the agenda is still being devised, the plan laid down by the Governor in a news conference in his office, and in a speech earlier in the day before the combined House and Senate, has the characteristics of a classic Weicker campaign of high-toned hardball, perhaps his last as he completes his final months in office.


Review/Art; Even With 2 Shows (or 3), Not the Usual Star
Since he made a big splash with his first one-man show at the Allan Stone Gallery in Manhattan in 1962, the California painter Wayne Thiebaud has not been unappreciated.
There have been museum exhibitions around the country, sky-high prices for his works and general (deserved) critical approval.
At the moment, he has both a mini-retrospective of his paintings to inaugurate Allan Stone's new location on East 90th Street and a show at the National Academy of Design.
The academy invited him to put it together from its collection along with a room of his own art.
Mr.
Thiebaud, nonetheless, has never been celebrated as a star in New York.
A print retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art 23 years ago was his last major museum appearance in the city.
He is the kind of artist about whom people nod in agreement when you speak of him admiringly, but he is not a name on lips the way Warhol and Lichtenstein and the others with whom he initially rose to prominence are.


Vatican Disavows Suggestion Of Church Guilt in Holocaust
A German lay theologian preparing a document for German and Polish bishops has suggested that Roman Catholics acknowledge that they share historical responsibility and guilt for the Holocaust.
But the Vatican moved quickly today to say that the draft did not have the approval of the Holy See.
The document, presented on Wednesday by Hans Herman Henrix of the Catholic Theological Institute in Aachen, Germany at a meeting of a liaison group of Jews and Roman Catholics in Jerusalem, spoke of "manifold guilt" of Catholics for a failure to resist the rise of the Nazis in Germany and the annihilation of Jews during World War II.
The draft stunned Jewish representatives at the gathering.


Diner's Journal
Out With the Din
For people who remember when C. T. was Banana Cafe, it seems strange to walk through the door and not have all conversation disappear into the din.
It is the first clue that things have changed at 111 East 22d Street.
The room is dark, hip, cool and almost tropical.
The brightest point is the spotless kitchen, where chefs move soundlessly behind a wall of glass.


Sergeant Charged in Police Corruption Case
A New York City police sergeant was arraigned yesterday in Brooklyn on charges that he agreed to provide protection, while off duty, to a drug dealer during a cocaine sale, and that he offered to help another dealer, while on duty, through the use of a police computer.
The sergeant, Robert Santana, 33, is one of the first supervisory officers in the city to be arrested for direct involvement in drug trafficking during corruption inquiries in the last two years.
He is assigned to the 71st Precinct, which is in Crown Heights.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PENN VIRGINIA OIL AND GAS CORP., Kingsport, Tenn., acquired the assets of C D &amp; G Development Corp., Pikeville, Ky., for $7.1 million.
SPALDING SPORTS WORLDWIDE INC., Chicopee, Mass., plans to shift most of its golf-club production to its golf-ball factory in Gloversville, N.Y.


While Most Stocks Drift, A Few Make Sharp Moves
Wall Street was a muddle yesterday.
As traders prepared for the Memorial Day weekend, stock prices barely changed, according to the main indexes.
But a few market-leading stocks, like Philip Morris and Boeing, showed sharp swings for reasons peculiar to them.
The factors that have moved the stock market recently were a bit of a muddle, too: bond prices were down but the dollar was up, and the outlook for commodities prices continued to improve.


For a Better Board of Education
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has engaged in public brawls with Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines over budget cuts and other issues.
Now he has a chance to show his commitment to improving education in New York City -- through his appointments to the central Board of Education.
The board, which sets policy and is responsible for high schools, has seven members.
Each of the five borough presidents picks one and the mayor chooses two.
The four-year terms of all seven expire on June 30.
A combative conservative majority has held a 4-to-3 edge on the board for the past two years, focusing inordinate attention on such inflammatory social issues as AIDS education and condom distribution.
Whether the next board can sustain a broader consensus focused on educational improvement may depend on Mr.
Giuliani's choices.


DeShields Listed as Day-to-Day
Los Angeles Dodgers second baseman DELINO DeSHIELDS was listed as day-to-day yesterday after X-rays of his left middle finger showed no fracture.
He was injured when he scored on a head-first dive into home plate on a wild pitch by Chicago's JIM BULLINGER during the fifth inning of the Dodgers' 7-6 victory over the Cubs on Wednesday night.
DeShields, who had two hits and scored two runs, left the game immediately and needed three stitches to repair a cut on the finger.
He will be re-examined today before the Dodgers play the Pittsburgh Pirates. (AP)


Art in Review
Richard Dadd  David &amp; Langdale 231 East 60th Street Manhattan  Through June 3
Richard Dadd (1817-1886) was considered in his youth to be one of England's most promising artists.
Then, in his mid-20's, he became mentally deranged, murdered his father and was placed in a hospital for the criminally insane, where he continued to produce art to the end of his life.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.24
3.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.15
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.57
4.56
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.09
7.10
6.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.34
6.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.25
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.39
5.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Washington Memo; In a Dissonant White House, The Economics Team Hums
Normally, conflict is what makes news.
But what makes the way economic policy is developed in the Clinton Administration newsworthy is the remarkable absence of conflict among prominent officials with strong ambitions, personalities and opinions.
President Clinton's health and welfare policies are being put together in an atmosphere of continual bickering within the Administration, the unhappiness underlined by a spate of unauthorized disclosures by disappointed officials hoping to change preliminary decisions.
Foreign policy seems so cacophonous at times that it is often unclear who stands where and what the President thinks.


CHRONICLE
SHARON PERCY ROCKEFELLER has stepped down as the president and the chief executive of WETA, Washington's public television and radio station, because of the lingering effects of an automobile accident that she was in last year.
"Most unfortunately, I have not been able to regain my health and energy since my 1993 auto accident," Mrs.
Rockefeller said in a letter of resignation submitted on Wednesday.
"WETA deserves and must have a president who possesses the physical stamina to meet the challenges which lie ahead."


Steady as the Rain, Krickstein Gets the Better of Stich
Battered by the intermittent spring showers that drenched the French Open today, bolstered by the silver screws that keep the bones in both feet intact and emboldened by his unblemished record against Michael Stich, what else could Aaron Krickstein do but win his second-round match?
In fact, Krickstein positively trounced Stich today, but the 6-3, 6-3, 6-4 upset didn't seem to surprise either the subdued victor or the sullen loser.
A lethargic Stich, whose recent first-round Australian and United States Open losses and second-round exit today have provided a stark counterpoint to his No. 2 ranking, committed 10 double faults and 57 unforced errors.


Corrections
A chart in Your Money on May 21 with an article about credit card rebates misstated the amount offered by one card.
The Chase Builder Visa card rebates 10 percent of all finance charges, not 1 percent.


FLORIDA PREPARES NEW BASIS TO SUE TOBACCO INDUSTRY
The State of Florida is preparing the ground for a new attack on the tobacco industry that is intended to make it easier to hold cigarette manufacturers responsible for diseases associated with smoking.
Gov.
Lawton Chiles today signed legislation that would allow the state to file a suit on behalf of all its Medicaid patients who smoke.
Such class-action suits make it more difficult for cigarette companies to defend themselves by using the two main arguments they have successfully employed in cases brought by individual smokers.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Long Island Pro Wins  Darrell Kestner, the 40-year-old head pro at Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., won the $125,000 Dodge Open Charity Classic by three strokes yesterday at Rockaway River Country Club in Denville, N.J.
Kestner fired a par 65 in the afternoon round yesterday for a four-round total of 247.
With the course shortened to a 16-hole layout because of construction on Nos. 10 and 11, Kestner's six-under 59 in the morning's third round gave him a four-shot lead over P. J. Cowan, 26, an assistant pro at the Lake Success Golf Club on Long Island.
Kestner earned a $20,000 automobile.
Ramsbottom Takes Lead: Nancy Ramsbottom holed a 7-iron from 124 yards for an eagle to cap an eight-under-par 64 and took the first-round lead in the Corning Classic.
Pat Bradley and Amy Benz were tied for second.
They each shot 65's on the rain-softened Corning (N.Y.) Country Club layout. (AP) PGA Tournament Suspended: More than half the field was awaiting starting times yesterday when thunderstorms forced suspension of the first round of the Southwestern Bell Colonial in Fort Worth.
No one in the 110-man field at the Professional Golfers' Association tournament had completed play. (AP) SOCCER  Denmark Tops Sweden  Michael Laudrup scored nine minutes into the second half last night, giving Denmark, the European champion, a 1-0 victory over World Cup-bound Sweden in an exhibition game at Copenhagen.
The victory avenged a 1-0 loss to the Swedes in the first round of the 1992 European championship. (AP) YACHT RACING  Merit Cup's Lead Grows  The Swiss yacht Merit Cup, a Maxi entry, extended its lead to 80 miles yesterday in the sixth day of the final leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
The Italian yacht Brooksfield was second over all and the leader in the Whitbread 60 Class, 45 miles ahead of Galicia 93 Pescanova of Spain.
The final leg began in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and is expected to end in Southampton, England, on June 5. (AP)


Petrie Stores Corp.(PST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Alzheimer's To Be Focus Of New Effort
A major private center for research into Alzheimer's disease will be established at Rockefeller University in Manhattan to refocus the nation's efforts against the debilitating condition, scientists and philanthropists said today.
Zachary Fisher, a prominent figure in the real estate and construction industries, and David Rockefeller, the executive committee chairman of Rockefeller University's board of trustees, said they would together donate $5 million to establish a major center that would combine basic research with clinical treatment of Alzheimer's.


Synergistics Indus reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Civil Rights Slaying Raises Speedy-Trial Issue
It took 30 years, the demise of all-white juries and a sea change in racial attitudes to convict an elderly white supremacist, Byron De La Beckwith, of the 1963 murder here of Medgar Evers, the Mississippi N.A.A.C.P. field secretary and civil rights pioneer.
After two mistrials in 1964, in which juries deadlocked, and the dropping of charges against Mr.
Beckwith in 1969, justice had at last been done in 1994.
That, at least, was the sentiment among Mississippi's black citizens, some of its white citizens, Mr.
Evers's widow, Myrlie, and prosecutors after Mr.
Beckwith, still unrepentant at 73, was sentenced to life in prison on Feb. 5.


Sounds Around Town
Vanguard Jazz Orchestra
Vanguard Jazz Orchestra, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
One of New York's institutions, the Monday-night big band at the Village Vanguard gets its annual one-week show.
It's a band with all sorts of arranging; its strength is its colors and its soloists.
It's also, mistakenly, taken for granted.
Shows today and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third show on Sunday.
There is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum for all shows.
PETER WATROUS Jacky Terrasson
Jacky Terrasson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
The pianist Jacky Terrasson is a master of dynamics, and his trio, with Ugonna Okegwo on bass and Leon Parker on drums, is tight, concise and empathetic.
The band is also dedicated to swinging, and it gets a light but furious forward motion going.
Mr.
Terrasson isn't afraid of strange chords and unusual juxtapositions; he traffics in surprise.
Shows through tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.
Little Jimmy Scott
Little Jimmy Scott, the Chestnut Room, Tavern on the Green, Central Park at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Little Jimmy Scott's piercing wail infuses everything he sings with an aura of metaphysical lamentation.
The songs are mostly ballad standards that lend themselves to a keening rhythm-and-blues style, suggesting a hybrid of Dinah Washington and Little Anthony.
The program focuses on songs from Mr.
Scott's forthcoming album, "Dream" (Warner Brothers).
He is backed by a quartet led by the pianist Ken Ichi Shimazu.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11 and at 8:30 and 10:30 on Sunday night.
There is a music charge of $23.50 tonight and tomorrow and $17.50 on Sunday.
S.
H.
Jazz Album of the Week
Kevin Hays, "Seventh Sense," (Blue Note; CD only, $10.99).
For those who love the more experimental albums recorded by Joe Henderson, Bobby Hutcherson and Andrew Hill on the Blue Note label in the 1960's, "Seventh Sense" is a jolt of joy.
Mr.
Hays, a pianist best known for his association with the tenor saxophonist Josh Redman, has assembled an excellent band (including Seamus Blake on saxophones, Steve Nelson on vibes, Doug Wiess on bass and Brian Blade on drums) that wheels its way through his open, moody compositions along with works by -- surprise -- Bobby Hutcherson and Joe Henderson.
Although the recording isn't well sequenced -- three slow tunes in the middle make it a bit hard to listen to -- it captures the charge that experimentation had in the mid-1960's, when harmonic and rhythmic exploration merged with a solid grounding of swing.
It helps that the rhythm section drives so hard; this is an album built on the relationship between piano and vibes and a roaring bass and drums.
P.
W.


De La Hoya Fight Tonight
After watching film yesterday of Italy's Giorgio Campanella, the World Boxing Organization's junior lightweight champion, Oscar De La Hoya concluded, "He ain't no Italian stallion."
De La Hoya, who tries to retain his title against Campanella tonight in the feature bout of "Rising Stars" at the M.G.M.
Grand in Las Vegas, Nev., said Campanella "is tough, a real hard puncher, but he's just the type of boxer I can flatten."


DelBello Wins Democrats' Nod for Senate Seat
The last time Alfred B. DelBello was in the State Senate chamber in Albany, he was presiding, a function of his job as lieutenant governor.
Now Mr.
DelBello, a former Westchester County Executive, wants to return to the Senate, this time as a member.
Mr.
DelBello, a Democrat, is a candidate for the seat from the 37th District, a heavily Republican district whose incumbent, George E. Pataki, is leaving to run for governor.


Joe Brainard, Artist, Theater Set Designer And Poet, Dies at 52
Joe Brainard, an artist, writer, set designer and frequent collaborator with the New York School poets, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 52 and lived in SoHo.
The cause was AIDS, said his brother John, of Greenwich, Conn.


A pugilistic new agency seeks to produce sharp campaigns that stand up and get noticed.
THE combination of black and blue is familiar to fans of painting, fashion and fisticuffs.
Now two longtime creative executives are helping to form an agency to promulgate what they are calling "black and blue advertising."
Frank Fleizach and Bob Needleman, who have worked together and separately at a lengthy list of large agencies, are joining Paul Ahern, the president of Ahern New York, a small shop founded in 1986.
As of Wednesday, Mr.
Fleizach, 47; Mr.
Needleman, 43, and Mr.
Ahern, 40, will be the principals of Ahern Needleman Fleizach.


San Francisco State Destroys Malcolm X Mural After Furor
Students at San Francisco State University arrived on campus this morning to discover that a controversial mural of Malcolm X had been permanently removed.
The college administration said it had destroyed the mural, which depicted the face of Malcolm X surrounded by dollar signs, Stars of David and skulls and crossbones, because it was anti-Semitic.
The university had twice painted over the artwork, on the student union's outside wall, but students scrubbed off the paint both times.


She Was a Myth, a Symbol and Finally Mortal; Courage at the End
To the Editor:
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, one of America's most admirable and respected public icons, succumbed to a devastatingly aggressive form of cancer, which was resistant even to our most sophisticated medical treatments.
In keeping with her living will, under the guidance of her doctors and with the support of her family, she asked to leave the hospital so she could be at home when her life ended.


There Is Only One Thing Better Than Class Outdoors


Paint, Paste, Paper, Push
To the Editor:
The sign uncovered at Reade Street and West Broadway in downtown New York City and described in Paul Goldberger's May 14 appraisal of "Signs of Lost Times" may have "confounded city historians for years," but it was clear to me the moment I saw it.


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores Co.(BTRY) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Howard U. Keeps Free Speech Free
To the Editor:
Hats off to Franklyn G. Jenifer, president of Howard University, for his defense of the First Amendment (Op-Ed, May 13).
How easy it would have been to ban Khalid Abdul Muhammad from the Howard campus.
But democracy is best served by permitting unpopular views the widest circulation.
We shouldn't carve out exceptions to the First Amendment because we are disgusted by racist epithets or vile language.


10,000 Jobs Are Added In City for First Quarter
New York City added almost 10,000 jobs in the first three months of this year, the largest quarterly increase since the start of the local recession in early 1989, according to a report issued yesterday.
The report, produced by the city's Economic Policy and Marketing Group, provides the strongest evidence to date that what has long been a weak and hesitant local economic recovery is finally starting to produce meaningful employment gains.
The group provides coordinated planning and marketing strategy for the city's economic development agencies.


Gaza Self-Rule Deepens Jewish Settlers' Anxiety
Luna Amar was not sure what exactly had made the Israeli Army nervous this morning, but it made no difference.
The soldiers had issued a warning about the roads.
That was enough to persuade her and her neighbors not to send their children to school in Neve Dekalim, a nearby Jewish settlement that, depending on the security situation, can be either a 20-minute drive or a lifetime away.


Shortchanging Rights in China
Succumbing to enormous pressure from business interests, President Clinton has walked away from his own sensible policy of linking Beijing's trade privileges to modest human rights progress.
By abandoning its public threat of meaningful sanctions, the Administration harms its foreign policy credibility and gravely endangers those brave Chinese citizens who stood up to a brutal dictatorship in the mistaken belief that Washington would defend their cause.


Withdrawal Pace Slows At Mutual Bond Funds
Mutual fund investors seem to be growing less alarmed about the prospect of higher interest rates, and withdrawals from bond funds have slowed.
But there are still only limited indications that investors are willing to risk more cash, fund company executives said yesterday.
"It is a wait-and-see environment," said Joan Miller, a spokeswoman for the State Street Research group of funds.
"We're not seeing mass redemptions, but we're not seeing much buying either."


A Briefing From the Special Counsel


U.S.S. Peleliu Journal; 4,000 Marines, Two Months at Sea and Sick of It
In the war room of this amphibious assault ship, plans to evacuate American civilians from Somalia have been in place for more than two months.
There are relief maps of Mogadishu and talk of strategy options, depending on road and airport accessibility.
The marines guarding the American Embassy in Mogadishu stay in constant radio contact with the ship.
Plans have also been drawn up to evacuate Americans from Burundi in case the small Central African nation dissolves in civil war like its neighbor Rwanda.


Algo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A brief article on Tuesday about the selection of Hugh B. Price to serve as president of the National Urban League misstated his employer.
He is a vice president of the Rockefeller Foundation, not the Ford Foundation.


INSIDE
Broker Favored Mrs. Clinton
Newly released records showed that Hillary Rodham Clinton's broker did not require her to put up the normal sum of cash in a cattle futures trade in the late 1970's.
Page A20.
U.S.
Opening Hanoi Mission
In a major step toward normalizing relations, the United States and Vietnam said they would set up diplomatic missions in each other's capitals in two to three months.
Page A7.
Hate-Crime Laws Overruled
The New Jersey Supreme Court overturned the state's 1981 hate crime statutes, which were intended to prevent acts like cross-burning and the painting of swastikas.
Page B1.
Knicks Lead Series, 2-0
Patrick Ewing scored a game-high 32 points and had 13 rebounds to lead the Knicks to an 89-78 victory over the Indiana Pacers.
Page B9.


No Headline
"We're going to take the Marlboro Man to court." LAWTON CHILES, Governor of Florida.  [ A1:1. ]


Ewing Grabs Steering Wheel in Knicks' Title Drive
The second half belonged to Patrick Ewing, and another playoff victory belonged to the Knicks.
With Ewing dominating offensively, and the Knicks dominating defensively, New York rolled to an 89-78 victory in Game 2 of the Eastern Conference finals last night at Madison Square Garden.


Ultimately, Fans Root For the Soul of a City
This is for Ranger fans only.
A friend of mine, a Knicks season-ticket holder through the Ewing Era, became nostalgic just before the Pacers series began.
"Sometimes I think it was more fun when they were lousy," he said.
"There would always be empty seats, so you could sprawl across two, and you could walk around the Garden and visit. It was a great social scene.


Cardinals Ask Clark to Take Pay Cut
Arizona Cardinals wide receiver GARY CLARK has been asked to take a pay cut to help the team get under the $34.6 million salary cap.
The Arizona Republic said yesterday that BUDDY RYAN, the coach-general manager, hadn't received a response from Clark about restructuring his three-year, $6 million contract, which calls for $1.37 million in base salary this season.
Clark had a groin pull in the second game last season and was healthy for only six more contests.


On Long Island, a Memorial Day Salute to the Builders


John Devaney, 68, Author of Books For Young Readers
John Devaney, the author of 80 nonfiction books, most for young readers, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on May 19 about companies seeking wireless-communications licenses from the Federal Communications Commission misidentified the investment firm that is providing capital to Encompass Inc., a start-up company in Atlanta.
The investor is the Allen Group, based in Cleveland, not Allen &amp; Company of New York.


Dawson Will Probably Miss 3-4 Weeks
ANDRE DAWSON, the Boston Red Sox designated hitter, had surgery to repair torn cartilage in his left knee yesterdayy and is expected to be sidelined about three to four weeks.
Team physician Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS said he repaired cartilage on the inside and outside of the knee at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center.


Job-Seeking Women in Japan Finding More Discrimination
A senior Japanese Cabinet official acknowledged today that companies throughout the country had systematically denied job opportunities to women during the four-year economic downturn, reinforcing assertions by women's groups that the move toward equal opportunity in the 1980's has been tremendously eroded.
The official, Eijiro Hata, Minister of International Trade and Industry, called in leaders of one of Japan's biggest business groups today and asked them to end practices that have made Japanese women the last hired and the first fired.


Review/Film: The Flintstones; Lovable And Loud, With Wits Of Stone
THERE are many learned theories about why "The Flintstones" are pop-culture icons.
One involves the theme song: "Flintstones! Meet the Flintstones! They're the modern Stone Age fa-mi-ly." Just try to get that out of your head.
Another is that the Flintstones have been kept alive by vitamins.
"You took the vitamin; now see the movie" might not have been a bad marketing slogan.
A couple of generations of children have popped chewable versions of Fred, Barney and Wilma into their tiny mouths daily.


CBS Sees A 'War' for Affiliates
Vowing that his network will recover from Fox Broadcasting's heist of eight important CBS stations, Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group, promised yesterday to "open the network's wallet" to replace the defectors.
"The war is started," Mr.
Stringer said, "and any complacency will have to be banished from CBS." Among the moves Mr.
Stringer said CBS might make were higher compensation payments to affiliates; extending contracts with affiliates to as long as five years, from the current terms of about a year, or even taking a financial interest in some stations, which was Fox's tactic this week.
Disappointing Ratings, Too
Even as CBS was trying to rally confidence in the network and its programs, it had an additional nugget of bad news to disclose: disappointing results in the May ratings sweep period, which ended last night.


Accounts
*
Liz Claiborne cosmetic division, New York, to Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York, as the first agency to develop advertising to introduce Dana Buchman, a fragrance named after a company apparel line.
Billings were not disclosed.


A $430 Million Bid for Western Union Brings a Rejection
The First Data Corporation has offered the New Valley Corporation $430 million for its Western Union Financial Services unit, and New Valley has spurned the proposal as grossly inadequate.
Robert J. Amman, president and chief executive of New Valley, which controls the newly reconfigured Western Union, said in a letter on Wednesday that he would welcome further talks about sweetening the proposal, which First Data made on Tuesday.


Inside Art
When Some Give Up the Ghost
Spring is usually the time when galleries that are in trouble finally decide to close, and this season is no exception.
With the contemporary-art world still suffering from a sluggish economy, many galleries, most of which deal with younger or lesser-known artists, simply can't make a go of it.
"I gave it 10 years, but I became a bit of a dinosaur," said Josh Baer, whose Broome Street gallery in SoHo has featured contemporary artists including Nancy Spero, Chris Burden and Annette Lemieux.
"It's just not going to work anymore, giving clients the services they need and paying the overhead while showing difficult art the market can't support." Mr.
Baer, who is closing his gallery in mid-June, said he would be working with artists privately.
"If I need a space to hold a show, I'll rent it," he said.


Gerber Scientific Inc.(GRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


New Jersey Bias-Crimes Statutes Are Overturned
The New Jersey Supreme Court today overturned the state's hate-crime statutes, saying that while painting swastikas and burning crosses are reprehensible acts, the unmistakable messages they send are protected by free speech guarantees of the United States Constitution.
But the court took pains to note that actions motivated by hate could be prosecuted under a variety of other state laws.
The court said it had no choice in its ruling because of a 1992 decision by the United States Supreme Court striking down a St.
Paul statute similar to those enacted by New Jersey in 1981.
In fact, New Jersey is only the latest of several states to overturn their bias laws since Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the 1992 Federal decision saying that the First Amendment prohibits government from "silencing speech on the basis of its content."


TVWeekend; Edith Ann (or Lily Tomlin) Explains It All for You
One of Lily Tomlin's more endearing characters on "Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In" in the early 1970's was a 6-year-old named Edith Ann.
Sitting on an outsized rocker and wearing children's duds, Edith Ann observed the passing world with that special combination of innocence and mischief reserved for childhood.
Her idealism was exceeded only by her determination, signaled by a very visible tongue poking through the corner of clenched lips as she made gloriously opinionated entries in her diary.
Ms.
Tomlin went on, of course, to assorted personal triumphs in television, film and the theater, although in recent years her appearances have been far too few to satisfy more ardent fans.
Now, coming full circle, she has returned to television and Edith Ann in a series of animated half-hour specials constructed around the little girl and her stress-laden but loving family.
Jane Wagner, Ms.
Tomlin's longtime collaborator, is the writer.
The animation is by Klasky Csupo, best known for the original version of "The Simpsons."


Where City Children Can Have a Wild Time
THERE are places in this concrete-cornered, plasticized city where children, urban kids, can meet nature.
How are you, park squirrel?
Hi, pigeons.
But these natural encounters are not always the most natural thing in the world.
The two worlds clash -- and, most often, merge merrily -- at the new Prospect Park Wildlife Center in Brooklyn, the first New York City zoo totally aimed at children.
A regular visitor there is my son Roy, who at the age of 6 is convinced he knows all he will ever need to know about everything.
Recently, he was given the chance to feed a quarter's worth of granola-like gunk, dispensed from a vending machine, to some lambs.
A Kodak moment!
I squeezed my trusty Ph.D. ("Push here, dummy") camera in anticipation.


Farah Inc.(FRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 6


School Hit by Stray Bullets
Two stray bullets flew into Junior High School 45 in East Harlem yesterday morning, shattering a window in a third-floor classroom full of seventh graders, the authorities said.
Three students complained of a stinging sensation from the glass, but they suffered no injuries, said David Vazquez, the school's principal.


Executive Changes
FIRST FEDERAL OF ALABAMA, Jasper, Ala., promoted Robert Nolen Jr., its chief financial officer, to chief executive, succeeding Albert Simmons, who will continue as chairman.
NATWEST SECURITIES CORP., New York, named Robert Buchanan senior retailing analyst and senior vice president.


Public &amp; Private; Homicide Begins At Home
After Sarah Auerbach had been gunned down in the neighborhood dry cleaning shop, shot six times by a former boyfriend as she passed her blouses across the counter, law enforcement types tut-tutted sadly that the 35-year-old investment banker hadn't even sought a restraining order to protect her from the man who had been stalking her for months.
Victims' advocates and abused women had a jaundiced view of that response.
After all, they argued, the world most often hears about restraining orders when the woman who gets one is murdered by the person she got one against.


Mercy for the Dying
Just when it looked as if support for physician-assisted suicide was gaining strength in the courts and in public opinion, a New York State advisory panel has thrown its considerable influence against legalizing the practice.
The New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, appointed by Gov.
Mario Cuomo, charged this week that allowing doctors to help patients commit suicide would be "profoundly dangerous" and pose "extraordinary risks" for many patients.
The panel raised a number of troubling issues that need to be dealt with, whether or not physician-assisted suicide becomes an accepted practice.
But many of its concerns seem nightmarishly speculative -- like patients being killed to save the costs of treating them -- and virtually all the concerns can be mitigated by appropriate safeguards.


9 East Europe Nations to Join Round Table Talks
Nudged along by the European Union, nine East European countries agreed today to seek negotiated solutions to their internal and border disputes in an effort to avert conflicts like those in the Balkans.
The initiative was begun last year by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of France, who argued that governments needed mechanisms to carry out many of the principles of "good neighborliness" that have already been adopted by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.


Indians Reliever Has Hodgkin's Disease
MATT TURNER, a relief pitcher who opened the major league season with the Cleveland Indians, has contracted Hodgkin's disease, the Indians announced yesterday.


Classical Music in Review
New York Pops  Carnegie Hall
On Monday night Skitch Henderson celebrated his 11th year conducting the New York Pops.
He offered a vast range of musical and semi-musical goings-on: classic Broadway numbers from "Paint Your Wagon," "South Pacific" and "My Fair Lady"; Frederick Loewe's ballet music for "Brigadoon"; Mr.
Henderson's own score for the film "Act One"; John Bayless's garish piano improvisations on Bernstein's "West Side Story," done in the manner of Liszt and Beethoven, and members of the 1969 Mets singing "You Gotta Have Heart," from "Damn Yankees," with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
At the end of the evening, Mr.
Giuliani made an unsuccessful conducting debut with Sousa's "King Cotton March"; the crowd began clapping rhythmically, the orchestra fell into Ivesian confusion, and Mr.
Henderson had to give a beat inconspicuously from the woodwind section.


White House Drops Bank-Regulation Bid
The Clinton Administration today abandoned its effort to overhaul banking regulation this year, concluding that not enough time was left for Congress to act on it and that other initiatives should take precedence.
"It is becoming increasingly evident that this is just not going to be the year to get regulatory consolidation done," said Frank N. Newman, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance.


THE FINE PRINT: A periodic look behind the law.; Paying Income Taxes by Credit Card Could Get You a Trip to, Say, Hawaii
One day soon, many people may be able to have their taxes finance their vacations.
Especially if they are self-employed or do well with investments.
Last week, the House of Representatives passed a noncontroversial, grab-bag bill that would make dozens of minor changes in the tax law.
One provision would allow Americans to pay their income taxes with credit cards.


Borrowers Putting Rate Locks To the Test
As interest rates have risen the last few months, home buyers have become very eager to lock in a rate when applying for a mortgage.
In the last few weeks, fluctuations in rates have also heightened interest in "relocks," a variation allowing borrowers to shift to a lower rate if rates decline during the lock-in period.
But borrowers fixated on the absolute best rate sometimes trip up when using either of these loan provisions.


George W. Ball Dies at 84; Vietnam's Devil's Advocate
George W. Ball, who as Under Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations argued forcefully but unsuccessfully against United States involvement in the Vietnam War, died Thursday night in New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.
The cause of death was not immediately determined, but his son, Douglas, said that Mr.
Ball had entered the hospital on Wednesday and that his doctors had made a diagnosis of terminal abdominal cancer.


Sports of The Times; Close Enough to Taste: Fast-Forward to Knicks-Rockets
I wish I could just fast-forward the Knicks-Pacers series to the part where it starts getting good.
At this point, that is Game 4 or 5 when the series ends, presumably with a Knicks victory.
That sounds harsh, but it's not intended as a dig at Indiana or as a smart aleck rooting for the home team.
It's just the stated preference of a roving soul, eager to see pushes come to shoves.


Shots at Cardinal's Home Linked To 2 Policemen Held in Slaying
Two Milwaukee police officers were arrested in Wisconsin today hours after several shots were fired at the home of Joseph Cardinal Bernardin here.
The Chicago police say the gunfire came during a bizarre shooting spree that they believe ended in the slaying of a bouncer at a nightclub.
The Cardinal was not injured.


Mediation as a Route To Lower Divorce Costs
FOR 20 years, enthusiasts of mediation have insisted that techniques developed in labor law can make for better divorces.
Bringing a couple before a single disinterested party, they say, yields settlements with less expense and rancor than having two lawyers hash it out.
And they have found an audience, in part because divorce lawyers' fees have nearly doubled in the last decade.


Those Penske Flaws Just Wishful Thinking
Maybe it's just wishful thinking on the part of Roger Penske's competitors, but there are a couple of theories floating around Gasoline Alley here that the three powerful Penske Mercedes may have an Achilles' heel (or tire) in the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday.
The most popular rumor was that the Penske cars were wearing out their tires too quickly because of their harder acceleration out of the turns and more severe deceleration into the turns.
But Leo Mehl, Goodyear's worldwide director of racing, has apparently blotted out that ray of hope.


Judge Hints He May Tell Citadel To Scrap Its All-Male Tradition
A Federal judge today ordered officials at The Citadel, one of the nation's last two public all-male military colleges, to begin preparing a plan for co-education, indicating that he may soon force the college to admit women.
The judge, C. Weston Houck, of Federal District Court here, also ordered officials at the public college to develop a program to deal with any incidents of sexual harassment or abuse that could result from the inclusion of women in its corps of cadets, and he suggested that some incidents on campus had not been dealt with appropriately.


Be-Bop's Generous Romantic
When be-bop crystallized into an identifiable style during the early 1940's, one of its traits was a terrifying speed, which could make the music seem manic and impersonal.
Barry Harris, the 64-year-old pianist who has spent a career playing this music with an almost religious regard for its rules and bylaws, changed that entirely.
In his hands, be-bop becomes gentle.
He plays it slowly, with consideration; he lets each phrase linger, exposing a lyricism that with other artists is just a blur.
He plays the music kindly.
Mr.
Harris, one of jazz's most beneficent characters, is presenting his sort-of-annual show tonight at 8 at Symphony Space (2537 Broadway, at 95th Street).
To shape this show, "A Lovely Way to Spend an Evening," he has corralled nearly 200 people who have been associated with him over the years: musicians, singers and tap-dancers, many of them amateurs.


2 Overtimes Later, It's a Final and It's the Rangers
One team had to win this magnificent series, and it happened to be the Rangers.
One team had to lose, and it happened to be the Devils.
Someone had to end the tension and it happened to be Stephane Matteau, in double overtime.
He beat Martin Brodeur with a wraparound shot after 84 minutes and 24 seconds of play to give the Rangers a 2-1 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.
Thus ended the seventh and best game of a terrific Eastern Conference final series, the final stroke of an excruciating evening filled with drama and tension, the culmination of two weeks of New York hockey history that fans will re-live for many years to come.


Past Looks Brighter Than Future for Robb
The old Chuck Robb was back.
If only for a moment, he was not one of the most endangered Democrats in the Senate, fighting to keep his seat and to restore a reputation tarnished by beauty queens, massages and secret tape-recordings.
On this evening in his Senate office, Mr.
Robb drifted back a quarter of a century, to the glory days when he had returned from Vietnam laden with medals, to a bride whose father had been President and to whispers that he might even end up in the White House himself.
He was in Philadelphia, he recalled, a fresh-faced marine from Virginia who managed to win over a crowd of anti-war protesters.


A Rare Easy Night for Smith and the Mets
The Mets knew there would be exceedingly ugly days.
Any team trying to come back from a 103-loss season would be foolish to expect otherwise.
All the club has hoped for are brief respites this season as well as timely flirtations with respectability.
Such R &amp; R was much needed last night, after the Mets returned to Shea Stadium in the middle of a 3-7 doldrums-filled run.
The Mets got what they needed, defeating the Central Division-leading Cincinnati Reds, 10-2.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5  SOLZHENITSYN, BACK, SEES HOPE  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia from 20 years of exile, after waiting to complete his massive multi-volume history of the Russian Revolution, and he said he saw "a ray of light" for his countrymen.  1


Review/Dance; Harking Back to a Master's 'Sylphides'
Michel Fokine, one of the 20th century's seminal choreographers and one of American Ballet Theater's founding fathers, staged his last version of "Les Sylphides" in 1940 for the company.
When Mikhail Baryshnikov directed the troupe in the 1980's, he substituted the Kirov Ballet's staging of this celebrated work danced to Chopin.
The main change was the use of different music and choreography for the male solo, as derived from an earlier version of the work when it was known as "Chopiniana."


CHRONICLE
It doesn't have the hushed reverence of an art gallery, but BERT STERN, the photographer, thinks television is a fine place to sell fine art.
Mr.
Stern, who saw two of his photos of Marilyn Monroe sell for $2,700 and $5,000 in 10 minutes on Joan Rivers's "Can We Shop?" show in March, is hoping to do as well on the "Gallery Direct" show on QVC on Wednesday from 6 to 7 P.M.
Prices for limited editions of five Monroe pictures will range from $280 to $7,500.
He won't actually be doing the selling, though he will appear.


Let Brooklyn and the Other Boroughs Share Tourism Spotlight; Historic Cadman Plaza
To the Editor:
Great thanks for your May 17 report that the new Federal courthouse plan for Brooklyn will not affect the former Brooklyn General Post Office's external appearance.
The original proposal would indeed have been "an esthetic assault" on the historic post office on Cadman Plaza across from Borough Hall.


Bridge
When the world's oldest pair championship was first played, in 1929, one of the winners was the late, great Oswald Jacoby.
Many other famous stars of the game are past winners of this Goldman Open Pairs, which will be played today and tomorrow as part of the Eastern Regional Championships at the Sheraton New York Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 53d Street.
The first major event of the tournament was the Greenpoint Pairs, one of the few American events with cash prizes.
The final standings were: 1st, Jim Krekorian of Manhattan and Robert Blanchard of Lake Ariel, Pa., 1373.21 imps; 2d, Russell and Shawn Samuel, a father-and-son combination, of Locust Valley, L.I., 1132.79; 3d, Brian Glubok of Manhattan and Fred Chang of Flushing, Queens, 1120.21.
Shawn Samuel, an 18-year-old who is one of the country's best teen-age players, will enter Harvard University in the fall.


CHRONICLE
"This is a great gathering of a great family to honor a great man," ALFRED GWYNNE VANDERBILT JR. said as he rose in St.
Bartholomew's Church in Manhattan to address the multitudes of relatives he brought together yesterday to mark the 200th birthday of their forebear Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt.
Vanderbilts from near and far assembled 126 strong for the largest gathering of the clan since the death of the shipping and railroad magnate, in 1877.
The day included a reception, luncheons, a visit to the Vanderbilt mausoleum on Staten Island and the prayer service at St.
Bartholomew's, with speeches to extol the rise of an untutored youth who borrowed $100 from his mother to buy his first boat.
The talks were mostly filled with effusive praise, but former Mayor EDWARD I. KOCH didn't mince words.
Recalling the commodore's ruthlessness against competition, Mr.
Koch said:


Korea Speeds Nuclear Fuel Removal, Impeding Inspection
In a new challenge to Washington, North Korea has stepped up its removal of fuel from a nuclear reactor, prompting concern that it may prevent international monitors from carrying out crucial inspections, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The move surprised the Clinton Administration, which only a week ago offered to begin high-level talks with the North Korean Government in Pyongyang.


Repaving The Paths Of His Life
NICK CORCIARI, who hated being a banker, loves fixing potholes and repaving streets for the City Department of Transportation.
"It is the greatest job, " said Mr.
Corciari, who was once an assistant vice president -- with an expense account -- for Citibank.
At home in Rego Park, Queens, where he is recuperating from a wrist injury, he happily described the pleasures of his work and retraced the path that led him there.


Two Doctors In Nassau Investigated For Conduct
One department chief has been dismissed by the Nassau County Medical Center and another has taken a leave of absence amid separate inquiries into their activities, hospital officials said today.
Dr.
Stephen K. Rachlin, chairman of the psychiatry and psychology department, told the hospital today that he would take a voluntary leave of absence while medical center officials look into allegations by an acquaintance that he prescribed medications for her in return for sexual favors.


An I.B.M. Reshaping In Software
I.B.M. overhauled the management of its software-development programs yesterday to try to regain business it has lost to rivals like the Microsoft Corporation.
By better coordinating its efforts, the International Business Machines Corporation hopes to reduce the estimated $1 billion it spends annually in developing its various software operating systems.


For Bullet's Victim, a Vigil Triumphs; Against Medical Odds, Yeshiva Student Emerges From Coma
In the days after the bullet blasted into Nachum Sasonkin's brain, the slim hope for his survival sprang from a lone outward sign of life: a single blink of his eye when a cotton swab was drawn across the cornea.
But slowly, like spring's reawakening, the young man whose doctors expected him to die began to emerge from his deep coma.
He twitched when pinched.
Then, like a baby, he would squeeze a finger put in his hand.
His eyes, unfocused and glassy, began opening to slits.
More than two weeks after a barrage of gunfire on March 1 bloodied a van full of Lubavitch Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge, killing one, there was strong promise for Mr.
Sasonkin, the most severely injured of the three wounded survivors.
Bedside Readings
For someone like Mr.
Sasonkin though, who had spent his days studying in the service of God and the Lubavitcher Grand Rabbi, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, mere survival was but one hurdle.
So less than three weeks after the shooting, one of many relatives who kept a near-constant bedside vigil tested the 18-year-old yeshiva student, asking him which volume of the rabbi's writings had recently been published.
Is it the 31st?


Review/Music  HEADLINE&gt;Ives and Kindred Spirits
More eccentricity on Thursday night as the New York Philharmonic, under Kurt Masur, played Americana in various sizes and shapes at Avery Fisher Hall.
This program of Charles Ives, Carl Ruggles, Wallingford Riegger and Henry Brant is at the center of the orchestra's "American Eccentrics" week.
It will be repeated tonight and Tuesday.
Each of these pieces behaved like the capital of its own private world.
One sensed four strong, unencumbered wills, each dissatisfied with the comforts of home and each happy to hitchhike into the unknown.
Drifting, that great American societal art, is dangerous but liberating.
For the strong, it leads to new places.


Facing Graf, an Upset Is Winning Just One Set
The day was overcast, and it left several of the French Open's seeded stars downcast.
There was a tinge of invincibility in the performances of Pete Sampras, Jim Courier and Sergi Bruguera, the defending champion.
But there was vulnerability in the subdued form shown by last year's runner-up, Mary Joe Fernandez, who lost badly, and last year's champion, Steffi Graf, who infuriated herself by playing poorly.
For her, that meant losing her fifth set of the year, not her match.


Christopher Presses Policy Of Engagement With Asia
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, speaking in New York yesterday, cast President Clinton's decision to renew China's preferred trade status as part of a stepped-up policy of engagement throughout Asia.
In a speech to the Asia Society, Mr.
Christopher said President Clinton's decision on Thursday to engage China, rather than punish it, was part of a strategy to build stability in Asia and share the continent's prosperity.


Nets' Anderson Has Surgery
Kenny Anderson, the Nets' All-Star point guard, who learned last week that he had played much of the season with a broken bone in his left wrist, underwent corrective surgery yesterday and is expected to be fully recovered by the start of training camp in October.
According to the Nets, Dr.
Charles Melone, a New York University Medical Center hand and wrist specialist, performed the operation in which a screw was inserted into the damaged bone.
The wrist is expected to be in a cast for 8 to 12 weeks.


CHINA WELCOMES U.S. TRADE POLICY
China today welcomed President Clinton's decision to separate trade from human rights, saying a "historic opportunity" exists to improve relations between the United States and China, and pledging to make "major efforts" in that direction.
At a minimum, United States officials expect China to release several more well-known political prisoners, some with serious medical problems, and to complete an agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross to open China's prisons to outside inspection.


Retired Investors Adjust To Market Flip-Flops
Retired people who tried to escape the dismalreturns of "safe" investments like certificates of deposit by putting some money in stocks, bonds and mutual funds have gotten a taste of adventure this year.
The financial markets' overall declines, and intermittent flip-flops, have left plenty of small investors queasy.
But they're particularly unsettling for older, more conservative people who have shorter time frames and who may want or need their money before the stock and bond markets recover.
This group depends on investment income to supplement retirement checks and tends to keep close tabs on portfolios and cash flow.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.23
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.15
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.61
4.57
3.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.09
6.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.36
6.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.25
7.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.36
5.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bodies From Rwanda Cast a Pall On Lakeside Villages in Uganda
At first, Ngoga Murumba was horrified.
Now, after seven days spent pulling bodies from Lake Victoria, wrapping them in plastic and piling them into trucks, the 47-year-old farmer says he feels only numbness.
His face masked to cut the stench, and his hands protected with thick black rubber gloves, Mr.
Murumba works in a daze, mechanically emptying canoes of their cargo.


Crafty Navigator in the Shoals of Italian Finance
Enrico Cuccia never gives interviews and forbids them for his subordinates.
Photos of the 86-year-old banker are usually taken secretly as he crosses Milan's streets or enters the headquarters of Mediobanca S.p.A. on cobblestoned Via Filodrammatici, just behind La Scala.
But Mr.
Cuccia, who runs Mediobanca, has a reputation for taking things in hand.
And his investment bank's recent hijacking of two major Italian banks has reminded Italians just how powerful Mr.
Cuccia and Mediobanca have become.


Rome Journal; For Vatican, Diplomacy Boston-Style
In 40 minutes, Ambassador Raymond L. Flynn chided the State Department for insufficient appreciation of the Vatican, explained how he failed to report using about $12,000 in campaign funds for personal expenses in his decade as Mayor of Boston and described his meeting with the head of the Irish Republican Army's political wing.
Seated on the terrace of the graceful ambassador's residence overlooking Rome, he also discussed the most pressing issues in diplomacy between the United States and the Vatican.


Rostenkowski Is Said to Waver on Plea Deal at Friends' Urging
Representative Dan Rostenkowski has hardened his resolve to battle accusations of corruption after consulting with friends and associates who have advised him to reject a plea agreement with the Government, people following his case said today.
But if Mr.
Rostenkowski has decided to reject a proposed settlement, his lawyers have not yet told that to the Government, law-enforcement officials said today.
The deal, negotiated between his lawyers and Federal prosecutors, would force him to give up his chairmanship of the House Ways and Means Committee, plead guilty to a crime and serve a short prison term.


Bears' Dent Close to Deal With 49ers
RICHARD DENT, the free agent defensive end from the Chicago Bears, has been offered a two-year, $2 million contract by the San Francisco 49ers, The Santa Rose (Calif.) Press Democrat has reported.


Classical Music in Review
Los Angeles Guitar Quartet  Kaye Playhouse
Finding suitable music to play is certainly the biggest problem a guitar quartet faces, but ever since the Romero family invented this kind of ensemble in the 1950's, guitarists have been aggressively transcribing works for other combinations and commissioning new ones.
The Los Angeles Guitar Quartet, one of the more polished and inventive of the groups that have followed the Romeros' example, presented some of the latest additions to the repertory on Wednesday evening.


Street Peddlers in New York
New York City has lost 325,000 jobs -- that's a third of a million paychecks -- over the last five years.
With unemployment on the rise and immigrants still streaming in looking for work, people by the thousands have turned to hawking goods illegally in the streets.
Street vendors and their clamor are an integral part of life in the city.
But the makeshift markets they create often make sidewalks impassable, allow opportunities for protection rackets and undercut legitimate merchants.
The Giuliani administration is right to crack down on illegal vendors, especially on dangerously crowded thoroughfares like Harlem's 125th Street.
But the administration must also make it easier for those who wish to operate within the law to do so.
That means creating more vendor licenses and establishing locations where they can sell their wares without creating a hazard to public safety.


Bank Scandal May Expose Corrupt Links in Indonesia
The worst banking scandal in Indonesian history is threatening to expose the corrupt ties among prominent Government officials, bankers and business leaders in Southeast Asia's most populous nation.
The scandal, involving the loss of $436 million in bad loans, revolves around Eddy Tansil, a well-connected businessman who is now on trial in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital.
He is charged with forgery and fraud involving 16 loans from the Government-run development bank, known as Bapindo, that were to be used for construction of petrochemical plants.
The charges against Mr.
Tansil are so technical that it took prosecutors two and a half hours simply to read out the indictment at a court hearing last week.
The Indonesian public appears riveted by the case, because it involves the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in public money and also because it threatens to soil the reputations of several Indonesians far more prominent than Mr.
Tansil.
Among them are officials with close ties to President Suharto, the nation's leader since the 1960's.
When the trial opened on May 10, hundreds of spectators turned out.
As Mr.
Tansil walked out of the courtroom later in the day, several spectators reportedly tried to punch the 40-year-old businessman, who had to be protected by a phalanx of police carrying rattan canes.
Prosecutors are trying to prove that Mr.
Tansil was given hundreds of millions of dollars in loans as a result of pressure on Bapindo from high-ranking Government officials.
News reports in Indonesia have said that Admiral Sudomo, the former chief security minister and a longtime aide to President Suharto, wrote to the bank to vouch for Mr.
Tansil, who was little known in financial circles in Jakarta at the time.
The former finance minister, J. B. Sumarlin, was a member of the bank board when it issued the credits.
Neither man has been charged in the case, although both may be called to testify at Mr.
Tansil's trial.
President Suharto's youngest son, Hutomo Mandala Putra, has also been linked to the case.
Mr.
Hutomo, a businessman with hundreds of millions of dollars in holdings in Indonesia, was a partner in Mr.
Tansil's Golden Key Group but sold his stake back to the company last year.
Loans Went for Personal Use
Prosecutors have said that some of the money lent to Mr.
Tansil was used by his family to buy land, houses and cars for personal use.
The chief prosecutor, Luckman Bachmid, said in court last week that these were "losses to the state for self-aggrandizement." Mr.
Tansil, who is facing life imprisonment if convicted, has denied any wrongdoing.
While the case against Mr.
Tansil threatens to embarrass current and former Government officials, diplomats say the trial may be a hopeful signal that the Suharto Government is finally beginning to crack down on the notoriously corrupt state banking system, which is plagued by patronage and kickbacks.
"I would really doubt that all of the dirty laundry in this case is going to come out -- the Government couldn't afford that -- but some well-known people could find themselves humiliated in the process," said a Western diplomat in Jakarta.
Five Bapindo officials are also facing trial in the case.
Bapindo and six other state-controlled banks handle about half of the banking assets in Indonesia, and it is widely understood in Jakarta that they hand out loans as much on the basis of political connections as on collateral.
In February, the current Finance Minister, Mar'ie Muhammad, acknowledged that more than one-fifth of the total outstanding loans of the state banks were either bad or overdue.
Mr.
Mar'ie is admired in Southeast Asian financial circles for his efforts to clean up the state banks, although there is skepticism that he can end the worst of the abuses in a system riddled with corruption.


Observer; Pre-Pos-Terous
Lawyers are on the radio.
It is a talk show.
The talk is about Paula Corbin Jones suing President Clinton.
It is not the first time I have heard lawyers on talk shows lately talk about this suit.
Lawyers love it.
Is it because the suit makes our legal system look so preposterous?
I mean, now, really, listen to this --


Heinz to Buy British Line Of Baby Food
The H. J. Heinz Company said yesterday that it had expanded its baby-food business again by buying the Farley's baby-food line from the Boots Company P.L.C. for $140 million.
The deal is the second baby-food acquisition announced by Heinz in 24 hours and came during the same week that the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Sandoz Ltd. disclosed its plan to acquire a rival, the Gerber Products Company, for $3.7 billion.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday with an article about the acquisition of the Gerber Products Company by Sandoz Ltd. misstated Sandoz's financial results.
Its net income in 1992 was 1.495 billion Swiss francs, not 2.266 billion.


Castro Hires Rollins to Run Senate Race
Edward J. Rollins Jr., a political consultant known as much for his outrageous comments as his winning campaigns, has been hired by Bernadette Castro of Long Island to run her race for United States Senate.
Mr.
Rollins joins Ms.
Castro's campaign just four months after state and Federal law-enforcement officials cleared him of criminal wrongdoing in an investigation brought about by Mr.
Rollins himself: last year, he told reporters that the campaign of Christine Todd Whitman, which he was directing, had tried to suppress the black vote.
Mrs.
Whitman is now New Jersey's Governor.


Sharon Tosses Hat Into Ring To Lead Israel
Ariel Sharon, whose Rambo approach to war and politics makes Israelis either love him or hate him, declared his candidacy for Prime Minister today in a campaign to topple the Labor-led Government of Yitzhak Rabin.
Polls suggest that his chances are slim at best.
But here it is sometimes easier to ignore the frequent sonic booms than the pronouncements of Ariel Sharon -- former general, former Defense Minister, former Trade Minister, former Housing Minister but continuing believer in his ability to set a goal and make it happen.


Once a Gem, Orchard Beach Is Repolished
Joel Abraham first saw Orchard Beach as a wide-eyed 10-year-old in 1938, shortly after his family moved to the Bronx.
He recalls clutching his father's hand as they walked up the broad steps through the entrance of colonnades and down to the sparkling beach below.
Now Mr.
Abraham brings his 10-year-old granddaughter, Jessica, to Orchard Beach, grasping her hand as they trek to the fine sand and calm waters of Pelham Bay.
But the granite steps are cracked and misaligned, the paint has peeled on the once-graceful pillars, and grass and weeds choke the flagstone promenade.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Commerce Department said the economy grew at a brisk rate of 3 percent in the first quarter as faster spending contributed to an upward revision in the gross domestic product.  [ Page 1. ]


Smart Money Betting Big on 'Dumb' Phone Cards
They are phone cards, yes, but they carry none of the familiar magnetic stripes of ordinary telephone calling cards, or the computer chips of smart cards.
No bill for long-distance calls arrives in the mail each month.
In the shorthand of high-tech wizards, they are "dumb cards," merely giving people a prepaid way to make calls for a set amount of time.
But their simplicity is their appeal.
They are so low-tech, telephone industry experts say, that they will undoubtedly become part of the future of just about every shopper or traveler in America.


Nonbankers Also Join The Harvard Club
To the Editor:
As Harvard Club members who are also members of a union, we were surprised to be catapulted into the moneyed aristocracy by Bob Herbert in "Crimson Class" (column, May 11).
We do not roam the streets of New York in limousines, but are occasionally jealous of those who do.


Panel Wants Less Flood Aid for Uninsured
A Federal advisory panel reviewing the catastrophic Midwestern floods of 1993 recommends that people who neglect to buy Federal flood insurance should be ineligible for many forms of disaster relief if their homes and businesses are damaged.
The recommendation was one of many in a report issued on Thursday that is expected to influence Congressional negotiators who are working to resolve differences between two bills, one passed by the Senate and the other by the House, that would reshape the flood insurance program.


Review/Theater; A Hollywood Soul's Trip From Tennessee
And now, another step in the evolution of autobiographical theater: the confessional gospel musical.
In "Hysterical Blindness and Other Southern Tragedies That Have Plagued My Life Thus Far," the actor Leslie Jordan traces the psychological journey that took him from Chattanooga, Tenn., to Hollywood, while an ensemble in choir robes sings satiric variations on hymns that give voice to the Southern-bred sense of shame Mr.
Jordan says he can never entirely escape.
This is all executed with a fervid eagerness to please, and Mr.
Jordan has the good sense to wink occasionally at the self-importance of such an enterprise. ("Where were we in this unabashed soul-baring saga?" he asks.) But much of this portrait of a gay outsider in a land of bigots, directed by Carolyne Berry, has the feeling of a complicated tale that, in repeated tellings, has been boiled down to its simplest and gaudiest elements.


Starting a Savings and Investment Club
Last fall, a group of mostly single mothers living on meager incomes formed the PoNoMore Group in Hardesville, S.C.
The group's aim was to make investments and grants to each other in a way not possible through regular banks or individual savings.
"We were barely making ends meet." said Veronica Thomes, the founder and a divorced mother of four.
The group sought help from the Save the Children Federation, which has sponsored similar programs abroad, and used as its model the self-help groups common among Asian immigrants and communities in developing countries.
Members say they have gained personal financial savvy through discussions, readings and speakers.
"It's taught me a lot about managing my own money," said Ms.
Thomas, who works as a youth program coordinator.
"I could have never learned about the stock market on my own."


INSIDE
New Catechism for Catholics
Despite criticism, American Catholic leaders hope a massive new explication of doctrine will counter religious illiteracy and uncertainty.
Page 9.
There's a Bug in Your Soup
Many retail stores, restaurants and fast food outlets are using tiny hidden microphones for surveillance in addition to video cameras.
Page 6.
But Watch Out for Sunburn
After years of fouled water, pinched vacation budgets and storm damage, this summer looks promising for beachgoers and businesses.
Page 21.
Rollins, Unsuppressed
Edward J. Rollins Jr., the political consultant whose comments stirred controversy in New Jersey, is joining a New York campaign.
Page 21.
George Ball Dies
George W. Ball, a lawyer, banker and presidential adviser over half a century and a voice against the Vietnam War, died Thursday.
Page 26.


Review/City Ballet; Choreography by Two Ballerinas
The interesting aspect of Diamond Project, the huge choreographic showcase that the New York City Ballet is presenting at the New York State Theater, is that there is so much room for the unexpected.
There were two premieres on the program Thursday night.
The first was "In the Blue," by the Danish ballerina Anna Laerkesen, whose idiosyncratic ideas were as refreshing as her marvelous ability to provide her fellow Dane, Nikolaj Hubbe, with an unusual amount of bravura.


Dorothy Davis, 77, World War II Pilot
Dorothy H. Davis, one of the elite group of female pilots who won their wings and the respect of their male colleagues flying military aircraft during World War II, died on Wednesday at her home in San Francisco.
She was 77.
Miss Davis suffered from Parkinson's disease and cancer, said a friend, Cliff Olson.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the opening of a factory by the Kopin Corporation to make flat-panel displays misstated the location of a computer industry consulting firm in some editions.
Stanford Resources is based in San Jose, Calif., not Richmond, Calif.


No Headline
"I know that your present life is extremely and unusually harsh, entangled in a myriad of mishaps; and that there is no clear future for you or for your children. These 75 years have been very hard, including these most recent times. But our people who have suffered so much deserve to see the light." -- ALEKSANDR SOLZHENITSYN.
[ 4:1. ]


Greenburgh Orders Helmets for All Bicyclists
Come Wednesday, Corey Walker will look over his shoulder when he rides his bicycle.
At 19, Mr.
Walker does not have to worry about New York State's new bicycle helmet law, which takes effect on June 1.
The state law requires only children younger than 14 to wear a helmet, and if they do not, their parents face the $50 fine.


E = mc  : Movie Comedy Equals Albert Einstein
Explaining the theory of relativity might be simpler than explaining why not everyone is thrilled with a film starring Walter Matthau as Albert Einstein.
The film, "I.Q.," isn't even finished yet.
The movie makers have shot some scenes in a little white house down the street from Einstein's own little white house.
They have shot other scenes at the Institute for Advanced Study, the high-powered think tank where he tinkered with equations from the late 1930's until his death in 1955 (and where officials wince at the term "high-powered think tank").
For brief moments in the last few weeks, they have replaced the BMW's, Volvos and Mercedeses that crowd the streets here with 1950's Detroit steel: sedans, coupes, even a Chevrolet pickup truck.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about an offer by the First Data Corporation for the Western Union Financial Services unit of the New Valley Corporation misstated the amount of the bid.
It is $480 million, not $430 million.
The article also misstated the number of bills processed by First Data each month.
It is 100 million, not 70 million.


Solzhenitsyn Is in Russia, Hoping for 'Ray of Light'
Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn returned from 20 years of exile today to a land he described as "tortured, stunned, altered beyond recognition," proclaiming faith that his countrymen would one day "find a ray of light."
His hair thinner and his face more crinkled, but his prophet's beard fuller and his eyes as lively as when he was forcibly bundled out of Russia in 1974 at 55, Mr.
Solzhenitsyn joyfully hugged his son Yermolai and friends waiting on the tarmac of the Vladivostok airport.
He accepted the traditional welcome of bread and salt from two women in folk costume before being engulfed by reporters and security men.


Boutros-Ghali Says Sanctions on Haiti Need 'Several Weeks'
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said today that he would wait no more than several weeks before asking the Security Council to consider whether tougher measures are needed to oust Haiti's military leaders.
To give expanded trade sanctions against Haiti some chance to work, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said, the United Nations plans to provide helicopters and other equipment to the Dominican Republic to encourage the country to patrol its border with Haiti and prevent embargoed goods from getting through.


Celebrating a Park's First Birthday


Croatia Currency's Name Protested
In a move that has set off protest, the Government of President Franjo Tudjman has decided to rename the Croatian currency after that used by the pro-Nazi puppet regime in Croatia in World War II.
Starting on Monday, the dinar, which was the monetary unit in the former Yugoslavia, will be replaced by the kuna, previously used as the national currency under the fascist Ustashe Government of Ante Pavelic.
The new kunas will be valued at about 17 cents, and the notes will carry the portraits of Croatian heroes and martyrs, many from the Middle Ages.


Greenspan Sees Steady Economy
Having raised short-term interest rates four times in the last four months, the chairman of the nation's central bank said today that the increases had not slowed the economy and that economic growth would continue at its current pace in the second quarter of this year.
Rather than make explicit predictions about future levels of interest rates, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve's chairman, devoted most of his appearance today before the Senate Banking Committee to explaining the reasoning behind the rate increases that have already taken place.
It was Mr.
Greenspan's first appearance before a Congressional committee since Feb. 22, and three of the four increases have come since then.


Uganda Doesn't Abet Rwanda Bloodshed
To the Editor:
You accuse Uganda of supporting the Rwandan Patriotic Front, and thus of responsibility for the bloodshed in Rwanda, in an April 18 news article.
Uganda's only role in Rwanda's civil conflict has been to press the Rwandan Patriotic Front and the Government for a cease-fire, respect for civilians and human rights and a timetable for democratic elections.


Those 7.7 Seconds Don't Come Back to Haunt Richter
Mike Richter sat in the locker room last night and tried to think about the future.
He knew there was no sense in dwelling on what had just happened.
That was over, that was past.
It was the overtime that mattered now, the overtime and his ability to stop every puck the Devils shot at him.
It was too hard, though, to avoid it.
It was 7.7 seconds.
That's all it was.
Richter had been a mere 7.7 seconds from perfection, 7.7 seconds from delivering the Rangers to the Stanley Cup finals with a performance no one could ever forget.


Sports of The Times; The Roar, The Hush, The Roar
IN the darkness during the national anthem at Madison Square Garden, the roar had begun, all but muffling the words.
The decibels had risen with the stakes: Either the Rangers or the Devils would oppose the Vancouver Canucks in Tuesday night's opener of the Stanley Cup finals.
"Let's go, Rangers," their rooters had been chanting. "Let's go, Rangers."


Krzyzewski Admits He's Getting Footloose
Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI conceded yesterday that he was looking at other coaching opportunities.
In yesterday's issue, The Herald-Sun of Durham, N.C., quoted sources close to the Krzyzewski family as saying there was a 50-50 chance that he will leave for the National Basketball Association after having been recruited by the commissioner, DAVID STERN.


Knicks' Road Show Rarely Gets Raves
The Knicks jump all over their playoff opponent.
They are up two games to none.
Everything is cozy at home.
They hit the road.
They hit a snag.


We Need Watershed Protection and Filtration
To the Editor:
I agree with the headline "Save the Watershed" (editorial, May 15), but disagree that "saving" the watershed would make filtration unnecessary.
The Catskill-Delaware watersheds are so extensively developed, with some 200,000 residents in summer, 50 towns, 400 dairy farms and the discharges of 35 sewage treatment plants, that restoration to its earlier pristine state is not politically or economically feasible.


Red Rodney, Jazz Trumpeter And Band Leader, Dies at 66
The trumpeter and band leader Red Rodney, known for his association with Charlie Parker, died yesterday at his home in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 66.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Helene.


French Executive Is Jailed in Belgium
A prominent French industrialist, Didier Pineau-Valencienne, chairman of Groupe Schneider, was arrested in Brussels today on fraud and other charges stemming from a dispute involving Belgian shareholders in the giant corporation.
Mr.
Pineau-Valencienne, 64, who traveled to Brussels Thursday to present evidence to magistrates investigating the case, was ordered detained early today and was confined in the Forest prison in the Belgian capital.
French press reports said he would be held for at least five days.


Giuliani Preserves Conservative Bloc On School Board
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday guaranteed that the Board of Education's conservative majority would remain in place as he strongly endorsed the current board president and selected as his own representatives two members who had broken with the borough presidents who originally appointed them.
Mr.
Giuliani named Irene H. Impellizzeri and Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra to new four-year terms on the board, replacing the appointees of former Mayor David N. Dinkins.


In a Growing Number of Stores, Hidden Security Microphones Are Listening
Not satisfied with video cameras, many retail stores, restaurants and fast-food outlets are expanding their surveillance by tucking tiny electronic ears in secluded places.
They say the devices, which record conversations on tape, give shopkeepers another tool to prevent theft, whether by burglars or employees, and to monitor how workers treat customers.
But some can also pick up private conversations in booths 25 feet away.
The use of concealed cameras, some secreted behind one-way mirrors in department stores, is also rising.


Q &amp; A
Changing I.R.A. Payouts
Q.
Once withdrawals have commenced on my I.R.A. at age 70 1/2, with payout based on the combined life expectancy of my wife and me, can I change the scheduled payouts of the I.R.A. by designating a new beneficiary, like my daughter?
EDWIN D. KARMIOL, Devon, Pa.


Fire at Ohio Plastics Plant Kills at Least One Worker


Surgery on Moorer's Valuable Left Hand
MICHAEL MOORER, boxing's first left-handed heavyweight champion, had corrective surgery on his left hand in Manhattan yesterday.
The operation, to repair tendons in the index finger and to remove bone spurs in the wrist, was described as a success by Moorer's camp.


Classical Music in Review
Scott St. John and Thomas Bagwell  Violinist and pianist  Metropolitan Museum of Art
These parsimonious times have been hard on the self-promoted debut recital.
A few well-organized introductory series have largely replaced it, one being "Introductions," put on by the Metropolitan Museum and sponsored by the Xerox Corporation.
Scott St.
John and Thomas Bagwell were Wednesday night's duo recitalists, the first a Canadian violinist and violist of 24, the other a 21-year-old pianist from Alabama.


Let Brooklyn and the Other Boroughs Share Tourism Spotlight
To the Editor:
Your May 12 report on a hotel-restaurant-arts package deal to lure tourists to New York City quotes Deputy Mayor John Dyson stating the Convention and Visitors Bureau has been "asleep at the wheel." I agree wholeheartedly.
While it sleeps, tourist dollars are spent elsewhere.


Treasuries Dip as G.D.P. Is Revised
In abbreviated pre-holiday trading yesterday, prices of Treasury securities declined moderately after rebounding from sharp early losses.
The market dropped after the Government reported an upward revision in the first-quarter gross domestic product to an increase of 3 percent, from the 2.6 percent estimate a month ago.
This surprised a bond market that had been expecting a downward revision to around 2.3 percent.


Have Bike and Spandex. Union Card Next?
More than 3,000 couriers, many of them bicycle-riding road warriors in body-hugging spandex, may soon be standing side by side with truckers.
Couriers here, whether of the two-wheeled variety on bicycle or four-wheeled kind in cars and vans, have begun meeting with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters with an eye toward forming a local, and union representatives are interested.
They say the move to organize could pave the way for similar efforts by countless couriers in other cities.


METRO DIGEST
BRIDGE VICTIM'S ROAD TO RECOVERY
Nachum Sasonkin, the most severely injured of the wounded survivors of the March shooting attack on a van carrying Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge, defied the medical odds for survival.
Discharged from St.
Vincent's Hospital three weeks ago, Mr.
Sasonkin is now in the Moss Rehabilitation Hospital in Philadelphia, which specializes in head injuries.
He is likely to spend months relearning a range of functions from walking and balance to swallowing.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI NAMES 2 TO EDUCATION BOARD
Mayor Giuliani named Irene Impellizzeri and Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra to new four-year terms on the Board of Education, replacing appointees of former Mayor Dinkins.
The appointments keep the board's conservative majority intact.
Page 1.
HEAD OF HOUSING POLICE IS REPLACED
The head of the housing police, who has opposed City Hall's plan to merge the city's three police forces, has been replaced by a chief who supports the merger.
The appointment of the new housing chief, Joseph R. Leake, underscored Mayor Giuliani's commitment to fight growing opposition to the merger.
Page 23.
WOMAN IS RAPED NEAR PROSPECT PARK
A 21-year-old Brooklyn woman waiting outside a hospital near Prospect Park was forced to the Parade Grounds, across the street from the south side of the park, and raped by three men, the police said.
The men then dragged her a hundred feet away and raped her again.
Page 23.
RENOVATION AT ORCHARD BEACH
Orchard Beach is getting back some of its old sparkle this year as part of a three-phase, $13.5 million renovation sponsored by the Parks Department and the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer.
Work has begun on the entrance drive, and a separate project, to renovate the handball and basketball courts north of the main bathhouse, is also under way.
Page 25.
REGION  PRINCETON REACTS TO FILM
Explaining the theory of relativity might be simpler than explaining why not everyone in Princeton, N.J., is thrilled with a film starring Walter Matthau as Albert Einstein.
Several scenes for the film, "I.Q.," have already been shot there.
But some people in the town remember the great frizzy-haired physicist shambling around there in an old sweater, and many do not want to see him "Hollywoodized." Page 24.
MISCONDUCT INQUIRIES AT NASSAU MEDICAL
Dr.
Stephen K. Rachlin, chairman of the psychiatry and psychology department at Nassau County Medical Center, told the hospital he would take a voluntary leave of absence while officials look into allegations by an acquaintance that he prescribed medications for her in return for sexual favors.
And Dr.
Lawrence W. Friedmann, chairman of the department of physical medicine and rehabilitation, is said to have been discharged last month, as prosecutors investigated the possibility that he had misused his position for personal financial gain.
Page 24.
The Town of Greenburgh, N.Y., has passed a law requiring all bicyclists, young and old alike, to wear helmets.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23
Bryant Park pigeons are on the pill 23
Holiday schedule 22


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Saturday about the quarterly loss reported by Viacom Inc. misstated the loss reported by the company's publishing unit, Simon &amp; Schuster.
In the first quarter of 1994, the publishing operations lost $14.6 million, not $414.6 million.
The article also misstated the means by which Viacom reduced its earnings after revaluing its television and cable operations.
The charges of $224 million against television programming and $73.4 million against cable networks were writedowns, which reflect reduced value, not write-offs, which describe worthless or defunct operations.


Muriel Cooper, 68, A Graphic Designer
Muriel R. Cooper, a graphic designer and professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Thursday at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
Professor Cooper, who lived in Brookline, Mass., was 68.
She died of a heart attack, officials at M.I.T. said.


Transactions
Baseball  American League AL -- Upheld a three-game suspension of Toronto manager Cito Gaston for making contact with umpire Rick Reed and disorderly behavior during a game on April 15.
National League FLORIDA MARLINS -- Activated Greg Colbrunn, first baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Placed Pete Harnisch, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 23.
Recalled Brian Williams, pitcher, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.


Cone Slips Against Another Former Met
They were teammates once, and free agents, and the link ends there.
Daryl Boston did not remember facing David Cone because those meetings came during spring training, when they were both members of the Mets, and pitchers were preparing their arms for a long season.
They were teammates with the Mets from 1990-92, until Cone was traded to Toronto and then became a wealthy free agent with Kansas City, where he has dominated the American League this season after an 11-14 record last year.


U.S. Meets Greece in a Fairly Familiar First
FRANK KLOPAS, born in Greece and raised in the United States, will be quite familiar with the opposition today when the United States and Greece meet on a soccer field for the first time, at the Yale Bowl in New Haven.
Klopas, who has scored four goals in his last six international games with the United States, spent four seasons with AEK Athens, one of the largest clubs in Greece.


Devils' Great Escape, And Greater Letdown
The Devils failed last night for the second time in three years to take a giant step toward overcoming the shadow of the Rangers.
Just as they lost the seventh and deciding game two years ago, the Devils again lost the ultimate game to their archrivals.
This time it was probably more painful for the Devils than two years ago because the 2-1 double-overtime loss moved the Rangers to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time since 1979.


Nixon's Victories
To the Editor:
I agree with "Nixon and F.D.R." (letter, May 17), that William Safire's comparison of Richard M. Nixon's victories in four out of five national races to Franklin D. Roosevelt's electoral record is stretching the point.
However, though Mr.
Nixon won the Presidency in 1972, it was in 1968, not 1976, that he won his other race for that office.
ANTHONY FORREST  Washington, May 17, 1994


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, completed its acquisition of BankWorcester Corp., Worcester, Mass., a holding corporation, for $34 a share.
HONEYWELL INC., Minneapolis, agreed to acquire Allied Data Communications Group Inc., Atlanta, a provider of network services for manufacturing industries.
Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.


U.S. ECONOMY GREW AT BRISK 3% RATE IN FIRST QUARTER
In a recalculation of first-quarter growth, the Government reported today that the economy expanded at a steady 3 percent annual clip during the winter because spending by consumers, business and the Federal Government was more than had originally been thought.
The surprising upward revision, from a preliminary estimate of 2.6 percent, touched off a decline in the bond market as investors reacted to fears that the stronger growth could cause inflation and erode the value of fixed-income securities.


Woman Raped and Raped Again by 3 Men Near Prospect Park
A 21-year-old Brooklyn woman waiting outside a hospital near Prospect Park on Thursday night was forced to a nearby baseball field and raped by three men, who then dragged her 100 feet away and raped her again, the police said.
The woman, who lives in the Kensington neighborhood, was standing in front of the entrance to Caledonian Hospital on Parkside Avenue around 10:40 P.M. when a man in a red jacket and white shorts accosted her and, brandishing a gun, said, "Keep quiet or we'll kill you," the police said.


Alfred Frazer, 66, Historian of Building
Dr.
Alfred Frazer, a specialist on the architecture of Mediterranean civilizations and a professor at Columbia University for 28 years, died on Monday at his home in Larchmont.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, said a colleague, Richard Brilliant.


Criminal Inquiry Sought for Cigarette Makers
Seven Congressmen asked the Justice Department today to begin a criminal investigation of tobacco companies on a variety of charges, including perjury and racketeering.
The request came in a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno written by Representative Martin T. Meehan, Democrat of Massachusetts.
It said: "We believe a criminal investigation is warranted by information contained in the industry's own internal documents revealed in recent weeks by Representative Henry Waxman, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment, and the news media.


Beach Season Begins Without a Cloud in the Forecast
After years of bad news about fouled water, pinched vacation budgets and storm-damaged beaches and boardwalks, the summer of 1994 appears to be shaping up as a good one both for beachgoers and those who depend on the summertime sun-and-sand crowd to make a living.
"We've received very positive indications from a cross-section of businesses at the shore that bookings for beach rentals are up above last year and water quality is excellent," said Karen Shaffer, a spokeswoman for the New Jersey Department of Tourism.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Memorial Day. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and city government offices will be closed.
POST OFFICE: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
The main post office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue will be open.
BANKS: Banks will be closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules will be suspended.
SANITATION: There will be no street cleaning or pickups.
SCHOOLS: School will be closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: All domestic markets will be closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New York City subways and buses will be on a weekend schedule.
Long Island Rail Road will be on a weekend schedule.
Metro-North will be on a holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and municipal offices will be closed.
POST OFFICES: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Banks will be closed.
SCHOOLS: Schools will be closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Jersey Transit will be on a Sunday schedule.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: All Federal, state and municipal offices will be closed.
POST OFFICES: There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Banks will be closed.
SCHOOLS: Schools will be closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North will be on a holiday schedule. Weekend Traffic Advisory
GEORGE WASHINGTON BRIDGE: The Manhattan-bound upper roadway will be closed until 6 P.M.
Monday for construction.
Delays of up to one hour are expected, particularly Monday afternoon, when there is a 4 P.M. baseball game at Yankee Stadium and a surge of holiday travel.
New Jersey-bound motorists are advised to use the lower roadway.
F.D.R.
DRIVE: Northbound from 61st to 96th Streets and southbound from 73d to 63d Streets will be closed Sunday from 12:01 A.M. to 8 A.M. for construction.
QUEENS MIDTOWN TUNNEL: One of two tubes may be closed from 10 P.M. until 6 A.M.
Sunday through Wednesday.
NEW JERSEY APPROACHES TO MANHATTAN: Traffic will be slowed from 11 P.M. tonight until 6 A.M. tomorrow by sobriety tests at police checkpoints.


After Long Delay, a New Catechism Appears in English
The new Catechism of the Catholic Church, an authoritative 800-page summation of Roman Catholic teaching, made its belated appearance in English yesterday, still accompanied by controversy but promising to be an instant best seller.
It is the first such official manual of doctrine in 400 years and, perhaps more important, the first to appear since the Second Vatican Council, which met from 1962 to 1965, initiated a period of rapid and often confusing change in the church's life.


Pigeons on the Pill Bring Cleaner Bryant Park
It started as a drug to lower people's cholesterol, but wound up as birth control for pigeons.
The drug, Ornitrol, isn't being made any more.
But there's enough in the pipeline for the pigeons of Bryant Park.
For a year now, they've been on the pill, so to speak -- actually, laced kernels of corn.
And there are signs they are taking their medication as prescribed.


Slovakia's Rabble-Rouser
In the 15 months that he served as Prime Minister of the newly independent state of Slovakia, Vladimir Meciar came close to running it into the ground.
Production dropped 10 percent in 1993 alone, and unemployment rose to 15 percent in the cities and 30 percent in the countryside.
Along the way, Mr.
Meciar, an ex-boxer and longtime Communist apparatchik, never ceased pounding away at Slovakia's beleaguered minorities, the Gypsies and Hungarians.
Booted out in March, Mr.
Meciar wants his old job back.
Western governments and investors have reason to hope he doesn't get it.


Sondra B. Gair Is Dead at 70; Host of Radio Show in Chicago
Sondra B. Gair, a veteran broadcast journalist best known for her public-affairs talk show on Chicago radio, died on Wednesday in Northwestern Memorial Hospital.
She was 70 and lived in Chicago.
She died of complications from breast cancer, her family said.


M.T.A. Says Studies Back Coliseum Price
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority released the results of two studies yesterday that it said justified its $100 million asking price for a portion of the Coliseum site it is negotiating to sell to the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
Mr.
Zuckerman has a contract with the city and the M.T.A. to buy the entire property for $338 million.
But he is trying to negotiate a deal with the agency in which he would pay $80 million and the city would provide a $20 million subsidy.


Let Brooklyn and the Other Boroughs Share Tourism Spotlight
To the Editor:
Your May 12 report on a hotel-restaurant-arts package deal to lure tourists to New York City quotes Deputy Mayor John Dyson stating the Convention and Visitors Bureau has been "asleep at the wheel." I agree wholeheartedly.
While it sleeps, tourist dollars are spent elsewhere.


Dow Advances by 3.68 In a Quiet Trading Day
As traders streamed out of Wall Street yesterday for the long Memorial Day weekend, the stock market closed up, but just barely, in quiet trading.
Stocks in the indexes did not rise by much, perhaps held back by a surprising economic report and falling bond prices that on another day might have stampeded traders into a strong selloff.


Mayor Moves To Combine Police Units
The head of New York City's housing police, who has opposed City Hall's plan to merge the city's three police forces, has been replaced by a chief who supports the merger, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday.
The appointment of the new housing chief, Joseph R. Leake, who was the Police Department's assistant chief in charge of operations in northern Manhattan, does not assure the merger of the housing, transit and city police.
But it underscored Mr.
Giuliani's commitment to fight growing opposition from the housing and transit police forces and unions, as well as from leading Democrats in the City Council.


Corrections
A Memorial Day listing in Weekend yesterday misstated the admission price for a holiday party tomorrow at 9 P.M. in the series called "Can't Top the Lindy Hop!" at the Roosevelt Hotel, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
Tickets are $25, not $15.


Clinton Aide Balks at Cost Of Contrition
The White House aide forced to resign because he took a Presidential helicopter on a golf outing is balking at paying for the trip, leading other White House officials to scramble to pick up at least part of the tab themselves, White House aides said today.
The aide, David Watkins, who was dismissed on Thursday, also wrote an unrepentant letter of resignation to President Clinton.
Mr.
Watkins admitted no wrongdoing, but said he had been "persuaded" he could no longer perform his job as director of White House administration and management.


League Upholds Suspension for Gaston
Manager CITO GASTON of the Toronto Blue Jays began a three-game suspension yesterday after the penalty was upheld on appeal by BOBBY BROWN, the American League president.


Classical Music in Review
Helios  Weill Recital Hall
Helios is an oboe quartet, a configuration of oboe and strings that has a small but interesting literature.
Actually, the ensemble is more than that, and perhaps the best way to explain its peculiarities is to mention that on Tuesday evening Marshall Coid, its violinist, doubled as a countertenor and gave lovely, polished accounts of two Italian Renaissance ballads.
Just before that, Sam Kephart played his own solo viola arrangement of "Yesterday," suggesting all the harmonies and counterpoint of the Beatles' original.


Foes in Cambodia's Civil War Begin Talks
Leaders of the Cambodian Government and the Khmer Rouge guerrillas gathered in North Korea for a new round of talks today, almost one year after the election that was supposed to bring peace to a nation still torn by civil war.
There were no immediate reports on what came of the first day of talks in the North Korean capital, Pyongyang, which serves as a second home to King Norodom Sihanouk, the mediator in the negotiations.


Widening the Net for Global Investment
The group of world stock funds, which can invest in the United States and abroad, has grown rapidly as investors have flocked overseas.
Today, there are 69 funds, compared with just 21 in 1989.
Given that Japanese, European and big American companies account for 90 percent of the world's market capitalization, most of the world stock funds invest heavily in those sectors.
But the funds with the best three-year records have veered sharply from that formula, cutting their exposure to about one-half.
The other half has been invested in smaller-capitalization domestic stocks and equities in emerging markets.


Small Caps, Big Hopes, Iffy Market
RICK RUVKUN has seen the future: two-way paging.
Today's pagers only receive messages, he said, despite a "huge, latent need" for sending, too.
And Mr.
Ruvkun, a fund manager at Bessemer Trust, says he knows who will help fill the gap -- a modest company with the major-league name of Mobile Telecommunications Technologies.
Small ventures with big hopes: Even in this iffy stock market, these volatile companies may pay off.
Historically, "they do better than large caps by 2 percent a year," said Robert Natale, a research director at Standard &amp; Poor's.
And the 1994 stock drops may make them a bargain.
The $407 million PBHG Growth Fund is "down 16 percent from our March peak," said Gary Pilgrim, who led it to a 46.6 percent return in 1993.


Beliefs; Joining the gift of water with the gift of love at a baptismal ceremony in Manhattan.
"We thank thee, Almighty God, for the gift of water." The water that the Rev.
Howard T. W. Stowe was praying over last Sunday was in the baptismal font at St.
Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church on West 87th Street in Manhattan, where he is the rector and where he was about to baptize three young parishioners.
At Father Stowe's side was the Rev.
Thomas Mafora, who had his own special reasons to be thankful for the gift of water.
Father Mafora is the rector of All Saints' Anglican Church in Khuma, South Africa, a black township in the western Transvaal.


Rangers Defeat Devils and Advance to Stanley Cup Finals


Review/Jazz; The Sound of an Earlier Era
Kevin Hays, yet another good young jazz pianist, put on a quiet, thoughtful show with his band on Wednesday night at a record-release party in his honor at Metronome.
Mr.
Hays's record, "Seventh Sense" (Blue Note), draws on the more inquisitive recordings made on the Blue Note label in the early to mid-1960's, and he has captured the sound of the music well.
That music had a wide introspective streak to it, a turn-your-head sort of self-effacement, and Mr.
Hays and his band borrowed from that aspect of it, a bit to their detriment.


We Need Watershed Protection and Filtration; Westchester Resistance
To the Editor:
Your excellent editorial (May 15) about New York City's watershed deserves amplification.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS By Sherri Szeman.
Harper Perennial, $12.
The commander of a Nazi death camp forces a Jewish prisoner into a sexual relationship that profoundly alters both their futures.
Narrated in turn by each of these characters, the novel "shows how a work of fiction can render with greater precision than any other instrument . . . both the lived experience and its wider moral import," Patrick McGrath said here last year.
HENRY JAMES.
The Imagination of Genius: A Biography By Fred Kaplan.
Quill/Morrow, $15.
This American literary expatriate has been the subject of endless books, but this biography is unusual in that it is confined in length and unconfined in subject matter.
Fred Kaplan fully discusses James's homosexuality, which was largely expressed obliquely, through his fiction.
It also deals with his less-than-lofty interests in money and popularity.
In 1992 our reviewer, Miranda Seymour, said Mr.
Kaplan "has pulled off what seemed the impossible coup. Here, at last, is a thoughtful, balanced book to give us a consistent and persuasive account of the writer's life and his development as an author."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  In a city where a jostle can become a fistfight, or worse, Ernie Odom fights anger with a mediator's measured calm.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Deconstructing dinner: Investigating the restaurant business, course by course, ingredient by ingredient.


Hope for Renewal Runs Deep in Cambodia Despite Obstacles to Peace


The Nation: The Furor Over Data on Doctors; You Bet Your Life. Do You Know the Odds?
ONE fundamental thesis runs through every health care plan now before Congress: Just give patients more information about doctors and hospitals, and they will avoid those likely to give them poor care.
That will raise the quality of care and reduce costs, since medical mistakes are expensive.
But even early in the debate, those who want change are finding that they have run headlong into one of the oldest arguments in medicine, one doctors and consumer groups have been fighting over for decades: How much information about the competence of doctors are patients entitled to have?


Defending Corporate Philanthropy
To the Editor:
I shudder to think of the further social disasters that will befall our country if corporations follow Terrence Scanlon's advice ("Business Feeds the Hand That Bites It," Viewpoints, May 8).
He tells them not to make contributions to any social or environmental advocacy groups that support regulation, higher taxes or other related Government mandates and cites the Children's Defense Fund as a specific example.
Mr.
Scanlon then asks why companies continue to make such contributions.
Perhaps because the smart ones know something that he does not: what their true self-interest is.
It's not automatically the immediate bottom line and short-term profit maximization, as he seems to think.
It might instead be social stability, the lessening of violence, an educated and motivated work force and preservation of the natural world.
KENNETH LUX Auburn, Me., May 13 The writer is a clinical and consulting psychologist.


Ellen M. Ringel, Edward A. Boyle
Ellen Mae Ringel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. Ringel of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward Anthony Boyle, a son of Vera Boyle of Bridgeport, Conn., and the late Edward J. Boyle.
The Rev.
George Sankoorikal performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Pius X Church in Fairfield.


After School: Learning Karate Or Making Pizza
ON a recent Wednesday afternoon at Northville Elementary School in New Milford, Gabe Knight, a fifth grader, was perched intently at a word processor, banging out a hard-hitting editorial on rubbish disposal for his "Becoming a Reporter" class.
"I don't know why Danbury's garbage has to be dumped in New Milford," he wrote, and suggested that the mayors of the two communities get together to find a way to stop fouling the air.


At Work; Women's Pensions, Wilting Fast
HEALTH CARE legislation may be the only item on the agenda on Capitol Hill this year, but there is now a light at the end of the tunnel bright enough to put a glint in the eye of those who would overhaul other less-than-seamless social security systems.
As anyone knows who periodically has a good denial-driven laugh at how much should be set aside for retirement -- to make up for all those profligate years of paying rent, clothing the kids and buying food with stagnating wages -- pensions are a trouble spot.
It may not seem so on the surface.
Women working full time are more likely than ever before to have pension coverage, according to a survey released on Thursday by the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, a Labor Department agency.
The percentage of women in full-time, private-sector jobs with pension coverage grew to 48 percent last year from 38 percent in 1972.
Coverage for men in the same category and period seesawed, ending at 51 percent in 1993, down 4 percentage points from the peak year of 1979.


Corrections
A listing in the Lowest Air Fares chart on page 3 of the Travel section today omits a destination under the heading "International Routes." The flight originating in New York and served by American and South African airlines goes to Johannesburg.


Susanne Cornfeld, Steven Hurowitz
Susanne B. Cornfeld, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Cornfeld of Hollywood, Fla., is to be married today to Steven D. Hurowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Monte M. Hurowitz of New York.
Rabbi Sol Roth is to officiate at the Ritz-Carlton in Palm Beach, Fla.


Fighting Crime in the Neighborhoods
PEOPLE keep coming into the new office structure by the South Norwalk railroad station asking for information about Metro-North trains.
Obligingly, Lieut.
John Suchy, or whoever else happens to be inside, tries to respond.
Since the South Norwalk Community Police Center opened near the eastbound track on April 26, at least one man has rushed in, money in hand, asking to buy a train ticket to Bridgeport.
"I told him that I was a police officer and didn't sell train tickets," recalled Officer Joseph Kubik, who was at the entrance desk at the time, "and that he'd have to buy a ticket on the train, since he didn't have time to go over to the ticket office on the westbound side."


Formal or Unruly, Blossoms in a Pot
THIS is the last call to set out young plants in containers, those redwood tubs, window boxes, barrels, large clay pots, plastic rectangles or whatever that can contain enough soil so plants thrive.
If these sorts of showpieces have not been put together, then by all means this is the weekend to finish.
Besides, being creative with plant combinations can be fun.
Weather should be no problem any longer.
At least the snows and hard freezes have gone and the rainfall that does come is most welcome.
So is the sunshine and longer days to be outside.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
C-17: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department authorization bill for fiscal year 1995 that would restore the number of C-17 aircraft to the six requested by the Pentagon.
Approved 330 to 100, May 24.
2.
Haiti: Vote on a non-binding resolution opposing military intervention in Haiti unless there is a "clear and present danger" to American citizens or interests.
Approved 223-201, May 24.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Nea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
2. Hughes (D)
Yea
Nea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Nea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nea
Nea
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
8. Klein (D)
Nea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Nea
Nea
11. Gallo (R)
Yea
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Nea
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D)
Yea
Nea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
4. Levy (R)
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Nea
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Nea
Nea
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nea
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Nea
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Nea
12. Velazquez (D)
Nea
Nea
13. Molinari (R)
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nea
Nea
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Nea
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Nea
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Nea
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Nea
19. Fish (R)
Yea
A
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Nea
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nea
Nea
29. LaFalce (D)
Nea
Nea
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


'Goring Yawns'
NUREMBERG Infamy on Trial.
By Joseph E. Persico.
Illustrated. 520 pp.
New York:  Viking. $25.95.


Political Partying: Whatever the Party, One Hotel Serves
Two of the longest-running parties at the Sheraton hotel complex on Seventh Avenue are the Democrats and Republicans.
The New York State Republican Party just concluded its convention there on Wednesday.
The week before, it was the scene of Mayor Giuliani's $1,000-a-plate dinner, drawing more than $1 million.
His Democratic predecessor, David N. Dinkins, held his election-night rally there in November, as did Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi and Public Advocate Mark Green.
The year before, the Sheraton served as headquarters for the Democratic National Convention.


Ideas &amp; Trends; If Russians Can Talk Freely, What's to Write About?
THE return of Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn to an ambivalent, even bemused Russia has occasioned the sort of intellectual skirmish that evokes even more nostalgia for the old, orderly days of totalitarianism, when truth-telling was cherished for its scarcity and its risks.
In today's Russia, Mr.
Solzhenitsyn has been attacked for being an irrelevance, a pompous bore, a publicity fanatic and even "a walking skeleton"; he has been defended just as vehemently, but often as an afterthought to a vitriolic attack on those who presume to attack him.


A Technician of the Temper
ERNIE ODOM has just smoked his seventh cigarette in less than an hour.
Perched on a chair in his austere studio apartment in St.
Albans, Queens, he says he never touches alcohol or caffeine.
He drinks spring water and eats one meal a day, macrobiotically sound if he can manage it.


At Yale, Deliberate Images in Black and White
THE black and white photographs of Wright Morris titled, "Origin of a Species," and a traveling excerpt from the Reba and Dave Williams collection of prints called "Alone in the Crowd" are among attractions at the Yale University Art Gallery.
Mr.
Morris, now 84 years of age, may be better known as a writer of novels, essays and criticisms than as a photographer.
In a way, however, it doesn't matter, for his style is essentially the same in both media.
He expresses his images deliberately with little emphasis and even less emotion, as if he were laying a mosaic.
The quotes included in the show may not explain the pictures but viewers soon realize that they are indispensable as is a piano to a soloist.


Prehung Doors Need Moderate Carpentry Ability
REPLACING an outside door or a window with a prehung model is seldom as difficult as it may seem.
What is needed are moderate carpentry experience -- driving nails in awkward positions, measuring with a level and tape, using a power circular saw and applying caulking -- and a helper to assist in positioning the assemblies.
Prehung doors and windows are so named because they are sold mounted in their frames.
That eliminates fitting hinges or adjusting window sashes, and also simplifies installation by reducing the job to little more than removing the old unit and its frame and nailing in the new one.


Sound Bytes; Visualizing the New Media
ALFRED C. SIKES, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, joined the Hearst Corporation a year ago to head its so-called new-media unit.
Hearst, a $2.3 billion company that is privately owned by a family trust, has a sizable portfolio of broadcast, cable television, book publishing and newspaper and magazine holdings, including The San Francisco Examiner and Cosmopolitan, Esquire and Good Housekeeping magazines.
And Hearst has set an ambitious goal for the division Mr.
Sikes heads.
By 2000, the company hopes to garner 10 percent of its earnings from new-media businesses like electronic publishing, interactive TV, on-line services and multimedia software.


Prayers and Posters for Missing 4-Year-Old Girl


Mute Dancers: How to Watch a Hummingbird
A LOT OF HUMMINGBIRDS DIE in their sleep.
Like a small fury of iridescence, a hummingbird spends the day at high speed, darting and swiveling among thousands of nectar-rich blossoms.
Hummingbirds have huge hearts and need colossal amounts of energy to fuel their flights, so they live in a perpetual mania to find food.
They tend to prefer red, trumpet-shaped flowers, in which nectar thickly oozes, and eat every 15 minutes or so.
A hummingbird drinks with a W-shape tongue, licking nectar up as a cat might (but faster).
Like a tiny drum roll, its heart beats at 500 times a minute.
Frighten a hummingbird and its heart can race to over 1,200 times a minute.
Feasting and flying, courting and dueling, hummingbirds consume life at a fever pitch.
No warm-blooded animal on earth uses more energy, for its size.
But that puts them at great peril.
By day's end, wrung-out and exhausted, a hummingbird rests near collapse.
In the dark night of the hummingbird, it can sink into a zombielike state of torpor; its breathing grows shallow and its wild heart slows to only 36 beats a minute.
When dawn breaks on the fuchsia and columbine, hummingbirds must jump-start their hearts and fire up their flight muscles to raise their body temperature for another all-or-nothing day.
That demands a colossal effort, which some can't manage.
So a lot of hummingbirds die in their sleep.


Jean Morris, R. A. Rosenbaum
Jean Fenimore Morris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Morris Jr. of Moorestown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Alan Rosenbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Rosenbaum of Delran, N.J.
The Rev.
James King performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Rosenbaum, 26, graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Maryland.
Her father is a vice president in Philadelphia with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the securities brokerage.


The Coveted Bloopie Awards
For those of you unable to get a seat in the white-tie audience at this year's televised Bloopie Awards ceremony, here are this year's winners.
Missing is the tension felt by the advertising copywriters nominated by their peers for grammatical gaffes, as well as the acceptance speeches blaming sponsors who demand language that dumbs down to the lowest denominated consumer.
The yawning lion bloopie to Dreyfus Asset Allocation Fund, for the headline "Some Don't Know How to Choose Between Stocks, Bonds and Money Markets. We Do." Sell short on between when that preposition, from the same root as twain meaning "two," precedes more than two items.
Go long on among for three or more, especially when your motto is "survival of the smartest."


Leslie M. Kantor, Bruce Alan Fryer
Leslie Mae Kantor, the daughter of Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, of Washington, and the late Valerie Woods Kantor, is to be married today in New York to Bruce Alan Fryer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Fryer of Camden, Me.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman is to perform the nondenominational ceremony in the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
Ms.
Kantor, 26, is keeping her name.
She is the director of community advocacy for the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States, a national nonprofit health-education organization, in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her mother was a lawyer in Los Angeles.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Heidi Schulman of Washington.


Defending Corporate Philanthropy
To the Editor:
Reading Terrence Scanlon's article, I was gratified to learn that so many business people are contributing to so many causes that they don't necessarily agree with.
It shows me that in spite of all the downsizing and takeover piracy that occurs in the corporate jungle, there are still plenty of open-minded, open-hearted people there.
KEVIN P. TWINE South Orange, N.J., May 13 The writer is an environmental planner and software designer.


Gwen E. Hurowitz, J. D. Cummings
Gwen Ellen Hurowitz, a daughter of Madeline Hurowitz of Kettering, Ohio, and the late Paul Hurowitz, is to be married today to Jonathan David Cummings, a son of William O. Cummings of Christiansburg, Va., and the late Lois C. Cummings.
Jean S. Kotkin, a leader of the American Ethical Culture Union, is to officiate at 202 East, a loft in New York.


Squatters Are Given an Abrupt Heave-Ho
In a squatters'-rights case that advocates for the poor say may reflect a trend, four families who worked for nine months to restore an abandoned building on West 168th Street were ejected recently by the police without notice.
The families, represented by a squatters' organizing group, Inner City Press/Community on the Move, filed suit against the city early this month and persuaded Justice Carol H. Arber to allow them to move back into the four-story brownstone.


Players and Union Officials Not Pleased by Owners' Proposals
Sometime in the second week of June, Richard Ravitch is expected to present to union negotiators the clubs' long-awaited proposal on revenue participation, a k a a salary cap.
Until then, the only proposals the players have before them are those Ravitch and his aides presented at a meeting in Los Angeles last Monday.
Told that those proposals did not make the players happy, a high-level management person said: "The object is not to make them happy. The object is to get a fair agreement."


Senior Prom


Irving Berlin Knew the Score
To the Editor:
In his article "How to Fix a Film at the Very Last Minute (or Even Later)"  [ May 15 ] , about post-production tinkering on such films as "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" and "I'll Do Anything," William Grimes writes that the latter film "certainly . . . will go down in cinema history as the first big-budget Hollywood musical that managed to lose the music on the way to the theaters."


Lisa Vigliotti, Timothy Harkness
Lisa Marie Vigliotti, a daughter of Rose and Anthony Vigliotti of North Haven, Conn., was married yesterday to Timothy Paul Harkness, a son of Patricia and Robert Harkness of Southfield, Mich.
The Rev.
Francis A. Laushway performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in New Haven.
Mrs.
Harkness, 28, is an associate with McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultants in New York.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Proposal to Move Amtrak Would Be User Unfriendly
To the Editor:
In regard to the May 1 article, "Grand New Amtrak Terminal: Arriving, the First $10 Million," while from a visual angle the $315 million project to relocate Amtrak's trains from its present Penn Station to a new one at the old Post Office looks like a grand idea, from a users' perspective the proposal is a disaster.


German Aide Faults Policy On Foreigners
The official responsible for the nearly seven million foreigners in Germany criticized the Government today for refusing to extend the protection of citizenship to immigrants and asylum-seekers who have been targets of violent attacks by right-wing extremists.
The criticism came from Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, Commissioner for Alien Affairs, who said that the Government had rejected proposals she made in February to change citizenship laws, and that it would not reconsider them until after the national elections on Oct. 16.


On Pro Basketball; Reversal Of Good Fortune
On a sun-drenched afternoon filled with parades and good cheer, Indianapolis yesterday was a city bathed in total and complete celebration.
Delirium is nothing new here this time of year.
The streets are packed virtually day and night with race-car enthusiasts who come from far and near for the Indy 500, the cornerstone event here for 78 years.


Wall Street; As Goes the Trade Status, So Goes the Nation Fund
IF every person in China drank one cherry cola, ate one cheeseburger and bought one toothbrush, lots of Americans would become very rich.
That may seem like a bit of a stretch, but it's the story that for years has attracted investors to companies that claimed to be China plays, and, more recently, to funds that are poised to take advantage of the growing Chinese economy.
Earlier this year, that tale seemed less likely to have a happy ending.
United States officials' concerns about China's human rights record cast some doubt on whether the nation could continue to export goods to America under the advantageous terms of most-favored-nation status.
In addition, the shares of the China Fund, a closed-end issue, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange, were also depressed by a rights offering that ended in April.


Knicks' Time for 2 R's: Rest and Recollection
The Knicks will have some time for quiet (stress Q-U-I-E-T) recollection over the next 48 hours, and it started in the locker room after their playoff game against Indiana today.
After setting a National Basketball Association 24-second-clock-era record for fewest points in a playoff game at 68, the Knicks had to take a hard look at themselves offensively, defensively and emotionally.


Corrections
A brief report about Fidelity Investments last Sunday, with a front-page article in this section about mutual funds that are run by managers in their 20's and 30's, misidentified the college attended by Michael Gordon, manager of Fidelity's Blue Chip Growth Fund.
It was Tufts, not Harvard.


Laura Hildesley, Jeffrey Bartsch
Laura Cunningham Hildesley, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
C.
Hugh Hildesley of New York, is to be married today to Jeffrey Michael Bartsch, a son of Susan DeBlasio Bartsch of Fleetwood, N.Y., and Donald J. Bartsch of New York.
The Very Rev.
James Park Morton, the Dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, is to perform the Episcopal ceremony at the United Methodist Church on Chebeague Island in Maine.
The bride, 25, is an associate at TFH Architects in Portland, Me.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the rector of the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Her mother, Constance P. Hildesley, is the program director for the modernization program of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.


Nancy Shutkin, L. D. Portman
Nancy Lee Shutkin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Shutkin of Stamford, Conn., is to be married today to Lawrence David Portman, the son of Alva G. Portman and Robert G. Portman, both of Beachwood, Ohio.
Rabbi Joshua Hammerman is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 25, is an associate account manager at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the New York advertising agency.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a internist at the New Canaan (Conn.) Medical Group and is an assistant professor of medicine at New York Medical College.


Naked Came The Midriff
It's a fashion that hits below the belt.
The bare midriff, once the preserve of belly dancers and bikini wearers, has become a significant trend.
Exposed flesh between cropped top and low-slung pants is now much more than a summer phenomenon.
The fall fashion shows were so full of clothes cut out around the middle that you might say the navel is the latest erogenous zone.
Supermodels, walking billboards of anatomical fads, heralded the shift with their craze for navel rings.


Democrats Rediscover Knack of Losing
THE battle for Owensboro, Ky., may be the straw that broke the donkey's back.
Democrats never expected this year's Congressional elections to be easy.
But the loss Tuesday of a House seat in rural Kentucky that had been Democratic for 129 years washed away the plaintive excuses Democrats have embraced since their defeat in the Georgia Senate race two weeks after Bill Clinton's election.
The outcome in Kentucky marked the eighth in a streak of big defeats by Republican upstarts.


Corrections
A review on May 1 about "The Desire &amp; Pursuit of the Whole: The First Complete Edition," by Frederick Rolfe, wrongly characterized A. J. A. Symons, the editor and expurgator of the first edition of Rolfe's novel in 1934.
Symons was born in 1901; he was not a member of the "Yellow Nineties" esthetic movement.


The Law According to Ernie Hudson
ERNIE HUDSON HAS spent so much time studying with police officers over the last several years that he has become one.
The character actor, best known for his role in the two "Ghostbusters" movies (1984 and 1989), has recently become a sergeant for the special service bureau of the San Bernardino County, California, police force.
All this was in preparation for playing police officers in three new movies.
In "The Crow" he is Albrecht, the officer who helps the Brandon Lee character in his quest for vengeance.
In "The Cowboy Way," a sort of "City Slickers" in reverse that opens on Friday, Mr.
Hudson's character, Sam Shaw, is a New York City mounted policeman who falls in with two rodeo riders (Woody Harrelson and Kiefer Sutherland).
And in "Airheads," which opens in August, Mr.
Hudson plays Sergeant O'Malley, a Los Angeles hostage negotiator who is called in to talk sense into a bunch of rock-and-rollers who have taken over a radio station.


Mr. Korkodilos and Miss Goldman
Deborah Allison Goldman, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Donald S. Goldman of Livingston, N.J., is to be married today to Emmanuel Korkodilos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dimitrios Korkodilos of Rocky Point, L.I.
Judge Joseph Falcone of the New Jersey Superior Court in Newark is to officiate at the Park Savoy Hotel in Florham Park, N.J.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Northeastern University.
She is a finance associate at Softkey International, a computer software company in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is a judge of the New Jersey Superior Court in Newark.
Her mother, Barbara B. Goldman, is a vocational rehabilitation counselor for the State of New Jersey in Newark.


Couple's Home-Grown Mission Efforts Develop Into a Refuge for the Addicted
JIM AND ISABEL BRACKEN were a couple who could have been chosen most likely to settle into an all-American, middle-class life style.
For a while it appeared that they had done just that.
Sweethearts since high school, they married in Pennsylvania in 1956, not long before he was discharged from the Army.
A decade later, he was a computer room supervisor at Temple University; she was bringing up two of their three children in a modest home in a working-class section of this Camden County community.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Guns Don't Kill People, Cigars Do
Nick Fury, hard-bitten hero of Marvel Comics for the last 30 years, is being forced to give up his cigar -- by a 7-year-old boy, no less.
Sammy Blum knew his father, a doctor, didn't like products that encouraged kids to take to tobacco.
So when he counted and realized that 5 out of his 100 Marvel Masterpiece cards show people puffing as they pulverize their foes, he scrawled out a letter to the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine, asking: "Why do they make cards for kids that show people smoking?"


Lindal L. Scott, James B. Parsons
Lindal Louise Scott, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
James Scott and Dr.
Beverly Scott of Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to James Byron Parsons, the son of Joyce Parsons of Franklin Park, N.J., and the late Royal Parsons.
The ceremony at the Bethany Baptist Church in Newark was performed by the bride's father, the minister of the church.
Mrs.
Scott-Parsons graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in public affairs from Princeton University.
She received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is a clerk for Judge Alfred M. Wolin of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey, in Newark.


Tonys Are About Broadway and Are Likely to Stay That Way
To the Editor:
The call to "Widen the Tony's Scope" (editorial, May 22) by including Off Broadway sounds like a good idea, but I believe it is not feasible.
As a former first-night theater critic and former president of the Drama Desk, a critics' organization that makes no distinction between Broadway and Off Broadway for nominations, I was pressed to champion inclusion of Off Broadway in the Tonys.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
IN THE PARKS  Discovering Happy Trails In the Middle of the City
If you missed the Urban Park Rangers' Bass Blast on the East River two weeks ago that celebrated a certain striped fish, be of good cheer.
On Saturday at parks in all five boroughs, the rangers will be leading the first urban celebration of National Trails Day.


Javits Center Facing Tougher Outside Competition
Officials at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center say they are finally beginning to crack the stubborn issues that have plagued the hall since it opened in 1986: high costs, wasteful union rules, mob intrusion and thefts.
But now, they say, they face more of an external threat: growing competition from cities building new halls, some surpassing the Javits in size.
Las Vegas, Philadelphia and Atlanta have expanded convention complexes in recent years, and other cities are expected to follow suit.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY  SCOTT FITZGERALD  A Biography. By Jeffrey Meyers. HarperCollins, $27.50.


Judge Rules Army Killed Africa Critics
After a yearlong inquest into South Africa's most compelling political murder mystery, a judge today ruled that the army and police had killed Matthew Goniwe and three other anti-apartheid campaigners in 1985 as part of a drive to contain civil unrest.
But Judge Neville W. Zietsman said he could not conclusively link any of the suspects -- including the general who rose to become chief of military intelligence -- to the four bodies that were found scorched and mutilated on a prairie outside Port Elizabeth.


Hidden Jewel
RESTAURANT RAPHAEL ** (212) 582-8993; 33 West 54th Street; $$$; all major cards An enchanting garden and superior country-French fare make this one of midtown's hidden jewels.
Appetizers include oxtail and foie gras terrine with a salsify salad; savoy cabbage stuffed with crab and dried tomatoes, and lamb and eggplant confit with warm goat cheese.
Among entrees, lamb filet is roasted and served with basil mashed potatoes and warm eggplant salad; hanger steak is served with a shallot sauce and sauteed potatoes, and faintly smoked red snapper is sauteed and accompanied by a zucchini gratin. (Review: 12/3/93 )


Corrections
A review on the In Short page on May 1, about "For Rushdie: Essays by Arab and Muslim Writers in Defense of Free Speech," included a misstatement from the book about the nationality of the writer Amin Maalouf.
He is Lebanese, not Libyan.
After the review appeared, a letter from the publisher, Braziller, reported that every reference in the book to Libya and Libyan writers should have been to Lebanon and Lebanese writers.


Sacre Bleu! Don't Call Her French, Or Even Female
AT THE WIZENED AGE OF 24, WITH eight years of an international career and four acclaimed solo recordings behind her, the French pianist Helene Grimaud has finally made her first concerto disk.
It's terrific, and it immediately jostles for consideration among the preferred versions of both works: the Rachmaninoff Second Concerto and the Ravel Concerto in G.
In the Rachmaninoff, Ms.
Grimaud sounds bold, assured and properly rhapsodic, never underplaying the brooding Romanticism but investing it with welcome backbone.
In the Ravel, she is all sparkle and jazzy wit, incisive yet delicate.
She is accompanied in both concertos with sympathy and personality by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and the undervalued conductor Jesus Lopez-Cobos.


Susan Teegardin and John McCarthy
Susan Kay Teegardin, a daughter of Mrs.
Joseph D. Hammerschmidt of Bay Village, Ohio, and Clinton B. Teegardin of Doylestown, Pa., was married yesterday to John Dennis McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. McCarthy Jr. of London and Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Patrick Carroll, a Roman Catholic priest and uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Assumption, in Westport.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 31, was until recently the assistant director for admissions and student affairs at the Lauder Institute at the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Wittenberg University.
Her father is a vice president and the general manager at Unisys in Blue Bell, Pa.


Lest We Forget, They Were War's Victims; On the Eve of D-Day
To the Editor:
One of the more mysterious and romantic aspects of World War II were the nighttime transmissions by the BBC in London to French Resistance forces on the Continent, cryptic messages informing the partisans of German troop movements or where downed Allied aviators were.
Perhaps the most dramatic message came on June 5, 1944.
Repeated over and over by Pierre Holmes (as your Dec. 18, 1993, obituary reports) was a line from a Paul Verlaine poem: "Long violin sobs rock my heart in monotonous languish"


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
SILK STRIKE RECALLED
This week, students from Eastside High School in Paterson will re-enact the pageant presented at the end of the historic five-month strike against 292 Paterson silk mills in 1913.
The re-enactment will be at 1 P.M.
Thursday and 1 and 7 P.M.
Friday at Passaic County Community College, College Boulevard.
Silk workers marched 900 strong from the Paterson mills, rode the ferry and continued their march to Madison Square Garden in New York City to portray highlights of the strike, which the workers won by establishing the eight-hour day and better working conditions that were eventually put into effect.


It's a Holiday. Laugh at Danger. Grill.
THE family cookout, 1954:
Dad is in the backyard, looking endearingly nerdy with his bony, soap-white legs exposed under (ironed) bermuda shorts, with penny loafers and white socks.
His dress shirt is rakishly opened two buttons at the collar, under a long apron imprinted with a silly picture of a running hot dog and the words "Official Dog Catcher."
He stands at the spindly barbecue grill from Sears, cigarette flopping in his mouth, with spatula in one hand and gin and tonic in the other, while a transistor radio scratches out the Patti Page tune, "How Much Is That Doggie in the Window?"


As P.L.O. Replaces Israelis, Jordan Remains on Sideline
The self-rule agreement that has swept Israeli soldiers from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho has also seen neighboring Jordan, once regarded as the power broker between the Palestinians and the United States, sidelined and neglected.
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, repeatedly failed to inform the Jordanians about the details of his negotiations with Israel.
And relations between the P.L.O. chief and King Hussein, while rocky in the past, are described by those close to the King as "dismal." Jordanian negotiators also say that trade and commercial deals cut between the Palestinians and the Israelis have intentionally excluded Jordan.


Miss Moran, Mr. Carmichael 3d
Margaret Anne Moran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Moran of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Hugh David Carmichael 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carmichael Jr. of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
John M. Demo performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Carmichael, 29, is a counselor at the Association of Flight Attendants' Employee Assistance Program in Washington.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in counseling from Catholic University of America.
Her father is a partner at KPMG Peat Marwick in New York.
The bride is a descendant of Michael Moran, who founded Moran Towing, the tugboat company in New York.


Debra M. Dicker, Charles R. Cohen
Debra Maureen Dicker, a vice president of Revista Aerea magazine in New York, was married last evening to Charles Robert Cohen, a science teacher at Lawrence (L.I.) Middle School.
Rabbi Herman Dicker, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Cohen, 26, graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Dicker of Boca Raton, Fla.


In the Region/Connecticut; A Whirlwind of Plans for a Hot Newtown Property
A PRIZED piece of property in the center of Newtown with almost 2 million square feet in 60 handsome brick buildings on an 800-acre campus has become a hotspot of contention among local and state officials and civic leaders.
Built in the 1930's as the Fairfield Hills state mental hospital, the now diverse operation is outmoded and its buildings are almost empty.
But the grounds and buildings have been well maintained and are suitable for recyling to other uses.


May 22-28: Trail Blazers; Florida and Mississippi Challenge Cigarette Manufacturers
In decades of litigation with smokers suffering from lung cancer and other diseases, tobacco companies have never lost a product-liability case.
But the industry came under attack on two new fronts last week, as Florida passed a law specifically designed to make it much more difficult for cigarette manufacturers to maintain that perfect record and Mississippi became the first state to sue them for health damages on behalf of its taxpayers.
Florida's action was potentially the more far-reaching of the two, and the Tobacco Institute responded angrily, calling the law "a travesty." By forbidding cigarette makers from arguing in court that consumers know the risks when they begin to smoke, the group charged, the law cheats "legitimate products out of the right to evidentiary protection and defenses."


Nostalgia


Noises Off at the Venerable Actors Studio
MENTION THE ACTORS studio, and the image is usually immediate: a shabby rehearsal room crammed with folding chairs in which the small and intense Lee Strasberg is guiding Robert De Niro or Ellen Burstyn or Al Pacino through a Method acting exercise that packs enough energy to blow a few fuses.
But that is theatrical history.
Strasberg died 12 years ago.
Since that time, his baby, the Studio, has had to make its way in the world with an often contentious group of surrogate parents hovering around it.


Jill Botway, Henrik Jensen
Jill Robin Botway, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford A. Botway of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Henrik Moller Jensen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans M. Jensen of Bornholm, Denmark.
The Rev.
Peter A. Bak performed the Lutheran ceremony at Ols Church in Bornholm.
Ms.
Botway is keeping her name.
She is the director of business development in New York for the Botway Group, which buys commercial time and ad space for advertisers; her father is the concern's founder and chairman.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University, from which she also received a law degree.


May 22-28: New Findings; Easing the Pain Of Circumcision
It hurts a lot longer when a newborn boy's foreskin is cut off than previously thought, and the traditional placing of a whiskey-coated finger in the baby's mouth is hardly adequate to relieve the pain, according pediatric researchers at Rochester General Hospital in New York.
The researchers concluded from a controlled study of 44 circumcised newborns that all should get a regional anesthetic at the time of the procedure and most would benefit from pain medication every six hours for a day after surgery.
But while 86 percent of infants are circumcised and nearly all the procedures are done in hospitals, most receive little or nothing to ease the discomfort during surgery and fewer still receive painkillers in the hours or days afterward.


Habitats/Redoing a 12-Room Maisonette; Not That Different From Restoring Art
DAVID and Mimi Dalva's 12-room maisonette once had, he said, "the Memphis look: post-modern, with a lot of pale greens and pinks, very Miami colors."
The seller was a man with an advertising agency, Mr.
Dalva continued, who lived in Palm Beach and "played polo, pretty wife, kids in prep school . . . just a different way of life."


BIKINI'S SILVER LINING
As Jack Niedenthal's sister and an observer of the politics of Bikini for the past nine years, I want to add some insights to Jeffrey Davis's article "Bikini's Silver Lining" (May 1).
The very real social problems that now exist in the Bikinian culture as a result of the influx of trust-fund monies and exposure to the outside world negate the ability to turn back time.
My brother supports a careful, long-term cleanup and resettlement program rather than one that quick-fixes it with money.


A Puzzling Rearrangement in Philadelphia
FOR YEARS, OFFICIALS AT THE Philadelphia Museum of Art heard grumblings that their installation of 19th-century European paintings was eccentric.
Here was one of the great collections in the United States of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art, the pride of one of the country's premier museums with its famous Cezannes and Monets, presented in a way that almost obscured its importance.
Some pictures were grouped according to the patrons who donated them.
Some Manets were in one place, some in another.
There was a Monet here, a Monet there.
Good works hung with lesser ones.
And the most prized work, Cezanne's monumental "Bathers," was poorly displayed.
Finally, the museum decided to bring more order to the place.
Under the old arrangement, parts of the medieval and early Renaissance collection were next to 20th-century art on the main floor.
Last year, as the first phase of a three-part overhaul, they moved upstairs with the rest of medieval and Renaissance to make way for 19th-century art, and the galleries they left were spruced up.


Attacks Against Gays Raise Fears
It was about 2:30 A.M.; the bartender had just locked up the Food Bar on Eighth Avenue and 18th Street and was walking home.
Then, says Pat Rogers, owner of the Food Bar, three teen-agers followed the bartender and began calling him "faggot." The teen-agers "pummeled his head and face," Mr.
Rogers said, "breaking his nose in two places."
That was a month ago.
Since then, there have been five other anti-gay incidents in the neighborhood, according to the Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project.
Alarmed over these incidents, Chelsea merchants and other community leaders have held two meetings with officials of the 10th Precinct to demand more patrols.


Keep the Charcoal Off the Grill, Utilities Say
As backyard chefs around the country roll out their barbecue grills this weekend, a group of electric utilities is asking them to spare the environment by swapping charcoal models for a nearly smokeless grill that plugs into an electric outlet.
But the charcoal makers, gamely entering a "greener than thou" contest, contend that their own product is the rightful environmentalist choice.
With the Government trying to stake out a neutral corner, the competing claims may be no easier to sort out than the merits of paper diapers vs. cloth, or plastic shopping bags vs. paper.


Laura Frazier, Michael Brodsky
Dr.
Laura Leigh Frazier and Dr.
Michael Scott Brodsky, veterinarians, were married yesterday at the Old Lyme (Conn.) Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Audrey Philcox and Cantor Robert Bloch performed the ceremony.
Dr.
Frazier, who is keeping her name, is an associate at the Bellerose (Queens) Animal Hospital.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut, and she and her husband received veterinary degrees from Cornell University.
The bride is the daughter of Dr.
Monte N. Frazier of Old Lyme and the late Phyllis Frazier.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FUNK FEST
The Mexican Mud Band and Tongue-in-Groove will bring their music and wit to the Funk Fest, which takes place at 10 P.M. today in the Port Chester night spot named for its address, 7 Willow Street, off Route 1.
Doors will open at 8, and admission is $10.


Boundary Runs Record To 5 in Row
Belmont Park ran up the curtain on a glittering holiday weekend of racing yesterday with an upset and a winning streak: Boundary, the undefeated but lightly raced son of Danzig made it five straight when he outran the favorites and won the Roseben Handicap by nearly three lengths.
It was the first stakes performance for Boundary, and he took the step upward with grace.
He charged through the homestretch, took the lead under John Velasquez and got to the wire two and three-quarters lengths in front of Chief Desire, who saved second place by the length of his neck over Julie Krone and Birdonthewire.
They had two lengths on the favored Demaloot Demashoot.


Mondo Murdoch; Networking, Globally and Relentlessly
IT has always been Rupert Murdoch's nature to shake things up.
For more than four decades, since he took over a newspaper in his native Australia in 1953, Mr.
Murdoch has circled the globe, accumulating vast power and wealth at every stop, and spending it freely to acquire whatever media or entertainment property fit his strategic vision of the moment, establishment and status quo be damned.
His latest display of audacity came last week in the United States when he engineered a $500 million deal to sign up 12 additional big-city television stations as affiliates of his Fox network, luring eight of them away from a startled CBS.
The move, coming just months after Mr.
Murdoch agreed to pay $1.6 billion to wrest from CBS the rights to broadcast National Football League games over the next four seasons, moved Fox indisputably into the first rank of the American television industry just eight years after Mr.
Murdoch set out to build a network.


Melanie D. Goldfeld, Kevin M. Powell
Melanie Dawn Goldfeld, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Goldfeld of Princeton, N.J., is to be married today to Kevin Michael Powell, a son of Annabelle and Malvern Powell of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Arnold Gluck is to officiate in Prospect Gardens at Princeton University.
Cantor Ilene Keys is to participate in the ceremony.
The bride, 31, will keep her name.
She is a program manager of services for the elderly at the St.
Anthony Foundation in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is the provost of Princeton, where he is also a professor of economics.
He was a member of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Carter Administration.


Stephen Kramarsky, Elise Masiee
Elise Claire Marie Masiee, a daughter of Elizabeth Masiee of Minneapolis and Luc Masiee of St.
Paul, is to be married today to Stephen M. Kramarsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner H. Kramarsky of New York.
The Rev.
Colin Leitch, a Unitarian Universalist minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Elizabeth B. Hall Chapel of Concord Academy in Concord, Mass.
The bride and bridegroom are associates at New York law firms, she at Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan and he at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
The bride graduated from the University of Chicago, from which she and the bridegroom received their law degrees.
Her father is an architect in St.
Paul.
Her mother is a freelance writer and television producer in Minneapolis.


Riverboat Gambling on the Hudson
THE date was May 4, and the topic under discussion at a public hearing in City Hall was this: Should there be riverboat gambling in New York City?
According to a proposal put forward by the City Council Finance Committee, six riverboats would create as many as 10,000 new jobs and would add at least $300 million a year to city and state coffers.
One of the speakers was Bernard Goldstein, a pioneer of the riverboat casino industry along the Mississippi River.
"I can't think of any place better than New York City for a riverboat," he said.
"Whatever the revenues are on the Mississippi, just add a few more zeroes."


Tisha Peters And Harry Fang
Tisha Elizabeth Jepson Peters, the daughter of Catherine H. and Jeffrey B. Peters of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to Harry Ta-Hsiang Fang, a son of Bernice and Bertrand Fang of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
William Rathman, a cousin of the bride, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's grandparents in Shokan, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is a leasing agent at Brenneman Property Services Inc., a real estate management company in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated from Barnard College.


A Non-Smoker Vs. an Airline
A LAW professor who sued Air France in 1991 because he sat among smokers despite being assigned a nonsmoking seat won his breach-of-contract suit and was awarded $500 by the court, which the airline paid at the end of March.
The case, in the Small Claims part of New York City's Civil Court, does not constitute an overwhelming precedent; the judge says her decision was based on narrow grounds.
But she followed her award with a written decision, an unusual step in Small Claims Court.
And the plaintiff, Prof.
Carl J. Mayer of the Hofstra University Law School on Long Island, and others on the antismoking ramparts believe the small claims forum provides an opening against foreign airlines whose overseas flights do not generally fall under United States smoking restrictions.
They are sometimes deaf to the pleas of travelers unable to tolerate smoke.
Neighbors Light Up
Professor Mayer's saga began in a way familiar to many nonsmokers who fly abroad.
On Aug. 1, 1990, he was returning to New York from Moscow through Paris on Air France Flight 079.
He confirmed his reservation for a nonsmoking seat with an agent.
At the gate, he again confirmed it and got a nonsmoking boarding pass for seat 34D.
Before takeoff, his testimony said, he saw passengers around him in rows 33 and 35 smoking, and they resumed after takeoff.
Passengers to his left in row 34 also started smoking.
Professor Mayer complained, and the steward said that smokers and nonsmokers had been mixed because of a computer problem.
Professor Mayer asked to be moved, but the flight was full and he remained in 34D.


Stephanie Seay, Brian Wood
Stephanie Deborah Seay, the daughter of Deborah and Harry R. Seay of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Brian Van Dyke Wood, a son of Barbara Jean Van Dyke Wood of Teaneck, N.J., and Thomas A. Wood of Washington.
The Rev.
Jesse F. Anderson, an African Methodist Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Happenstance, the home of Deveda J. Reid, the bride's aunt, in Malvern, Pa.
Ms.
Seay, 32, is keeping her name.
She teaches the second grade at the Joseph C. Ferguson Elementary School in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Spelman College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Cheyney University.


County Program Tries To Keep Families Intact
AS part of a countywide effort to reduce the number of children being placed in foster care, the Westchester Department of Social Services has signed a $189,228 contract with the Fairview/Greenburgh Community Center here to provide counseling services for 60 families.
The County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, said that under the program, "vulnerable families under stress" in Westchester will become eligible for a variety of services, including counseling, training in how to be a parent and homemaker assistance.


Sports of The Times; 'The Chance to Win Four More'
IN the cauldron celebrating the Rangers' 2-1 victory over the Devils in double overtime Friday night, Mike Richter skated to the bench, where Mike Keenan was glowing.
"Now we've got a chance to win four more," the Ranger goaltender said.


Katharene Smith, David Schwartz
Katharene Louise Smith, a daughter of Charles Smith of Peralta, N.M., and Aida Smith of Albuquerque, N.M., was married yesterday to David Baruch Schwartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Schwartz of Middle Village, Queens.
Justice Randall T. Eng of State Supreme Court in Queens officiated at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 28, is a reference librarian at the law firm of Crowell &amp; Moring in Washington.
She graduated from the University of New Mexico and received a master's degree in library science from the University of Chicago.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
When first spied off the thick spine of the Eisenhower Expressway, Proviso West High School suggests all the ingredients of a stable place.
Its low-slung beige brick, undulating for acre after acre over the fairways and greens of the old golf course in Hillside, Ill., makes it seem more like a corporate campus than a suburban high school.
Its location, nestled in a comfortable patch between a cemetery, a shopping mall and a movie theater, gives it the feel of a sanctuary sealed off from the monotone of Chicago's western suburbs, with their endless strip malls and four-lane highways and fast-food restaurants.
In the strong early-morning light, when the school parking lot is empty of the rattle of cars, and students have not yet begun to congregate outside the metal doors waiting to be let in, there is something truly monumental about Proviso West, a place built in the helter-skelter suburban-boom-town days of the 1950's -- and built to endure.
Inside the school there is the feel of a place where taxpayers' money was well spent -- a kind of mini-Pentagon, with more than half a million square feet.
Adjacent to the main complex is the high canopy of the field house with its fast track surfaces.
There is the gym with row after row of rising bleachers, and the sparkling indoor pool, where a swimmer pulls smooth, fine strokes that barely break the water.


Panel Finds Lag in Saving Environment
The panel set up to monitor international efforts to protect the environment has ended its first substantive meeting here acknowledging that much remains to be done to meet the goals set two years ago at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
After two weeks of debate, the 53-nation Commission on Sustainable Development concluded on Friday that the international community was failing to provide the money and the know-how needed to foster environmentally benign development in poor countries and that rich countries should do more to restrict harmful consumption by their citizens.


Formal or Unruly, Blossoms in a Pot
THIS is the last call to set out young plants in containers, those redwood tubs, window boxes, barrels, large clay pots, plastic rectangles or whatever that can contain enough soil so plants thrive.
If these sorts of showpieces have not been put together, then by all means this is the weekend to finish.
Besides, being creative with plant combinations can be fun.
Weather should be no problem any longer.
At least the snows and hard freezes have gone and the rainfall that does come is most welcome.
So is the sunshine and longer days to be outside.


Trying to Get Day Workers Off the Street
For more than 15 years, scores of men have gathered daily along 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst, desperately waiting for trucks, vans or cars to pull up -- their drivers in search of unskilled laborers for low-paying jobs, often involving construction, moving or restaurant work.
But the day workers, mostly undocumented immigrants from Mexico and Central America, have never been met with open arms by the residents and merchants along 18th Avenue between Bay Ridge Avenue and 72d Street.
They have complained that the workers are nuisances who litter and harrass passers-by.
Last year residents' complaints led to arrests and fines for loitering. (The police say they do not have specific arrest figures.)


Too Relaxed on High-Tech Exports
Nuclear arms makers in Iraq, Iran, India and Pakistan were just some of the recipients of U.S. high-tech exports in the past -- exports that they could use to make bombs.
Yet even as nuclear proliferation emerges as the principal threat to America's security, bills wending their way through the Senate and House would make it even easier for renegade states to obtain U.S. technology useful for building bombs.
The technology of concern has both civilian and military uses, like machine tools for grinding bomb parts to exacting specifications and devices known as krytrons, electronic triggers used to fire up photocopying machines that can also serve as nuclear detonators.


Improbable Journey From Shanghai To Mexico City
ONE OF THE MORE COVETABLE of this year's exhibitions is not, alas, in a museum in the United States.
Entitled "Treasures From the Bronze Age of China From the Shanghai Museum," it is in the Centro Cultural/Arte Contemporaneo in Mexico City.
The center is not in the heart of Mexico City but in a civilized enclave whose every street name is an act of homage to European high culture.
The visitor will find philosophers (Hegel), poets (Victor Hugo), geometricians (Eluer) and students of the skies (Laplace and Halley).
An American poet and storyteller, Edgar Allan Poe, is also included.
But right now the street that has topicality is the one named after the author of "Middlemarch."
The name of George Eliot is also on the letterhead of the Centro Cultural/Arte Contemporaneo, which stands at the intersection of Jorge Eliot (as she is known here) and another European import, Campos Eliseos (Champs-Elysees).
With her broody, deep-going, inquisitive and omnicapacious turn of mind, George Eliot would welcome the association.


City College Students Study the Anatomy of Hate
At a time when anti-Semitic speeches by black nationalists draw attention at college campuses, a group of students at the City College of New York is dissecting the sentiments of ethnic bias.
In a quiet conference room with a sweeping view of Harlem, Tricia Ferrell, a pre-law student, spoke softly earlier this month about her recent visit to former Nazi concentration camps in Poland.


Congested. Expensive. Out of Date.
Ann Christopher, a nursing student, says she routinely gets into shouting matches about service and quality with the workers at her loca: Consumers Food supermarket in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Mary Hunter, who was buying a few boxes of pasta last week at an Associated market nearby, regularly pays $13 in cab fare to do her "real" shopping at a Pathmark on the other side of the borough.


Evening Hours; Parties Around And About
Another notable week of previews, dinners and book signings.


Indoors and Outdoors, Concert Seasons Change
AN opening and a closing concert are on today's agenda, as Brass Ring begins the outdoor season in Lakeville while the Armstrong Chamber Concerts call it a season in Washington.
In Lakeville, the 1994 Holley-Williams House Concert Series is off to a bright and brassy start with Brass Ring, the New Haven Quintet composed of the trumpeters Neil Mueller and Claire Newbold as well as Laura Klock and Karl Kramer, horn and tuba players, and the trombonist David Kayser.
Their 2 o'clock program on the museum lawn (or inside Salisbury Congregational Church, if it rains) features works from the Colonial and Revolutionary War eras 435-2878.


Robin Levine, Paul Shainberg
Robin Dawn Levine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Levine of New City, N.Y., is to be married today to Paul Leslie Shainberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Shainberg of Memphis.
Rabbi Jacob Rubenstein is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is the manager of video research and marketing at Court TV in Manhattan.
She graduated from George Washington University.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; The Lost Quayle Diaries
"Gorby calls early A.M. with peace offer. Amb. (USSR) briefs Pres., but nothing much. . . . Lunch with boys, who are out of school. Tucker throws olive in Ben's milk. . . ."  -- FRI., JAN. 11, 1991
"Met with more families. Tough part of job. Plane home: press didn't like criticism. . . . They are so sensitive. Any criticism they feel unjustified. Think I'll keep it up." -- WED., JAN. 23, 1991
"Ground war next Wed. But problem wt Queen Margrethe and state dinner." -- THURS., FEB. 14, 1991
"Bush no longer viewed as phlegmatic." -- FRI., MARCH 1, 1991
-- FROM DAN QUAYLE'S DESERT STORM DIARY IN "STANDING FIRM" (HARPERCOLLINS, MAY 1994).
Dan Quayle's diary entries in his best-selling memoirs are a tantalizing glimpse of the former Vice President's innermost thoughts.
But the journal is quoted so sparingly, I was left hungry for more of Quayle's notes on his turbulent years in office.
As a kid, I kept a small pink diary (with a little silver lock), in which I recorded the great events of the day. ("Played Parcheesi. Ate Jiffy Pop. Watched TV. Went to Bed.") When I got to college and read the diaries of Pepys and Boswell, I recalled my shallow entries with embarrassment.
But now, reading "Standing Firm," I realize that my style was, in fact, Vice-Presidential.
I was gratified, therefore, to receive in the mail from a source who must remain anonymous (Jack Kemp) a small volume, bound tastefully in light blue Naugahyde.
Beneath the Vice-Presidential seal the title "Danny's Diary" was printed in gold.
Space precludes printing the lost Quayle diaries in their entirety, but here are some of the more historic entries:
They made the big announcement that I'm the V.P. choice at a riverfront rally in New Orleans.
I was so excited I gave Mr.
Bush a big hug.
I almost kissed him -- just guylike, you know -- but he made this funny whinnying noise and jumped back about eight feet, so I didn't after all. . . .
Later, Mr.
Baker took me aside and told me never to do that again, never, ever, ever. -- AUG. 16, 1988
Wish my aides would stop telling reporters I'm "educable" (which, by the way, I found out is different from "edible"). . . .
Today's Thursday, Mexican Day in the White House mess! . . .
Jack Kemp opened his mouth full of tacos and guac and stuck his tongue out at me.
I told Pres.
Jack is so immature, and he said, "Yes, he's no Vic." Which, Mr.
Baker told me later, was short for Victor, as in Victor Mature, which is the way the Pres. talks sometimes (which isn't really very Victor either, if you know what I mean). -- JAN. 31, 1989
After stops in Australia and Indonesia, arrived Singapore. . . .
Was 10 minutes late for meeting with Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew because of slo-o-ow foursome on back nine.
Got caned.
Had milk.
Went to bed. -- MAY 2, 1989
Some reporter asked me today who I liked better, Jim Morrison or Jimi Hendrix.
I hadn't heard of Jim Morrison, so I took Jimi Hendrix.
Not good.
Mr.
Baker called me in.
Got caned. . . . -- JUNE 10, 1989
Addressed United Negro College Fund today. . . .
Gee, I don't know what the big fuss is. . . .
It is a waste to lose one's mind or not to have a mind. . . .
You just can't win with the liberal press.
How true that is. -- MAY 9, 1989
Latin American trip going well.
In Chile, met with General Pinochet.
Didn't bug him about any gross stuff -- coups, torture, killings.
He said he is a big supporter of democratic rule.
Dumb foreigner.
I explained to him that we are Republicans. . . .
Bought hilarious anatomically generous wooden Indian doll at market in Valparaiso.
Better than that copper vase Marilyn wanted me to buy. . . .
She was mad at first about the doll and called me "sick" in front of reporters, but she let me play with it for a while tonight. -- MARCH 11, 1990
National security briefing A.M. with Pres.
Iraqis have invaded Kuwait.
Dark day for peace.
Mr.
Scowcroft said world was facing most dangerous moment since Day o' Infamy. . . .
Shot an 80 in the wind at Burning Tree.  -- AUG. 2, 1990
Lunch with George Will at Chevy Chase Lounge.
He's still pouting because I can't get him invited to the White House.
I tell him Pres. still hates him. . . .
He throws his olive in my milk. . . .  -- APRIL 4, 1991
White House in a panic about me calling Murphy Brown a tramp.
Phoned the Pres. from my limo.
He says the problem is he has never seen "Murphy Brown." I tell him not to worry; I haven't either. . . . -- MAY 19, 1992
MTQ made big waves with her speech tonight at the Republican Convention in Houston. . . .
I ask her what that stuff meant about women not wishing to be liberated from their essential natures as women.
She tells me never mind. . . .
We go to the hotel pool and play Shark in the Dark. -- AUG. 19, 1992
We lost the election.
I saw it coming.
It was everyone else's fault but mine.
Should've started a Dump Bush movement last year.
-- NOV. 4, 1992
MTQ got the publisher to return the draft of my book so we can do some rewrites.
She put in some funny stuff: "Marilyn is much softer than the public perception of her." She also says we need to be tougher on my Republican rivals for '96 -- even Mr.
Baker, which really scares me.
I tell her, happy campers they will not be.
She says a book is a terrible thing to waste.
How true, I guess. . . .  -- JAN. 14, 1994
Switched from boxers to briefs -- more Presidential!  -- APRIL 20, 1994
Al Gore was just named one of People magazine's 50 Most Beautiful People.
I can't believe how much attention he's getting.
It's just because I'm blond.
People think brunets are smarter. . . .
I wish Hillary would squash him like a bug. -- MAY 9, 1994
Mr.
Reagan called today.
He read my book.
He thinks I had good political insights but worries I was too vindictive.
He gave me some advice for '96.
"Dan," he said, "we have plenty of lads who are smart and mean: Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, Jim Baker, Bill Bennett, Dick Cheney. Sure, you and I may sometimes seem a few chips short of a bag of Wavy Lay's, but we have something more powerful going for us -- charm and sunshine, a wink and a smile, even for our foes. That's why it's good to be married to girls with gumption like Nancy and Marilyn. Let them hold the grudges, son, while we lasso the big picture." Good advice from the Gipper.
From now on, no more Mr.
Mean Guy! -- MAY 20, 1994


Childless Workers Demanding Equity In Corporate World
Leslie Lafayette, a high school English teacher in Sacramento, Calif., says she applauds employers' trying to accommodate the needs of working parents by assisting with child care or providing flexible work schedules.
But she says she is angry about filling in for colleagues who leave early to take their children to the doctor or to a soccer game.
She is frustrated, too, that she does not get any special consideration for her needs; a request for time off, say, to see her accountant is not met with the same empathy that a co-worker with a sick child would get.
Ms.
Lafayette says that because she is childless, she is required to do more than her share to fill in for those with children.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Film View column on page 9 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the festival in Cannes, misstates the title of a movie discussed by the actor Mickey Rourke.
It is "F.T.W.," not "S.F.W."


With Costs Down, a Builder Trumpets Affordability
IN New York City the term "affordable housing" has come to be associated with new houses built with city and state capital grants on city-owned land.
The land is provided at virtually no cost to the buyer.
The land contribution and the grants make possible prices that are affordable to households earning about $25,000 to $50,000 a year.
In purely private housing development, there are no such subsidies.
But with the drop in land prices in recent years, builders can set prices lower (meanwhile hoping market strength will push them up again).
Accordingly, they are ready to promote as affordable housing the offerings they plan for the middle-income market.


Truth, Sex and Advertising
To the Editor:
It is quite clear that Jean Kilbourne does not object to sex in advertising; she objects to sexism and mildly to homophobia.
It is striking, therefore, that she has apparently not observed or does not consider worth mentioning the fact that the sexual world represented in television advertisements invariably involves beautiful heterosexuals of the same race -- all made to appear to be between the ages of 22 and 22 1/2.
In the real world that Ms.
Kilbourne would like to see reflected, sex is practiced by the very young and the very old, by the fat and the handicapped as well as by gays, lesbians and interracial couples.
But on Madison Avenue and in society in general, acknowledgment and genuine acceptance of this fact is, to use Ms.
Kilbourne's word, "unthinkable." SOL SAPORTA Seattle, May 17 The writer is a retired professor of linguistics at the University of Washington.


Hero Worship
On some days, Lawrence F. Levy finds several faxes on his desk from Steven Spielberg, Hollywood's most formidable director.
At night, Mr.
Levy picks up the phone and often hears the voice of Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios.
Mr.
Levy is not a hot new movie star or screenwriter.
Far from it.
What Mr.
Levy, Mr.
Spielberg and Mr.
Katzenberg discuss and debate is the texture of bread, the precise ingredients of the nicoise tuna sub-burger and the whimsical, high-tech decor in their restaurant, Dive!, the newest and most discussed emporium in town.
Its gimmick: gourmet submarine sandwiches.


Dining Out Amid the Canyons
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE +  (212) 246-6699; 20 West 50th Street, at Rockefeller Center; $$; all major cards


NORTH KOREA FOILS EFFORTS TO HALT ITS NUCLEAR PLANS
The Clinton Administration's latest plan to stop North Korea's nuclear program appeared on the verge of collapse today as North Korea declared it would "never allow" outsiders to derail its nuclear plans, and officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency left the country saying their inspection efforts had failed.
North Korea's announcement came as reports here indicated that Pyongyang appears to be preparing to test a new medium-range missile over the Sea of Japan.


Housing Jewel in the Bronx Loses Its Luster
When Merna Wright, 48, an immigrant from Antigua, bought her two-bedroom apartment in the Parkchester housing development for $36,000 eight years ago, she thought she had achieved the American dream.
But now that dream is crumbling like the soggy plaster in her apartment.
Her dank apartment stinks of decay.
Mold and mildew cover her walls, and the paint is peeling.
All her possessions, save a sofa and some knickknacks, are in the middle of the room, covered with plastic sheets.


Mob Tightens Secretive Style In Retreat From Prosecutors
Not so long ago, when the Mafia was an expanding industry, mobsters in the New York area were so indifferent to law-enforcement surveillance that they talked freely in their clubhouses, exchanged traditional kisses on the cheek at street meetings and often mocked investigators who trailed them.
But buffeted by convictions, electronic spying by investigators, top-level defections and deadly internal feuds, many leaders and soldiers in New York's five Mafia families are altering their underworld life styles.
Law-enforcement officials assert that a widespread fear among Mafiosi of being infiltrated by informers or even observed talking with each other has compelled Mafia members in New York and New Jersey to take extraordinary defensive measures.


Saving the Children, to a Boom-Chicka Beat
SURVIVING with style has always been Johnny Colon's signature beat, as insistent as the driving salsa rhythms of his band, the quarrels with politicians, the scrabbling for money to keep his East Harlem Music School alive these past 26 years, as insistent as the belief that melody and harmony are keys to the heart of the city.
He learned that from his mother.


Keep Down the 'Joyful Noise'?
In the six months since the Kingsboro Temple of the Seventh-day Adventist Church began holding services, the congregation has had a rocky relationship with some of its neighbors on its quiet Park Slope street.
Residents first complained to Community Board 6 that the church's sign was too large.
Then they grumbled that parishioners were double-parking their cars on Seventh Street between Sixth and Seventh Avenues.


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
FINALLY FILLED: Another sign of life in Union Square.
The landmark building at 33 East 17th Street, which has stood vacant for 15 years, has been leased to a joint venture between Related Companies and The Carlisle Group . . .
OBSTACLE: The East River Esplanade between 68th and 72d Streets is being closed more often than predicted as a result of hospital construction, sometimes two to three days at a time . . .
FINALLY HERE: The new Cherokee post office will open Monday, June 6, on York Avenue near 79th Street, at twice the size of the old station . . .
CLUBHOUSE ROW: New neighbor for the Harvard, Yale, Cornell and New York Yacht Clubs on 44th Street: The Penn Club, at 30 West.


Puns on 'Rock,' Fine, but Beware of Bamm-Bamm
Four Weddings And a Funeral  Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell Directed by Mike Newell R 118 minutes


When Women Give Birth at Home
Articles like "For Birth at Home, More Women Seek the Help of Midwives" and "Midwife Who Sees Role as a Mission" (April 17) do women a great service by presenting alternatives.
But the important point of women's being empowered during childbirth was glossed over by repeated statements that medical backup is the most important element at a birth.
The first article said that many women "say they want to take back control of their bodies because they believe that giving birth is a healthy, natural process that has been recast as a sickness to be treated by the medical profession." But a woman who has a midwife attend a home birth with all the same medical equipment as a low-tech setting is also showing that she believes that something will go wrong and that birth is not a normal, natural event but one that must be medically supervised to be safe.


La Rochelle
To the Editor: The article "A Stormy Port, Peaceful Today" (May 1) describes the half-timbered houses of La Rochelle and expresses the belief that covering the wooden beams with slate to protect them from salt air and rain is unique to La Rochelle.
This "ancient and strange device" is actually common all along the Normandy coast as well.
In Rouen, many of the 700-odd half-timbered houses from the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries, for example, have their exterior wooden beams covered with slate for the same reason.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERARY ESSAYS  RELOCATIONS OF THE SPIRIT  Essays.
By Leon Forrest.
Asphodel/Moyer Bell, $24.95.


Rebuilding the Canal St. Station (Unobtrusively)
The $44 million rehabilitation of the East Side Canal Street subway station, one of the city's largest, began earlier this month, and so far the Transit Authority is doing its best to minimize disruption in the busy neighborhood.
The station, which extends from Centre Street to Broadway, is made up of four stations that were linked together in the early 1940's.
It serves Chinatown, Little Italy, Soho, TriBeCa and the courts.
Charles Seton, a spokesman for the Transit Authority, said that during construction full service would be maintained on the subway lines that stop there -- the No. 6, the N, R, J, M and Z.


Dining Out Amid the Canyons
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE +  (212) 246-6699; 20 West 50th Street, at Rockefeller Center; $$; all major cards


Close Encounters of the Absurd Kind?
To the Editor:
Do you think your readers are a bunch of morons?
The Book Review provides us with one of the few reviewers who could ever take "Abduction" seriously.
This book is the end result of the hysteria brought on by a small but influential group in the psychiatric profession who have thrust the recovered-memory theory upon the American people with such disastrous results.
The reviewer, one of these unbelievably misguided psychiatrists, tells us that even if the memories of abduction by aliens are untrue, it may be because they are "disguised memories of sexual or physical abuse."


CLASSICAL BRIEF
Wolf: Morike and Goethe Lieder  Ruth Ziesak, soprano; Ulrich Eisenlohr, pianist.
Sony SK 53278; CD.


Ms. Clarke, Mr. Martin-Smith
Judith Lightfoot Clarke, the daughter of Anne Powell Clarke and John Clarke of Smith Mountain Lake, Va., was married yesterday to Nicholas Martin-Smith, the son of Deirdre Martin Smith and Dr.
Donald A. Smith of Rochester.
The Rev.
James Henry officiated at the Huntington Court United Methodist Church in Roanoke, Va.
The bride, 31, and the bridegroom, 32, are actors in New York.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father is a retired district manager with the American Automobile Association, in Roanoke.


A Stage Career Becomes a Show
IN 1978, Judy Kaye went onstage on Broadway as an understudy.
True to theatrical fable, she came back a star -- for the first time.
This week in New Jersey, Ms.
Kaye will talk about how she took over for Madeline Kahn in "On the 20th Century" five weeks after opening night.
She will also perform songs from the show's Tony Award-winning score and other selections, from a Puccini aria to a "passionate rock ballad," she said.
And she will tell "other backstage fun stories."


Psychiatrist To Discuss Churchill's Heroic Stance
Winston Churchill, neglected throughout childhood by his parents, who relegated his care to a nanny and shipped him off to boarding school at the tender age of 7, might have grown into an embittered, angry man, a loner seeking revenge through anti-social acts.
That he instead became a well-loved world leader has long fascinated Dr.
M.
Donald Coleman, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who practices in Mamaroneck.
Dr.
Coleman will speak about Churchill at the annual meeting of the Westchester Psychoanalytic Society, to be held June 6 at 8:30 P.M. at the Carl and Lily Pforzheimer Memorial Building in Purchase.
The title of the talk, which is open to the public free of charge, is "Winston Churchill: Especial Resolutions of Childhood Deprivations Helped Form the Heroic Character of the Statesman."


The End of History
To the Editor:
In Martin E. Marty's tepid, uncritical review of "Apocalypse: On the Psychology of Fundamentalism in America," by Charles B. Strozier (May 8), he refers to Mr.
Strozier's claim that fundamentalism is "unsteady" and that apocalypticists use millennial beliefs to address their "inner divisions" as they "yearn for big-bang futures." What patronizing nonsense!
I am an evangelical (or, to use the pejorative term, a "fundamentalist") who takes biblical revelation seriously and literally (with recognition of obvious symbolism) in its teaching about the denouement of human history in cataclysmic events climaxing in the return of the Messiah in judgment and redemption.
To demean sane people who believe scriptural prophecy as maladjusted and insecure seekers after wish fulfillments or as some kind of David Koresh-type Waco whackos is both condescending and inaccurate.
ROBERT L. CLEATH  Arroyo Grande, Calif.


A Rap Movie Opens, and It's Only A Year Late
THE WRITER, ACTOR AND director Rusty Cundieff is eager to unleash his vision of inner-urban America upon the nation's screens, big and small.
After spending many of his 29 years in show business or at least in the pursuit of it, Mr.
Cundieff is hardly a household name.
He has been a stand-up comic, and he was co-writer of "House Party 2" (1991), a sort of rappers-come-of-age-and-go-to-college movie.
He had a small role in Spike Lee's 1988 movie "School Daze" and he appeared as one of the slaves and an Eddie Murphy impersonator in Robert Townsend's 1987 comedy "Hollywood Shuffle."


Susan R. Dach, Bruce I. Terman
Susan Rita Dach, the daughter of Edith Dach of Jamaica, Queens, and the late Joseph Dach, is to be married today to Bruce Israel Terman, a son of Mildred S. Terman of Cleveland and the late Joseph Terman.
Rabbi Irving Spielman is to officiate at the Sea Grill in New York.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Guns Don't Kill People, Cigars Do
Nick Fury, hard-bitten hero of Marvel Comics for the last 30 years, is being forced to give up his cigar -- by a 7-year-old boy, no less.
Sammy Blum knew his father, a doctor, didn't like products that encouraged kids to take to tobacco.
So when he counted and realized that 5 out of his 100 Marvel Masterpiece cards show people puffing as they pulverize their foes, he scrawled out a letter to the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine, asking: "Why do they make cards for kids that show people smoking?"


Cartoon Debate At Princeton
After reading the May 1 article "A Cartoon Stirs Debate at Princeton," I have come to the conclusion that there is too much time left over from the pursuit of education at Princeton.
Our society has sadly evolved from a nation of winners into a nation of whiners.


Jennifer Mnookin, Joshua Dienstag
Jennifer Leigh Mnookin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Mnookin of Cambridge, Mass., is to be married today to Joshua Foa Dienstag, a son of Eleanor Foa Dienstag of New York and Jerome Dienstag of Rochester.
Rabbi Matthew Cutler is to perform the ceremony at the Harvard Club in Boston.
The bride, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where her father is the Samuel Williston Professor of Law.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in science, technology and society, an interdisiplinary program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and is a law student at Yale University.
Her mother, Dale Mnookin, was until recently the owner of Mothers-in-Deed, a nanny agency in Palo Alto, Calif.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
To Live Under a Big Tank
CALL it "One room, water view, both outside and inside." The historic-house tour in Roslyn on Saturday includes one historic nonhouse.
It's a water tower.
"But it's a very unusual building," said Dr.
Roger Gerry, president of the Roslyn Landmark Society.


Editors' Note
The "And Bear in Mind" listing on page 18 of the Times Book Review today includes a brief description of "Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster," by Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P. Schecter.
The listing entry, based on a review that appeared last Sunday, calls the book "valuable." But it should also have reflected the reviewer's caution that some of the book's assertions are demonstrably wrong and others lack credibility.


Thomas vs. Clinton
Over the past few weeks, a wide range of commentators have drawn parallels between the claims raised during the hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and the recent charges of sexual harassment against President Clinton.
Comparisons can be useful if they illuminate the obscure or help resolve a problem.
But simply likening the events of 1991 and the events of 1994 ignores the complexities of sexual harassment.
As the Supreme Court noted just last year, sexual harassment that creates a hostile environment defies "a mathematically precise test," and calls for examining "all the circumstances" of a case.
In fact, the differences in the Clinton and Thomas situations teach us more about sexual harassment than do the similarities.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Craig Grebeck, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 21.
Purchased the contract of Olmedo Saenz, infielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Assigned Dan Smith, pitcher, to Port Charlotte of the Florida State League on an injury rehabilitation assignment.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Mike Timlin, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 25.
Purchased the contract of Randy St.
Claire, pitcher, from Syracuse of the International League.
Announced Alex Gonzalez, shortstop, has completed a 20-day rehabilitation assignment at Syracuse of the International League and was optioned to Syracuse.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Placed Gary Sheffield, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Russ Morman, first baseman, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
National Basketball League  SASKATOON SLAM -- Released Michael Sims, guard.


Business Diary
COMPANIES Networks Learn What Happens If They Leave the Chicken Coop Open
Yes, television keeps reinventing itself, but some things have stayed constant since the beginning of time (i.e., the beginning of television).
Even with upstarts like HBO and CNN, the networks that came over on the Mayflower are still the heavies.
The power of CBS, NBC and ABC has eroded, but only now does this trinity suddenly seem shaky.
Last week Fox, which recently jolted the big guns by nabbing some serious television fare -- pro football -- had the audacity to take 12 stations away from them, 8 from CBS alone, by agreeing to invest $500 million in New World Communications.
Of course, the old-liners can get new stations in the markets involved -- big-time places like Dallas, Detroit and Atlanta.
But they could well be relegated (horrors!) to the boondocks north of channel 13.
And the reaction of a bloodied CBS: "The war is started," said Howard Stringer, head of the CBS Broadcast Group.
For Gerber, a Way to Grow
Gerber had a problem.
It dominated this country's baby food market, but with a declining birth rate there were fewer little mouths -- and no way for the company to grow.
But Sandoz wanted the chance to branch out from pharmaceuticals -- not to mention that Swiss companies have been rushing to make acquisitions before Jan. 1, when a change in accounting methods makes acquisitions less desirable.
So last week the two found each other, as Sandoz bid $3.7 billion for Gerber -- a high price, suggesting that Nestle was also interested. (Of course it was just coincidence that Gerber stock options were very active the Friday before the deal was announced.) Simplifying With a Vengeance
I.B.M. wants to simplify its life.
That's what its new-broom chairman, Louis Gerstner, clearly thinks is needed to get this scattered giant on the right and future track.
There's talk of a "unified image," of offering customers "seamless, easy solutions that tie products together." But when I.B.M. simplifies, put on your seat belt.
Last week it abruptly dismissed more than 40 ad agencies, giving the work to a single agency, Ogilvy &amp; Mather.
I.B.M. spends up to $500 million a year selling itself, making this the biggest account migration in ad history.
Madison Avenue is still picking up the pieces.
For Denny's, Bias Is Costly
Despite all the progress, no one would pretend that racial bias has been wiped out.
But the indignities that remain, both large and small, are often hard to pin down -- and even harder to punish.
But according to the Justice Department, Denny's, the restaurant chain, was so blatant and consistent in its bias that a solid case could be built.
Perhaps the decisive straw came when six black Secret Service agents assigned to President Clinton were refused a table.
And this wasn't random bias, said one lawyer in the case, but "an attitude that went into the management level." Last week Denny's agreed to pay $54 million to settle lawsuits by thousands of black customers. (Those who feel they should share in this can call 800 836-0055.) They Know When You Slurp
A fast-food restaurant would seem an ideal spot to impart state secrets or steamy gossip.
It's anonymous, generic, so much a part of the landscape that it's practically invisible.
Think again.
Last week it turned out that Dunkin' Donuts -- along with who knows how many other businesses -- hides microphones in its stores to monitor cashiers and clerks.
But of course that means everyone's on tape, customer and employee alike.
It gives a whole new meaning to the concept of public dining.
"It's surprising and scary," said Lewis Maltby of the American Civil Liberties Union. 214 Miles for an Electric Car
Electric cars will never make it.
Everyone knows that.
They just can't go far enough between meals.
Then again, look at those cars guzzling unthinkable amounts of gas, and belching out unthinkable clouds of gunk, at the Indianapolis 500 today.
They're lucky to go 100 miles between pit stops.
Electric cars, by comparison, are becoming virtual long-distance runners.
Last week at the American Tour de Sol, a race for electric and solar-powered cars, a Geo Metro converted by Solectria cruised 214.2 miles without stopping -- no doubt a world record.
INTERNATIONAL Tiananmen Square: It's History
Did President Clinton really have any choice when he renewed China's favorable trading status last week?
Probably not; our trade with China has become so vast that a mere politician would be hard pressed to slow it down.
Look at the numbers: $31 billion of Chinese goods come to the United States yearly; $9 billion worth take the return route.
Some people wished the President had stuck to a hard line on human rights, but Mr.
Clinton -- sounding eerily like George Bush -- insisted that even though China had not made the progress he'd sought, more could be accomplished by not isolating this giant nation.
The message seems to be this: the statute of limitations is up on Tiananmen Square.
Playing the Antitrust Card
Washington can rattle its sabers at foreign companies whose practices hurt our exports, but it may do no good.
Last week it tried a new tactic, filing an antitrust suit against the British glass maker Pilkington, saying it hoarded glass-making technology; Pilkington quickly settled.
America's jurisdiction?
Simple.
Pil kington has big holdings here.
This approach could leave a lot of global companies open, for it's nearly impossible to do business here without putting down some roots.
THE ECONOMY Data for All (Except the Poor)
Under your feet, over your head and in the wilds of cyberspace, the information highway is relentlessly taking shape.
But now some concerned citizens are saying, Wait a second!
You've forgotten something.
As phone companies plan their fancy networks linking video, voice and computer, they're guilty of "electronic redlining," bypassing poor areas and focusing on better-heeled tekkies -- that's the message of a study released last week by consumer and civil rights groups.
While the industry insists that it's laying paths where the users are -- that it had to start somewhere -- critics say there have to be rules.
Data highway, meet political reality.
Now, States Take On Tobacco
"The free ride is over," said Mississippi's Attorney General as he announced a suit against 13 tobacco companies to recover the state's costs of treating smoking-related illnesses -- and to stop Joe Camel-type ads.
"It's time these billionaire tobacco companies start paying what they rightfully owe." Of course, no one's ever gotten a penny from suing the tobacco industry -- it's always argued that smoking is a matter of choice -- but this is the first time a state, not an individual, has tried.
And the state's assertion that tobacco companies long knew of smoking's hazards has more weight now, after the disclosure of documents backing that up. . . .
And no sooner had Mississippi acted than Florida went a step further, enacting a law specifically to allow suits on behalf of Medicaid patients who smoke.
Calming Words on Derivatives
Most people still don't understand what derivatives are, but there's a gnawing sense that these speculative gadgets -- contracts "derived" from things like stocks or currencies -- constitute some sort of "black hole" that could inhale the financial universe.
Well, last week scientists said there really are black holes, but on the financial front the sky-is-falling crowd got a setback.
After a congressional study calling for far more scrutiny of derivatives, Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, came on stage and said, in effect, Don't worry.
There's "negligible" risk, he said, that this fast-growing market could create a monster that could rattle the Republic.
The Tortoise Economy
Slow and steady, slow and steady -- that's what the numbers keep showing.
Fitting right into this last week was a report that April durable-goods orders rose just 0.1 percent, still treading water after surging in late 1993.
The trend could also be seen in final G.D.P. figures showing a 3 percent first-quarter growth rate (revised upward from 2.6), after that strong 7 percent pace at the end of last year.
Home resales did rise strongly in April, but an awful lot of people surely sensed that the glory days of low mortgage rates may be over.


Leslie Dadourian, Joseph Barmakian
Leslie Anne Dadourian, a daughter of Haig and Astrid Dadourian of Berkeley Heights, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Joseph Thomas Barmakian, a son of Levon and Bertha Barmakian of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Arshen Aivazian is to officiate at the St.
Mary Armenian Church in Livingston, N.J.
The bride, 34, is an associate at Novins, York &amp; Pentony, a law firm in Toms River, N.J.
She graduated from Skidmore College and the Southwestern University School of Law.


Nanne Puritz, Darius Bikoff
Nanne Puritz, the daughter of Dr.
Elliot M. Puritz of St.
James, L.I., and the late Ellen Puritz, was married last evening to J. Darius Bikoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bikoff of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Elliott Spar performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Puritz-Bikoff, 25, is an actress in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is a dermatologist in Smithtown, L.I., and the owner of the Rane Toy Company there.


A Non-Smoker Vs. an Airline
A LAW professor who sued Air France in 1991 because he sat among smokers despite being assigned a nonsmoking seat won his breach-of-contract suit and was awarded $500 by the court, which the airline paid at the end of March.
The case, in the Small Claims part of New York City's Civil Court, does not constitute an overwhelming precedent; the judge says her decision was based on narrow grounds.
But she followed her award with a written decision, an unusual step in Small Claims Court.
And the plaintiff, Prof.
Carl J. Mayer of the Hofstra University Law School on Long Island, and others on the antismoking ramparts believe the small claims forum provides an opening against foreign airlines whose overseas flights do not generally fall under United States smoking restrictions.
They are sometimes deaf to the pleas of travelers unable to tolerate smoke.
Neighbors Light Up
Professor Mayer's saga began in a way familiar to many nonsmokers who fly abroad.
On Aug. 1, 1990, he was returning to New York from Moscow through Paris on Air France Flight 079.
He confirmed his reservation for a nonsmoking seat with an agent.
At the gate, he again confirmed it and got a nonsmoking boarding pass for seat 34D.
Before takeoff, his testimony said, he saw passengers around him in rows 33 and 35 smoking, and they resumed after takeoff.
Passengers to his left in row 34 also started smoking.
Professor Mayer complained, and the steward said that smokers and nonsmokers had been mixed because of a computer problem.
Professor Mayer asked to be moved, but the flight was full and he remained in 34D.


QUEENS UPDATE
ROCKAWAY: What's left of the beaches along the Rockaway Peninsula, after a stormy winter, will open this weekend.
And though the sand may be sparse, Queens Borough President Claire Shulman last week offered some hope for the future: a long-sought $20 million replenishment of the Rockaway shoreline will begin early this fall.
The Army Corps of Engineers, which is overseeing the project, will put the contract out for bid next month.
The Corps will pump sand from the ocean and deposit it along the heavily eroded peninsula between Beach 20th Street and Beach 149th Street.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AUSTRALIAN NOVEL  THE WISDOM OF STONES  By Greg Matthews. HarperCollins, $23.


Tori Stuart, W. I. Richmond
Victoria Lee Stuart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan L. Stuart of Harrison, N.Y., is to be married today to William Ira Richmond, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving D. Richmond of Norwalk, Conn.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk is to officiate at the Harmonie Club in New York.
The bride, 28, is known as Tori.
She is a consultant at Executive Perspectives, management consultants in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the president of A. L. Stuart &amp; Company, a merchant banking concern in New York.
Her mother, Jacqueline B. Stuart, is an associate at Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, a New York law firm.


A 22-Year Commuter Says Bicycles Are Safe in the City
To the Editor:
As a daily bicycle commuter for some 22 years, I found your May 15 article "New York on Two Wheels" welcome except for the over-emphasis on security.
In those 22 years I have "lost" just two bikes, and one was not locked.
I lock up each day on the street with one Kryptonite lock rather than the two suggested, but I do ride a three-speed clunker, as also suggested.
The risk of theft is really no bigger than with a car.


Arafat Names 14 to Self-Rule Authority
Yasir Arafat today named 13 men and one woman as ministers to the authority that is to govern the Gaza Strip and Jericho under the self-rule accord that the Palestine Liberation Organization negotiated with Israel.
About half the appointees come from Mr.
Arafat's headquarters in Tunis.
They either took part in negotiations with Israel in the last nine months or have been the P.L.O. chairman's comrades since 1965 as he moved from Jordan to Lebanon to Tunisia.


One for Ewing, 68 for Knicks, and Life for Pacers
It was a record-setting performance by the Knicks, and all of the records were negative.
The Knicks scored 68 points this afternoon, the fewest points ever in a National Basketball Association playoff game since the institution of the 24-second clock in 1954.
And Knicks center Patrick Ewing had the worst game of his career, scoring just 1 point.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Personal income, April, percent change
0.6
0.4
Personal consumption, April, pct. change
0.4
0.1
Consumer confidence index, May
91.7
90.8
New-home sales, April, thous., annual rate
739
729
Wednesday
Purchasing managers' index, May
57.7
57.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
366
365
Leading indicators, April, percent change
0.7
0.2
Friday
Auto sales, May, millions, annual rate
7.4
7.1
Nonfarm payrolls, May, change, thousands
267
282
Unemployment rate, May, percent
6.4
6.4
Monday
Memorial Day (put that cellular phone away)
Thursday
Chain stores release May sales data


Noises Off at the Venerable Actors Studio
MENTION THE ACTORS studio, and the image is usually immediate: a shabby rehearsal room crammed with folding chairs in which the small and intense Lee Strasberg is guiding Robert De Niro or Ellen Burstyn or Al Pacino through a Method acting exercise that packs enough energy to blow a few fuses.
But that is theatrical history.
Strasberg died 12 years ago.
Since that time, his baby, the Studio, has had to make its way in the world with an often contentious group of surrogate parents hovering around it.


Airline Study Finds Cabin Air Acceptable
The reduction of fresh air in airline cabins since the mid-1980's brought complaints from passengers and airline crews who said that poor ventilation exposed them to viruses, bacteria and other contaminants, resulting in headaches, nausea, influenza and other health problems, especially after long flights.
Now a study commissioned by the airline industry has found no harmful effects from the reduction, from 100 percent fresh air pumped in every three minutes, to half fresh air and half recirculated air every six or seven minutes.
The study found that the air quality in airline cabins exceeded Federal standards for office and factory workers.


Defending Corporate Philanthropy
To the Editor:
Terrence Scanlon castigates corporations for making donations to nonprofit groups whose efforts may work against business interests and sternly warns that executives' personal political beliefs cannot override their primary responsibility to protect the shareholders' financial interest.
It apparently has not occurred to Mr.
Scanlon that supporting desirable public policies may far outweigh any short-term impact on profits and dividends.
Shareholders seem to agree: when proposals to restrict corporate donations have been submitted to proxy votes, they have generally been soundly defeated.
THOMAS T. SEMON  Fort Lee, N.J., May 9 The writer is a marketing research consultant.


Diane E. Baylor, Jeffrey S. Kuskin
Diane Elizabeth Baylor, a daughter of Renee and Kenneth Baylor of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Jeffrey Scott Kuskin, the son of Sue W. Frank of Tarrytown, N.Y., and Harold A. Kuskin of Morristown, N.J.
Rabbi Burt Siegel is to officiate at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Sandwiches Dress Up for Special Summer Occasions
THE official start of summer is several weeks away, but despite the calendar the season starts this weekend.
Cooking and entertaining lighten up, becoming easier and more informal.
This calls for sandwiches.
Of course, sandwiches are essential for picnics and quick lunches, but given adequate embellishment, they can also move to the hors d'oeuvres platter, a weekend lunch for guests or a casual supper.


The Executive Life; The Conference Rooms At the Cyberspace Inn
"I WANTED to create one of those white-wine-and-shrimp-in-the-desert schmooze gatherings," said William F. Zachmann, "where people heavily into the computer industry can gather around and swap information on an informal basis."
Mr.
Zachmann, president of Canopus Research Inc. of Duxbury, Mass., was not describing a typical executive gathering in a hotel conference room.
Instead, he was discussing the coming together of hundreds, even thousands, of computer industry technologists and executives at the Canopus Forum in cyberspace.


Leo Kuper, 85, Dies; Wrote on Genocide
Leo Kuper, a retired professor of sociology at the University of California at Los Angeles who wrote extensively on race relations and genocide, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 85.
The cause was heart disease, said a daughter, Mary Kuper.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL $850,000
126 East 93d Street
3-family attached town house; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in others; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $8,200, listed at $895,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: William B. May)
CHELSEA $735,000
133 West 17th Street
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. penthouse co-op in a loft building; elevator, exposed-brick walls, 12-ft. ceilings, skylights, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,209, 50% tax deductible, listed at $735,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Eychner/TriBeCa; Kingman Associates)
EAST MIDTOWN $515,000
415 East 37th Street
(Horizon)
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,335-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, laundry room, 2 exposures; common charge $1,183, taxes $9,528, listed at $595,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)
GREENWICH VILLAGE $810,000
70 East 10th Street
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 terraces, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,600, 49% tax deductible, listed at $895,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Eychner/Village)
UPPER EAST SIDE $310,000
2 East End Avenue (79th St.)
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,059, 52% tax deductible, listed at $300,000, 64 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)
BRONX
BAYCHESTER $215,000
3318 Seymour Avenue
2-family, 30-year-old detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 1 bedroom, 1-bath hospitality suite; taxes $1,500, listed at $225,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: ERA/ Wage Realty)
SPUYTEN DUYVIL $40,000
3671 Hudson Manor Terrace
(Manor Towers)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 675-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, dining alcove, terrace, tennis courts, Hudson River view; maintenance $575, 50% tax deductible, listed at $54,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: William G. Brody &amp; Associates)
BROOKLYN
PROSPECT HEIGHTS $284,000
568 Carlton Avenue
2-family, 3-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; renovated kitchens and baths; taxes $500, listed at $309,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)
PARK SLOPE $253,500
27 Prospect Park West
2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, entry gallery, maid's room, Prospect Park view; maintenance $1,156, 40% tax deductible, listed at $295,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)
QUEENS
FOREST HILLS $405,000
75-00 Kessel Street
2-family, 60-year-old detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, fireplace in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage; taxes $2,400, listed at $475,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Sarah Jones Realty)
REGO PARK $170,000
60-36 Weetherole Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old detached aluminum-sided house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $1,300, listed at $179,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)
STATEN ISLAND
ELTINGVILLE $245,000
25 Bayard Street
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old detached colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, full basement; taxes $2,200, listed at $269,900, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)
RANDALL MANOR $123,000
488 Castleton Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old semi-attached frame house; dining area, full basement, 1-car garage, 26- by 116-ft. lot; taxes $1,500, listed at $129,500, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)
LONG ISLAND
CORAM $122,500
25 Haliday Road
5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200, listed at $126,000, 18 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA Albo Agency; Coach Real Estate Associates)
GREAT NECK $160,000
20 Chapel Place
2-bedroom, 2-bath co-op in 29-year-old building; 40-foot living room, dining ell, indoor garage ($55 a month), walk to station; maintenance $800, listed at $185,000, 52 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty Better Homes &amp; Gardens)
ISLIP $300,000
120 Elder Road
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old waterfront Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 1-car attached garage, circular driveway, 100- by 280-foot lot; taxes $9,200, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Eric J. Ramsay Jr. Associates)
ROSLYN HEIGHTS $225,000
64 MacGregor Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300, listed at $265,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: U.S. 1 Laffey Real Estate; E.F. Realty Inc.)
NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN $146,000
5-24 River Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, taxes $4,523, listed at $169,900, 7 weeks on market (Broker: T.P. Mabey Realtors)
LOWER TOWNSHIP $40,000
129 Texas Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch-style bungalow; front porch, eat-in-kitchen, fenced yard; taxes $1,004, listed at $49,900, 39 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz Real Estate)
PENNINGTON $380,000
13 Chadwell Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; great room with fireplace, skylights, deck; taxes $8,268, listed at $385,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel Corp., Realtors)
RANDOLPH $140,750
64 Old Brookside Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old Cape Cod; oak kitchen cabinets, thermal windows and doors; taxes $2,671, listed at $149,750, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)
WESTCHESTER
BEDFORD $304,000
53 Roosevelt Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; family room, office, skylights, brick terrace, fireplace; 0.75 acre; taxes $5,809, listed at $309,000, 9 months on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; Houlihan Lawrence)
GREENBURGH $115,000
20 Terrace Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; porch, terrace, fireplace, basement, garage; taxes $3,988, listed at $132,500, 30 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff &amp; Son)
PEEKSKILL $185,000
1896 Carhart Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape colonial; porch, family room, deck, fireplace; taxes $4,690, listed at $189,500, 14 weeks on market (Brokers: Weichert Realtors; Coldwell Banker)
SCARSDALE $265,000
50 Popham Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old co-op; fireplace, dining room; maintenance $1,680, listed at $299,000, 11 weeks on market (Brokers: Julia B. Fee; Dudley D. Doernberg)
CONNECTICUT
BROOKFIELD $93,000
111 Heathewood Drive
1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo; family room, , pool, tennis courts; common charge $154, taxes $2,300. listed at $104,900, 17 weeks on market (Broker: William Raveis Real Estate)
EASTON $318,500
99 Flat Rock Road
9-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 54-year-old, wood-frame colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, 0.69-acre lot; taxes $4,211, listed at $335,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: Calaban Co.; William Raveis Real Estate)
GREENWICH $1.165 million
34 Copper Beech Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 21-year-old, brick and shingle colonial; dining room, library, family room, pool, sauna, 3 fireplaces, terrace, 2-car garage, 1.17-acre lot; taxes $7,917, listed at $1.225 million, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties Inc.; William Raveis Real Estate)
NEW MILFORD $255,000
4 Morey Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old, wood-frame farmhouse colonial; c/a, remodeled kitchen and baths, Jacuzzi, 2-car garage, 3-acre lot; taxes $3,100, listed at $259,900, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt Real Estate; R.K. Gallo)


The Titans of Tint Make Their Picks
THE titans of tint came to town this month.
Dressed in hues they describe as firethorn, cornmeal and purple haze -- or just in suits of plain old gray flannel -- the men and women of the Color Marketing Group gathered at a New York hotel for their spring ritual of secret caucuses and swatch exchanges.
Their mission: to determine which colors will be big sellers on the nation's clothing racks, showroom floors and supermarket shelves the next two years.


Prehung Doors Need Moderate Carpentry Ability
REPLACING an outside door or a window with a prehung model is seldom as difficult as it may seem.
What is needed are moderate carpentry experience -- driving nails in awkward positions, measuring with a level and tape, using a power circular saw and applying caulking -- and a helper to assist in positioning the assemblies.
Prehung doors and windows are so named because they are sold mounted in their frames.
That eliminates fitting hinges or adjusting window sashes, and also simplifies installation by reducing the job to little more than removing the old unit and its frame and nailing in the new one.


On Sunday; At St. Benedict, The World Cup Is Homecoming
AN argument can be made that it's best that the United States audience never manages to grasp the fun of soccer.
The argument would be a variation on the old joke that democracy is too good a thing to share with other people.
Present soccer as the ultimate threat to isolationism, one that summons pithier levels of nationalism than can be expressed in mere smart bombs and yellow ribbons.
It's foreign, not worth a true American sport's mega-merchandising time of day.
"I hate this game!" counter-commercials might enthuse, a la the National Basketball Association.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Little Leathers
Once a tyke has taken to quaffing apple juice from that brand-name bottle, how can he show himself to the world in the same old Care Bears T-shirt?
Never fear.
The same parents who feel closer to him because he's got a Dr Pepper label in his tiny fist can dress him up in the height of fashion as a 50's hood (or 90's banker).
Motorcycle jackets as small as size 2 slid onto the racks in 1991, and this spring, they hit their stride.
They've suddenly become widespread and acceptable.
The handkerchief-size jackets, with enough zippered pockets to hold a lifetime supply of pacifiers, have been selling in Manhattan stores faster than you can say "Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean" for about $60 apiece. (You can get them in denim and fringed leather, too.)


Anne Benefield And John Hein
The Rev.
Elinor Anne Benefield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Benefield of State College, Pa., is to be married today to John Joseph Hein, a son of Mary Hein and the late John Hein of Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Jean Benefield Pinto, the sister of the bride and a Presbyterian minister, will perform the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Dr.
Arthur Caliandro, a minister at Marble Collegiate, will take part in the Reformed Presbyterian ceremony.
The bride, 41, is known as Anne.
A Presbyterian minister, she is an associate minister at Marble Collegiate, where she is a pastoral adviser and is the director of the church school program.
She graduated from the University of Georgia, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She received a Master of Divinity degree from Princeton Theological Seminary.


Corrections
An essay on page 21 of the Travel section today, about being a magnet for hustlers, carries a misspelled byline.
The writer is Sally A. Kitt Chappell.


Wendy E. Ferber, Andrew D. Nadel
Wendy Elise Ferber, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Ferber of Pomona, N.Y., is to be married today to Andrew David Nadel, a son of Tobi and Eugene Nadel of Millwood, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Stern is to officiate at the New City (N.Y.) Jewish Center.


Streetscapes/The Mount Morris Fire Bell Tower; Stabilizing a Relic of the Early-Warning System
IT is as tough a reuse problem as any that a preservation student could expect: What do you do with a big iron frame built a century and a half ago to accommodate one or two people?
The iron frame in question is the Fire Bell Tower in Marcus Garvey Park (formerly Mount Morris Park).
The initial restoration is under way, but how to maintain it as something more than a piece of sculpture is an ambitious challenge, one taken on by a local preservation group.


Prehung Doors Need Moderate Carpentry Ability
REPLACING an outside door or a window with a prehung model is seldom as difficult as it may seem.
What is needed are moderate carpentry experience -- driving nails in awkward positions, measuring with a level and tape, using a power circular saw and applying caulking -- and a helper to assist in positioning the assemblies.
Prehung doors and windows are so named because they are sold mounted in their frames.
That eliminates fitting hinges or adjusting window sashes, and also simplifies installation by reducing the job to little more than removing the old unit and its frame and nailing in the new one.


Yanks Pull Their Power Switch in 9th and 10th Innings to Beat Royals
Even when the occasional flaw begins to become an issue, the Yankees find a way to leave a ball park with smiles on their faces.
Just when the inconsistency of Melido Perez seemed certain to lead to his third defeat in the last four decisions, the Yankees were rescued by unlikely sources for the second consecutive night in a 5-3, 10-inning victory over the Royals tonight.
Daryl Boston's second home run in as many nights became the difference in another Yankee victory.
His two-run homer tonight, off reliever Jeff Montgomery, tied the score with one out in the ninth.
An inning later, Jim Leyritz, who temporarily became the regular catcher because of injuries to Mike Stanley and Matt Nokes, hit his ninth home run of the season to give the Yankees the lead.


Why I Am Still Alive Today
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE YOUR MOTHER By Gayle Feldman. 256 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $23.


Rebuilding the Canal St. Station (Unobtrusively)
The $44 million rehabilitation of the East Side Canal Street subway station, one of the city's largest, began earlier this month, and so far the Transit Authority is doing its best to minimize disruption in the busy neighborhood.
The station, which extends from Centre Street to Broadway, is made up of four stations that were linked together in the early 1940's.
It serves Chinatown, Little Italy, Soho, TriBeCa and the courts.
Charles Seton, a spokesman for the Transit Authority, said that during construction full service would be maintained on the subway lines that stop there -- the No. 6, the N, R, J, M and Z.


Boston's Private Gardens Briefly Open Their Doors to the Public
Down the hill, in the Public Garden, the swan boats navigate a small pond shaded by weeping willows, just as they have for 117 years.
Up the slope of Beacon Hill all the gardens are private, even secret, blossoming behind rows of bow-front town houses that line the redbrick sidewalks.
These gardens are linked by a web of back alleys that are wide enough for a cow and tall enough for a boy with a basket on his head, a standard imposed by a city ordinance from the 1830's.
Once a year only, this year on May 19, the wrought-iron gates to these serpentine passages are opened to the public for the "Hidden Gardens of Beacon Hill" tour.


May 22-28: Field Day for Press; Britain's 'Killer Bug' Succumbs to the Truth
The headline from London's Evening Standard last week had homeward commuters fumbling for pocket change: "Mystery Bug Kills Again." A rival tabloid's first-person account was even more riveting: "Killer Bug Ate My Face."
But if there was an epidemic sweeping Britain last week, it was more rhetorical than medical.
Health officials acknowledged that 10 people have died since the first of the year from a deadly variant of group A streptococcus, usually associated with sore throats.
The mutant bacterium, a painful and often fatal infection, invades and destroys living fat, skin and muscle tissue, often following invasive surgery or deep wounds.
As many as 450 deaths a year in the United States are blamed on the infection; in Britain the annual death toll runs in the dozens.


Close Encounters of the Absurd Kind?
To the Editor:
James S. Gordon's review of John E. Mack's "Abduction: Human Encounters With Aliens" (May 1) is as signal a failure in assessing the book as it is apparently a fine success in describing it. (At once, let me admit that I have not yet read Dr. Mack's work, but I must also say at the start that I know the book's subject fairly well. I have been a student of U.F.O.'s for more than 40 years.)


A Blind Life on the Stage
PREVIEWS will start on Saturday for "Flip Side," a musical revue staged by the Theater for the Blind and created by the company's writing workshop.
In an effort to counteract Hollywood images of the blind, the revue includes serious and comedic sketches of the life of the blind including dating, parenthood and guide dogs as well as a game of blind "Jeopardy." Three of the six actors are blind.
The theater's audiences include both blind and sighted people; biscuits are provided for guide dogs.
Ike Schambelan, the director of the revue and founder of the troupe, said the company had evolved from recording plays for the blind to staging standards like Shakespeare to performing works that were written specifically for the blind.


May 22-28; They Pursued It With Hubble and Hope
Out of the mind of an Einstein, supported by accumulating evidence, there emerged the incredible concept of black holes.
These are places in the universe where gravity is so powerful that nothing, not even light, can escape and ordinary laws of time and space do not apply.
Black holes are by definition invisible, and for decades astronomers had struggled to establish their existence at the centers of many galaxies by observing the effect of their astonishing mass on surrounding stars and other matter.
Even though each new clue fell just short of the required proof, scientists grew more certain of the reality of black holes.
Their behavior recalled lines from "The Hunting of the Snark" by Lewis Carroll:


Where Does Dinner Come From?
DECADES ago, the celebrated French anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss, in his influential study "The Raw and the Cooked," examined the preparation of food to describe the structural levels of pre-modern societies.
After all, to cook food in a pot requires more mastery over the materials of nature than holding it on a stick over a fire, because you have to know how to make a fireproof pot.
In short, cooking tells you where a society is on the slowly ascending hill of technology and complexity.
And so, along came the idea of deconstructing an haute-cuisine meal at a New York restaurant -- pulling it apart morsel by morsel to figure out what is involved in how many far-flung places so that, say, some tuna tartare flavored with mustard oil, extra virgin olive oil, cayenne pepper and mustard seeds, topped with some spheroids of Ossetra caviar and balanced on a latticework of crispy potato could end up on a plate in Manhattan.


Health Law Would Help Stony Brook
It is clear from reading "Hospitals Attacking Stony Brook on Care Plan"  [ April 24 ]  that there is confusion about both the scope and intent of the proposed flexibility legislation.
This bill does not give the three State University of New York hospitals, including Stony Brook, any extraordinary powers.
In fact, the opposite is true.
The fact is, the delivery of health-care services throughout the country is changing dramatically.
This proposed legislation will allow the same kind of power, now available to all other public and private hospitals in New York State and across the nation, to Stony Brook and the other State University of New York hospitals.


David R. Neiblum, Laura K. Hankin
Laura Kate Hankin, the daughter of Drs.
Carole and Joseph Hankin of Purchase, N.Y., is to be married today to Dr.
David Ross Neiblum, a son of Lillian and Henry Neiblum of Cranbury, N.J.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom is to perform the ceremony at Oheka Castle in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
The bride, 26, is the acting director of the civil rights and race relations project at the New York Civil Rights Coalition.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in public policy from Duke University.
Her father is the president of Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.
Her mother is the Superintendent of Schools for the Syosset (L.I.) Central School District.


Women's Dreams, Men's Desires
IN a significant claim to enchantment, Theater Works in Hartford is producing "The Swan," a contemporary fable by Elizabeth Egloff about a woman's craziest dream come true.
The story goes something like this: Dora Hand, a nurse, is awakened by croaking noises outside her decrepit house in Nebraska.
She opens the door and screams.
In the next scene, a laundry basket, previously uninhabited, is overstuffed with feathers.
Kevin, her married lover who is a milkman, comes in and puts milk into a refrigerator that has only pizza boxes in it.
Dora's friend, Lillian, calls.
Suddenly, out of the feathered mass, a naked man appears.
"Lillian, I'll call you back," Dora says in a hurry.
Comedy writers take note: This is how to create a funny line.


Manager's Profile; Alexander S. Macmillan 3d
Fund: Columbia Growth, $585 million in assets.
Manager since 1992. (Sponsor: Columbia Management Company, Portland, Ore.)
Born: Nov. 15, 1952; Boston.


Solzhenitsyn Attacks Gorbachev and New 'Reforms'
Showing that 20 years of exile had only deepened his thunder, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn used his first news conference back on Russian soil today to fire bolts at Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Westernizing reformers, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky and, above all, unrepentant Communist "oppressors and executioners."
Like a prophet of old emerging from long seclusion to castigate a fallen world, the 75-year-old writer held forth with passion and eloquence for almost two hours on Russia's need for repentance and reconciliation, on the errors of its post-Communist course, on the sufferings of the Russian nation.


Hold the Burgers. Now Hold the Golden Arches Too.
If some residents of Bay Ridge have their way, the golden arches will not rise in their neighborhood.
McDonald's has been thinking about putting a restaurant at the corner of Marine and Fourth Avenues, and local opponents have organized a petition drive and a letter-writing campaign to encourage the company to forget the idea.
"We feel it's not going to fit in with the character of the neighborhood," said Tobias Russo, who has led the campaign.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Return of the Checker Cab, With a $60 Fare
Remember the days of the Checker cab when a family of five fit in the back with ease?
Well, now they're back, sort of.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Room Rates Rising At Las Vegas Hotels
In the recent past, when Las Vegas was synonymous with gambling, low room rates in the plush hotels and the free drinks in the hotels' casinos were intended to keep visitors at the gaming tables.
That's where the revenue from patrons' losses far exceeded profits from other aspects of hotel operation.
But as Las Vegas's image changes from a gambling town to a family resort, room rates are going up.
Among the visitors affected are those taking package trips with tour operators who were previously able to obtain blocks of rooms at extremely low rates.
Now that the family market is expanding, major hotels are raising the rates charged to wholesalers in hopes of reclaiming some of the otherwise pre-sold rooms and offering them to families willing to pay rack rates, the rates quoted over the telephone to individual travelers.
For example, a couple flying from the East Coast to Las Vegas on a package that included air fare, transfers and accommodations at the MGM Grand paid $928 last month, said Christopher DeSanto, vice president of Santo Tours of Buffalo.
That same package is expected to cost about $975 in September. (Next month, however, it will be $906, largely because of lower demand in the summer. Before the room rate increase, though, the June package would have been $798.) Another tour operator, Ray Daley, executive vice president of Apple Vacations East of Newtown Square, Pa., said he expected increases of $60 to $80 a couple for four-night packages from the East Coast in the fall.
Earlier this month, a package that included air fare and accommodations at Excalibur was $710.


The Children? Or the Cub?
It sounds like the opening of a movie, the background action while the credits are unrolling.
A woman is running alone through the foothills of the Sierra Nevada.
The sound track is silent but for the crunch of her feet on the dry grass and the rasp of her hard breathing.
Suddenly, from out of nowhere, a mountain lion springs and pinions her to the ground.
A brief struggle, and she is dead.
Only it isn't a movie.
This scene is real, and was played out last month, when a woman named Barbara Schoener went out for a seven-mile run and became the first person killed by a mountain lion in California since 1909.
A week later, hunters killed the lion; its 7-week-old cub, all floppy feet and sweet face and primal innocence, got a television spot.
It also got $21,000, most of it a pledge from a nonprofit organization of a nearby zoo, which said it would use the money to improve a habitat for the cub's use.
Mrs.
Schoener's two small children, for whom a trust fund was established (she was the family's main support), did not do even half as well.


Step Up, Folks! Check It Out! Nationhood!
FRANK MANKIEWICZ SAYS THE HAZY nature of the relationship between Washington, D.C., and reality dawned on him on June 5, 1980.
"Jimmy Carter was giving the Medal of Freedom -- this is the country's highest civilian honor -- to John Wayne," Mr.
Mankiewicz, the former Democratic strategist, recalled not long ago, "and the citation read that he was getting the medal because he was a great American. And I thought to myself: Wait a minute! John Wayne wasn't a great American. He wasn't even a great actor. He just played great Americans."


Political Notes; Vallone Negotiates Before Negotiating
With a Republican in the Mayor's chair, City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone relishes the mantle of No. 1 Democrat in New York City.
He buttressed his claim last week on a trip to Washington to lobby for Federal aid to restore some of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed budget cuts, which could undercut the Mayor.
After a meeting with Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem, the dean of the state delegation, and other Democrats, Mr.
Vallone came away with a pledge that the Council could count on $75 million more in new Federal aid than the $125 million Mr.
Giuliani has assumed.
The aid would cover a range of programs.


Corrections
An article on page 28 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Helen Wagner, a veteran soap opera actress, misspells the surname of her husband and manager.
He is Bob Willey, not Willie.


Myanmar
To the Editor: I have just returned from Myanmar and can confirm all that was written in your article with one exception, concerning the tyrannical government.
I must add that if you go to Myanmar, be prepared for frequent searches and interrogations.
In 11 days there, I was stopped twice at military checkpoints, with my driver, where we were searched and questioned.
I was also visited at my hotel by the local police who asked "Why are you going to Pagan?" as if I was off to spy on some state secret.
Finally inside a temple at Pagan, I was confronted by a lone, young soldier at AK-47 gunpoint.
He demanded to see what was inside of my belt pouch.
After my passport and traveler's checks were shown, he strutted away bolting his weapon in mock fire toward the ceiling.
Burma was a great adventure but its people are suffering at the hands of a ruthless military dictatorship.
CARL ROSENSTEIN  New York, N.Y.
Mr.
Shenon responds: As to Ms.
Mirante's complaints, I think that the article's description of the Myanmar Government and the situation faced by foreign travelers could not have been much blunter: "It remains one of the most oppressive regimes in Asia, with a human-rights record that would be charitably described as dismal. Some travelers still refuse to visit because they do not want their money to finish up lining the pockets of the men in khaki."
As to Mr.
Rosenstein's experiences, they sound frightening, but also uncommon.
Burmese soldiers and police officers are known to look on foreigners with suspicion, if only because they are still a novelty in most of the country.


Truth, Sex and Advertising
To the Editor:
Only in The New York Times, which has lately assigned itself the task of leading the charge for political correctness, could such silliness masquerading as scholarship like Jean Kilbourne's article ("Gender Bender Ads: Same Old Sexism," Viewpoints, May 15) find a receptive home.
As a man, I do not pretend to know what women talk about when they gather.
Such a limitation does not inhibit Ms.
Kilbourne, who suggests that men often gather to ogle women's bodies and that a man trying to impress other men is more likely to boast about his mate's sexual capacity than about her status. (Very simply put, "men" certainly do not gather to ogle women's bodies, and men certainly do not talk about their mates' genitals.)


Jennifer Loring Cook and Rudy Vavra
Jennifer Loring Cook, an editor at Glamour magazine, was the prom queen of the class of 1969 at Hastings High School in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She wore pleated skirts and sweet sweaters and was almost always with her boyfriend, which seriously disappointed Rudy Vavra, one of the shyer members of the class of '69, who had always admired her from afar.
Five years ago, the two met at their 20th high school reunion.
"We literally arrived at the front door at the same time," said Mr.
Vavra, a painter, who is now 43 and lives in TriBeCa.
"I put my hand on the doorknob and said, 'Hi, I'm Rudy Vavra,' and Jenny said, 'Who?' "


INSIDE
From Factories to Wal-Mart
Giuliani officials are considering zoning changes to encourage discount retailers and warehouse stores to locate on underused industrial land in New York City.
Page 25.
Palestinian Leaders Named
Yasir Arafat named 14 members for the governing authority for the Gaza Strip and Jericho, including some well-known residents.
Page 12.
Pacers Shut Down Knicks
Indiana beat New York, 88-68.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the game ended.)


Hidden Jewel
RESTAURANT RAPHAEL ** (212) 582-8993; 33 West 54th Street; $$$; all major cards An enchanting garden and superior country-French fare make this one of midtown's hidden jewels.
Appetizers include oxtail and foie gras terrine with a salsify salad; savoy cabbage stuffed with crab and dried tomatoes, and lamb and eggplant confit with warm goat cheese.
Among entrees, lamb filet is roasted and served with basil mashed potatoes and warm eggplant salad; hanger steak is served with a shallot sauce and sauteed potatoes, and faintly smoked red snapper is sauteed and accompanied by a zucchini gratin. (Review: 12/3/93 )


Hold the Burgers. Now Hold the Golden Arches Too.
If some residents of Bay Ridge have their way, the golden arches will not rise in their neighborhood.
McDonald's has been thinking about putting a restaurant at the corner of Marine and Fourth Avenues, and local opponents have organized a petition drive and a letter-writing campaign to encourage the company to forget the idea.
"We feel it's not going to fit in with the character of the neighborhood," said Tobias Russo, who has led the campaign.


Conservatives May Break With G.O.P.
Just days after state Republicans ended their convention with euphoric promises to join Conservatives against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a group of Conservative Party leaders are threatening to torpedo unity by preventing the Republicans' endorsed gubernatorial candidate, George E. Pataki, from receiving their party's nomination.
Last Wednesday, many Republican leaders felt they had assured their statewide ticket of receiving the Conservative Party line in November by making Herbert London, a college professor who is a Conservative Party favorite, the Republican candidate for State Comptroller.


Evening Hours; Saving a Landmark
A benefit for the Church of the Heavenly Rest, May 18.


Profile; Even in a 'Big Tent,' Little Insults, Little Compromises
WHEN Bruce A. Lehman swore before God and his country to uphold the laws of the land, his mother was holding the Bible.
Nothing extraordinary about that.
But then, in a paneled sanctum of the Commerce Department, with a military color guard standing by, Mr.
Lehman introduced to the assembled officials and well-wishers not only his mother and sister but also his male partner of 15 years, their 8-year-old child, and her lesbian mother, with whom Mr.
Lehman and his companion share child-rearing duties.


Way Stations On Greenway Trail
To the Editor:
On your "Helping Way Stations on New York's Greenway Trail" on April 10, it pays to know what the game is and the players.
The first thing to know is that the railroad is the player here.
The railroad has cut the people of New York from its river.
It was built along the east bank of the Hudson, which gives the riders (the few riders) a good view of the water.
But it also means that north of New York City, from the city to Albany 150 miles north, the people are for the most part cut off from their river.
From the City of Hudson to Albany, about 45 miles, there isn't a public boat launch on the east bank of the Hudson.


Melissa Uhlig, Wesley Wright 3d
Melissa Uhlig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin R. Uhlig Jr. of Middletown, R.I., was married yesterday to Wesley Wright 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wesley Wright Jr. of Richmond.
The Rev.
Alan Neale performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Columba's Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Wright, 26, was until recently a public-affairs intern at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Spike Me a River
While there have been no reports of fishermen reeling in shaky, wide-eyed catfish, the United States Geological Survey has found caffeine in the Mississippi River.
Scientists sampled the whole river, using the equal-transit-rate-equal-width-increment-depth-integration method (science's version of dipping a cup over the side of the boat).
They found that Minneapolis-St.
Paul and St.
Louis had the highest levels -- around 0.04 micrograms per liter.


Andrea S. Morse, Gregory Skolozdra
Andrea Susanne Morse and Gregory Paul Skolozdra, partners in Morse &amp; Skolozdra, a law firm in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Judith T. Baumer, an Episcopal minister, and the Rev.
Leo Goldade, a Ukrainian Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Skolozdra graduated from the University of Virginia and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Norman C. Morse of Silver Lake, S.I.


Would You Baptize an Extraterrestrial?
The astronomer George Coyne takes a seat in an empty bedroom in his Tucson house.
He's got that casual astronomer look -- khaki shorts and a sweatshirt declaring "Aspen Center for Physics." He adjusts his square black glasses as he considers my question: "When you look through a telescope, do you see cold gases commingling indifferently or a coherent universe governed by a loving God?"
For any other scientist, this question is a freebie.
But Coyne is not just a respected astronomer with a doctorate from Georgetown, who publishes his work in Nature and can call Stephen Hawking a friend.


Factory Areas May Be Sites Of Superstores
Attempting to spur redevelopment of thousands of acres of abandoned and underused industrial land in New York City, top city officials are proposing to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani that the city relax restrictions in manufacturing areas to encourage the entry of the huge specialized discount retailers and warehouse stores so popular in the suburbs.
"We have to have a more fluid land-use policy," said Clay W. Lifflander, president of the City Economic Development Corporation, a nonprofit arm of the city government responsible for attracting and retaining business in New York.
"Large retail stores are an example of what we need to be more open to."


Attacks Against Gays Raise Fears
It was about 2:30 A.M.; the bartender had just locked up the Food Bar on Eighth Avenue and 18th Street and was walking home.
Then, says Pat Rogers, owner of the Food Bar, three teen-agers followed the bartender and began calling him "faggot." The teen-agers "pummeled his head and face," Mr.
Rogers said, "breaking his nose in two places."
That was a month ago.
Since then, there have been five other anti-gay incidents in the neighborhood, according to the Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project.
Alarmed over these incidents, Chelsea merchants and other community leaders have held two meetings with officials of the 10th Precinct to demand more patrols.


Formal or Unruly, Blossoms in a Pot
THIS is the last call to set out young plants in containers, those redwood tubs, window boxes, barrels, large clay pots, plastic rectangles or whatever that can contain enough soil so plants thrive.
If these sorts of showpieces have not been put together, then by all means this is the weekend to finish.
Besides, being creative with plant combinations can be fun.
Weather should be no problem any longer.
At least the snows and hard freezes have gone and the rainfall that does come is most welcome.
So is the sunshine and longer days to be outside.


Alicia C. Hesse, Richard Cleary
Alicia Catherine Hesse, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hesse of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Richard Edward Cleary, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard V. Cleary of Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
Ledlie Laughlin performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in Florence.
The bride, 25, was until recently a fund-raiser for the American Heart Association of Greater Boston in Framingham, Mass.
She graduated from Connecticut College.


Andrea Halliwell, Thomas Lynch
Andrea Christine Halliwell, the daughter of Nancy Halliwell-Carnie of Boise, Idaho, and Dr.
William H. Halliwell of Boonton, N.J., is to be married today to Thomas Harrison Lynch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Lynch of Fairport, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Bourcy is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Loretto Chapel in Santa Fe, N.M.
The couple graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
The bride, 26, received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is an assistant manager of field sales and marketing at American Express in New York.
Her father is the senior director in the pathology department at Schering Plough Pharmaceuticals in Lafayette, N.J.
Her mother is a real estate agent at Richard B. Smith in Boise.


A Greenwich Cafe Comes Into Its Own
THE third incarnation of the cafe-restaurant-patisserie called Versailles in Greenwich has finally got it right.
The improvements seem attributable to a new manager-sommelier, Paul Varni, from Lafayette and JoJo's in Manhattan, and a new chef, David Raymer, from Gotham Bar and Grill and Vince &amp; Eddie's, also in Manhattan.
The dinner menu has been given a welcome punch of modern French styling (the lunch menu has yet to be revised) while keeping the prices moderate.
The wine list, too, has been thoughtfully revised, expanded, clarified and upgraded (while keeping prices affordable) with most wines from France and California priced between $22 and $30.


The Sum of the Parts
A brief look at the way this season's swimwear stacks up.
The formula for a great suit: One part engineering and two parts architecture.


Noises Off at the Venerable Actors Studio
MENTION THE ACTORS studio, and the image is usually immediate: a shabby rehearsal room crammed with folding chairs in which the small and intense Lee Strasberg is guiding Robert De Niro or Ellen Burstyn or Al Pacino through a Method acting exercise that packs enough energy to blow a few fuses.
But that is theatrical history.
Strasberg died 12 years ago.
Since that time, his baby, the Studio, has had to make its way in the world with an often contentious group of surrogate parents hovering around it.


There Is Another Side To Airport Garage Deal
I must respond to your April 24 article on the Westchester County Airport parking garage  [ "1,100-Car Airport Parking Garage to Open Early: Repeat, Early" ] .
When Louis Cappelli said, "We will just eat" $300,000 because he was paying extra for overtime work, your reporter might have inquired as to why this developer was so happy to lose $300,000.
To say that such a loss is outweighed by other less tangible gains, such as "this job is good for our track record," belies the fact that most business people would not voluntarily choose to lose $300,000 when no one was asking them to take such a loss.


Weakened Hulls Pose Questions About Safety
A century ago, when sailing vessels were made largely of wood, sailors watched out for leaks.
But aboard modern sailboats, most of which are built of synthetics and plastics, crews face a more insidious threat -- weakened hulls that start flexing like the sides of a child's swimming pool.
Most sailors on the 14 boats in the 32,000-mile Whitbread Round the World Race have experienced this phenomenon with varying degrees of fear and loathing.


Keep Down the 'Joyful Noise'?
In the six months since the Kingsboro Temple of the Seventh-day Adventist Church began holding services, the congregation has had a rocky relationship with some of its neighbors on its quiet Park Slope street.
Residents first complained to Community Board 6 that the church's sign was too large.
Then they grumbled that parishioners were double-parking their cars on Seventh Street between Sixth and Seventh Avenues.


Addiction Programs Opening Up For Disabled
OVER the last 10 years, as increasing numbers of the disabled have sought care for drug and alcohol addiction, almost no treatment programs have accepted them.
Now, under pressure from rights advocates, the programs are opening up, albeit slowly.
Treatment agencies are no longer routinely rejecting people with disabilities, and they are improving coordination with other agencies that deal with the disabled.


Clinton Aides' Copter Bill Raised to $13,000
The Presidential helicopter that flew White House officials to and from a golf course last week and another that flew nearby were in use for a total of more than five hours at a cost of $13,129.66, the White House said today.
In releasing a Marine Corps accounting of the trip, which forced the resignation of a senior aide to President Clinton, the White House issued a written statement reiterating that the Government would be reimbursed for the full bill.


Sculptural Works That Defy the Limitations of Definition
TOM DOYLE, a past master at combining sections of tree trunks with beams transformed into undulating limbs, seems very much at home in the Quietude Garden Gallery, at 24 Fern Road in East Brunswick.
In the same setting, however, Elaine Lorenz looks ill at ease with her concrete forms that double as planters.
Then, in Jersey City, there is Mary Ann Unger, who has converted the Trans Hudson Gallery into a vault by way of concrete shapes that could be the swaddled remains of giants.
The term "sculpture" is nothing if not elastic.


For Jerome Robbins, a 'Siege by Terpsichore'
"ONE HAS FEELINGS ABOUT mortality at odd moments," Jerome Robbins said the other day.
At 75, American ballet's premier choreographer was ostensibly speaking about himself and why he had declined an offer from the Paris Opera Ballet to create a new work in 1996.
He chose, instead, a more immediate project: the new piece he has just choreographed for the School of American Ballet.
But, he made clear, he was also talking here about mortality as the theme of his 1988 ballet, "Ives, Songs."
The work was the last by Mr.
Robbins for the New York City Ballet, and it had all the resonance of a farewell.
In December 1989, Mr.
Robbins resigned as the company's co-artistic director, a post he had held with Peter Martins since 1983.
In the spring of 1990, the City Ballet honored him with a festival of his ballets.
Then, although he still looked in on rehearsals of his ballets, he went off to work on other ventures, including an unfinished experimental theater piece.


Dominic Bianchi, Alexandra Verveer
Alexandra Verveer, a daughter of Philip and Melanne Verveer of Washington, was married there yesterday to Dominic Lee Bianchi, the son of Marka Bianchi of Rockford, Ill., and Rudolph Bianchi of Boulder, Colo.
The Rev.
Paul Cioffi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Georgetown.
Ms.
Verveer, 24, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Northwestern University and is to receive a law degree from Georgetown University tomorrow.
Her mother is the deputy chief of staff to Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The bride's father is a partner in the Washington office of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.


Shakespeare Meets Emma Lazarus
THE PRINCE OF WEST END AVENUE By Alan Isler. 246 pp.
Bridgehampton, L.I.: Bridge Works Publishing Company. $19.95.


Saving the Children, to a Boom-Chicka Beat
SURVIVING with style has always been Johnny Colon's signature beat, as insistent as the driving salsa rhythms of his band, the quarrels with politicians, the scrabbling for money to keep his East Harlem Music School alive these past 26 years, as insistent as the belief that melody and harmony are keys to the heart of the city.
He learned that from his mother.


Not Your Average Picket Line


In His Brother's Shadow
SHOT IN THE HEART By Mikal Gilmore. Illustrated. 403 pp. New York: Doubleday. $24.95.


Ban on Baseball Caps A Sign of Courtesy
In "Baseball Caps and First Amendment"  [ "Letters to the Editor," April 24 ]  Donald Parker stated that the Mineola Middle School principal, Kenneth Handler, is usurping students' rights protected by the First Amendment by forbidding children to wear baseball caps while attending classes and assembling in the school building.
As a mother of two Mineola Middle School children I applaud Mr.
Handler's stand on the issue of baseball caps, since it reinforces my own feelings on this matter.
Parents and school officials, be they principals or teachers, are within their rights and authority to expect of the children in their care the proper code of dress and politeness that is due them.


Commercial Property/Lower Manhattan BID; An 'Engine for Economic Improvement' Downtown
IT'S finally happened: Downtown Manhattan's landlords have grouped into a Business Improvement District.
Armed with a budget of $8.6 million and scheduled to start operating on Jan. 1, the new BID will try to accomplish as a group what neither individual landlords nor city officials nor residents have been able to do: Revive the flagging fortunes of an area that has been singularly resistant to economic recovery.


F.Y.I.
Coffee Break?
Q.
Although I believe I have figured out many of our city's oddities, one mystery remains: what happens when hot dog vendors and the like need to take a break?
Must they go the whole day without going to the bathroom or using the phone?


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
FINALLY FILLED: Another sign of life in Union Square.
The landmark building at 33 East 17th Street, which has stood vacant for 15 years, has been leased to a joint venture between Related Companies and The Carlisle Group . . .
OBSTACLE: The East River Esplanade between 68th and 72d Streets is being closed more often than predicted as a result of hospital construction, sometimes two to three days at a time . . .
FINALLY HERE: The new Cherokee post office will open Monday, June 6, on York Avenue near 79th Street, at twice the size of the old station . . .
CLUBHOUSE ROW: New neighbor for the Harvard, Yale, Cornell and New York Yacht Clubs on 44th Street: The Penn Club, at 30 West.


Randi Fishbein, Joshua Grimes
Randi Beth Fishbein, a daughter of Florence and Dr.
Sidney Fishbein of Penn Valley, Pa., is to be married today to Joshua Lind Grimes, a son of Miriam and Paul Grimes of Glenside, Pa., and New York.
Rabbi Frederic Kazan is to perform the ceremony at Temple Adath Israel of the Main Line in Merion, Pa.
Ms.
Fishbein, 26, is a human resources administrator at the Strategic Management Group, a management development company in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father, who is retired, was a physician in family practice in Philadelphia.


Puns on 'Rock,' Fine, but Beware of Bamm-Bamm
The Flintstones  John Goodman, Rick Moranis, Elizabeth Perkins, Rosie O'Donnell PG 98 minutes


Choose Integration Or Disintegration
To the Editor:
Racial integration is an ideal embraced by most Americans.
Like other ideals, it is honored in the abstract more than in daily living.
African-Americans continue to embrace the ideal, despite some bitterness over the dream's being deferred.
As a black woman, I did my doctoral dissertation on the residential choices of black families and the quality of their lives.
My research and recent studies in several disciplines that I have read convince me that people of color continue to associate quality living with neighborhoods, schools and civic involvement that attracts people of all races.


Caroline Cotter, Thomas Grogan
Caroline Marie Cotter, a daughter of Jeanette and Nicholas J. Cotter of Lindenhurst, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas William Grogan, a son of Ellen Grogan of Massapequa, L.I., and the late Richard A. Grogan.
The Rev.
Zachary Callahan performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Lindenhurst.
Mrs.
Grogan, 31, is an advertising contracts representative at The New York Times.
She graduated magna cum laude from Molloy College.
Her father retired as a sales manager for the RCA Service Company in Farmingdale, L.I.


Start of an Annual Summer Job


E. J. Kahn Jr., 77, Writer for The New Yorker
E.
J.
Kahn Jr., who used the globe and its peoples and landscapes as canvases for his voluminous writings as a staff writer for The New Yorker magazine since 1937, died yesterday afternoon in Holyoke Hospital, Holyoke, Mass.
Mr.
Kahn, who lived in Manhattan and Truro, Mass., was 77.
The death was caused by injuries suffered on Friday in an auto accident between a car in which Mr.
Kahn was riding and a truck, said his son Joseph P. Kahn.


The Oldest Community Garden Is Bulldozed


County Creates Militia To Defend Gun Rights
Gun control has never been the most popular of concepts in the Florida Panhandle, and Santa Rosa County is no exception to that rule.
So to protest what they see as recent encroachments by the Federal Government on a citizen's right to bear arms, the county government here has established a militia and made every able-bodied man, woman and child a member.
The action has been ridiculed by gun-control groups, which say the county measure is based on an erroneous reading of the Constitution.


A Reminder of Jim Crow
After reading an article in The City about dating ("Desperately Seeking Someone?" published on Feb. 13), a woman called one of the dating services mentioned.
In a letter to the service, the woman, who asked that her name not be used, described that telephone call and her reactions to it.
I am the African-American woman who called your service recently, only to have you blow me off.
I am writing because it touched a nerve and managed to conjure up for me old feelings of having been brushed off similarly growing up down South in Arkansas, and even now, just living from day to day.


Not Your Average Picket Line


Vancouver's Diverse Dining
VANCOUVER, the pristine city-on-the-bay that is considered one step below heaven by the environmentally conscious, is similarly reaching elevated heights with food.
Always considered a culinary country cousin to Seattle, about 150 miles to the south, this thriving port city of nearly half a million residents now offers ample opportunities for visitors to sample Northwest cooking at its best.
What is Northwest cooking, anyway?
Ask three chefs and you will likely get three answers.
Fundamentally, it is based on indigenous products like salmon, sea scallops, Dungeness crab, oysters, wild mushrooms and game.
And the vast influx of Chinese and other Asians in the past decade has added a bright new thread to the region's gastronomic quilt.


Amy M. Weiss, Richard J. Land
Amy Maxine Weiss, a human resources manager at Coopers &amp; Lybrand Consulting in New York, is to be married today to Richard Jeffrey Land, an equity and options trader for Blackhawk Ltd. in New York.
Rabbi Gerald I. Weider is to officiate at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
Weiss, 30, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Marilyn and Aron Weiss of Brooklyn.
Her father is a professor of business and finance at the College of Staten Island.
Her mother is the executive assistant to the director of the Studio in a School Association, a nonprofit organization that brings art programs to New York public schools.


Kathleen Lynch, Gregory Cartine
Kathleen Marie Lynch, a daughter of Mary and Peter Lynch of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Gregory Leopold Cartine, a son of Miriam and Stanley Cartine of West Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Denis M. Matthews is to officiate at the St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn.


Sandwiches Dress Up for Special Summer Occasions
THE official start of summer is several weeks away, but despite the calendar the season starts this weekend.
Cooking and entertaining lighten up, becoming easier and more informal.
This calls for sandwiches.
Of course, sandwiches are essential for picnics and quick lunches, but given adequate embellishment, they can also move to the hors d'oeuvres platter, a weekend lunch for guests or a casual supper.


Traffic Jams or Easy Riding? Two Views
With two warring traffic studies in hand, the Bureau of Standards and Appeals is about to rule on a major issue for the Upper West Side: whether to allow a 117,000-square-foot gym to open in the huge cluster of development at Lincoln Square.
One study, commissioned by the club's developers, Reebok and Spectrum Sports Clubs, found that the gym, at Columbus Avenue and 68th Street, would not create a noticeable difference in automobile and pedestrian traffic in the area.


Fugitive Killers Hunted in New York City
The police searched New York City yesterday for two men, both convicted killers, who escaped from an Orange County psychiatric hospital by taking a hostage at gunpoint and drove to the South Bronx on Friday night, the authorities said.
The men, who released their hostage unharmed near Yankee Stadium and fled on foot, once lived in the city and have relatives here, said Donald Look, a senior investigator for the state police.
The men have been linked to several killings during the last 30 years, he said.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Hole-In-One Lifts Corning Classic Leader  Nancy Ramsbottom had a hole-in-one yesterday as she emerged from the third round of the Corning Classic with a two-stroke advantage.
Ramsbottom, who has not won on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour in 10 years, holed a 7-wood on the par-three, 186-yard third hole at the Corning (N.Y.) Country Club.
The ball landed about 15 feet from the pin and rolled in the cup.
Ramsbottom shot a one-under 71 for a 54-hole total of 206.
Stephanie Farwig and Pat Bradley were tied for second. (AP) Record-Setting Simpson Ahead: Scott Simpson will take a four-stroke lead into today's final round of the Southwestern Bell Colonial in Fort Worth.
Simpson, playing almost flawless golf, put together a bogey-free, six-under-par 64 to match the largest 54-hole lead of the season on the PGA Tour.
His 195 total was 15 under par.
Gary Hallberg, with a third-round 65, was second. (AP) Late Surge by Trevino Earns Seniors Edge: Lee Trevino birdied two of the last three holes in a three-under-par 67 and held a one-stroke lead after two rounds of the Bell Atlantic Classic in Malvern, Pa.
Tommy Aaron and Jim Dent shared second place. (AP) AUTO RACING Formula One Driver Crashes in Spain  As drivers, team officials and the sport's governing body continued to discuss new Formula One safety measures, a driver crashed at the Spanish Grand Prix yesterday in Barcelona, Spain.
Andrea Montermini of Italy crashed during practice, fracturing bones in both feet.
Montermini, 29, was in stable condition.
Doctors said an operation on Montermini's left foot might be necessary. (AP) HORSE RACING Cam's Card Shark Wins N.J.
Classic  Cam's Card Shark continued his winning ways last night as the undefeated 3-year-old pacing colt rolled to an impressive victory in the New Jersey Classic at the Meadowlands.
The favorite, driven by John Campbell, won in 1:51 and paid $2.80 to win.
Cam's Card Shark, who has won all seven races this season, finished 1 3/4 lengths ahead of Pacific Rocket.
Cam Terrific was third. (AP)


A Unique Resonance
To the Editor:
The fact that "Chant" has soared to first and fifth places on the classical and pop charts, respectively, clearly owes a great deal to the strategy of Angel's president, Steven Murphy  [ "A Hit 1,000 Years in the Making," May 8 ] .
But simply calling it "Chant" in the manner of a pop album and designing a cover with a young-audience appeal tells only part of the story.
Nor does it suffice to compare it to the Solesmes revival of a century ago or speak of it as an expression of anti-elitist times, a communal form of unison singing that as the musicologist Richard Taruskin is quoted as saying, "plays into a New Age impulse."


Sports of The Times; Ewing and Knicks Hit Indoor Wall at Indy
PATRICK Ewing won't blame the brutal noise in Market Square Arena and he won't blame being on the road and he says he's feeling fine.
He always sounds like he has a cold, and he always uses a lot of tissues on the bench, so it's hard to tell when he really is a little wobbly.
Ewing just knew the energy wasn't there, collectively, on the entire Knickerbocker team, long before he finished with the biggest stinker of his professional career, or his college career.
One point.
Four rebounds.
Twenty-eight minutes.


A German U-Turn on Rates Scares Europe
THE Bundesbank is back, battling inflation with a willingness to keep interest rates uncomfortably high.
European markets are shocked.
Perhaps the most telling fact of last week's market turmoil in Europe -- which sent bond and stock prices down across the continent -- was that people were stunned by a few tough comments by Hans Tietmeyer, the president of Germany's central bank.
It was not so long ago that a Bundesbank official's vow to battle inflation was viewed about the same as the Pope issuing a new condemnation of abortion.
Worth reporting, perhaps, but hardly surprising.


World Markets; U.S. Glitch in the British Air Dynamo
TO its competitors, British Airways must seem to be operating in a different industry.
Despite the huge losses being suffered by nearly every other airline in the world, the British carrier has posted healthy profits in all but a few quarters throughout the severe downturn that has been plaguing the travel business for years.
Last week, British Airways turned in another set of impressive results.
For the year ended March 31, it earned $:286 million, or $429 million at current exchange rates, an increase of 60.7 percent over the previous year, when it earned $:178 million.
It even managed to eke out an operating profit of $:1 million, or $1.5 million, in this year's January-March quarter, traditionally its weakest.


Squatters Are Given an Abrupt Heave-Ho
In a squatters'-rights case that advocates for the poor say may reflect a trend, four families who worked for nine months to restore an abandoned building on West 168th Street were ejected recently by the police without notice.
The families, represented by a squatters' organizing group, Inner City Press/Community on the Move, filed suit against the city early this month and persuaded Justice Carol H. Arber to allow them to move back into the four-story brownstone.


Who Keeps 600 Miles of Trail Blazed?
FORTUNATELY, the men spotted just what they wanted -- a big flat rock a yard or so long.
Unfortunately, it was 30 feet downhill from where they wanted it.
Richard Blake was undaunted.
"Treasure is where you find it," he said.
"This one's beautiful."
Soon he and three other men were working the rock up the hill, pushing and turning it end over end.
Finally they got it to where they were adding rock steps to a hiking trail.


BIKINI'S SILVER LINING
In Western terms, a $100 million fund and the possibility of a lucrative underwater theme park as a tourist attraction once the Bikinians are resettled probably sounds like ample restitution for these 2,000 people; and perhaps there are so few of the original 167 left that reclaiming their culture is not a priority for them.


Uproar Over a Plan to Bury Silt Offshore
For many residents of Rockaway, the prospect is outrageous.
The Army Corps of Engineers is planning to dredge 6.5 million cubic yards of contaminated silt from New York Harbor and bury it in an underwater pit about two miles off Breezy Point.
"You're taking it from a place where no one swims and almost no one fishes and dumping it in an area where you have great use of the waterways," said Jonathan Gaska, the district manager of Community Board 14, which comprises Rockaway and Broad Channel.
"It could affect the fragile ecosystem of Jamaica Bay, which has been improving. And the surrounding area -- Staten Island, Brooklyn and Rockaway and Broad Channel -- all could suffer from the effects of this."


Myanmar
To the Editor: You send dangerously mixed signals in "On the Road to Myanmar." You urge travelers to drive by the house where the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, keeps the country's rightful leader, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, in her fifth year of detention, and to talk with students in teashops, quietly (lest the locals get dragged off to a fate that makes a Singapore caning seem gentle).
These might be acts of witness.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is Memorial Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices will be closed.
POST OFFICE There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
The main post office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue will be open.


K. A. Onoffrey, John Heckler Jr.
Kimberly Ann Onoffrey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Onoffrey of Seabrook, Md., is to be married today to John Maguire Heckler Jr., the son of Margaret M. O'Shaughnessy Heckler of Wellesley, Mass., and Mr.
Heckler of Middleburg, Va.
The Rev.
Lon N. Solomon is to perform the ceremony at the Chevy Chase Presbyterian Church in Washington.
The bride, 30, is the district sales manager in Washington for Kimball Office Furniture.
She graduated from Pacific Union College.
Her father retired as the director of information management operations at the General Research Corporation in McLean, Va.
Her mother, Jo Carroll Onoffrey, is a real-estate agent at Prudential Preferred Properties in Crofton, Md.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  NORTH KOREA EFFORT FOUNDERS  North Korea said it would never allow outsiders to derail its nuclear program, ending the Clinton Administration's optimism for an agreement with the Communist country on nuclear matters.  1  THE BATTLE OVER CHINA  President Clinton has set his course for trade relations with China, but the story of how he got there is one of broken campaign promises, fierce interagency battles, secret diplomacy and 11th hour indecision.  1


Engineers, M.B.A.'s And Teamwork
To the Editor:
A design engineer who does not consider the cost of a product is hardly an engineer at all.
No matter how technically perfect his design may be, no matter how well it performs, if it does not make a profit for the manufacturer, it is a failure.


Reading For Literacy
Illustrious voices are raised at Lincoln Center, May 16.


Correction
The "What's Doing" column on May 1, about Chicago, misstated the address of the Theater on the Lake.
It is at Fullerton Avenue and Lake Shore Drive in Lincoln Park; it is not at 425 East McFetridge Drive, which is the Chicago Park District headquarters.


One Death in an Alley Gives New Life to War in Kashmir
LIKE most men in this part of the world, Imtiaz Ahmed Malik was a cricket fan.
One day last month, he and many of Kashmir's other four million Muslims gathered around televisions and radios to listen to a cricket match in the Persian Gulf, where India was playing Pakistan, the Muslim neighbor that lays claim to Kashmir.
Kashmir's Muslims, who have lived for 50 years under the rule of India's Hindu-dominated governments, were backing Pakistan, as usual.
From these bare facts there followed an incident that left Mr.
Malik dead, shot in an alley by an Indian soldier who had been drawn to the scene by the din of raucous calls for India's defeat.
For the newspapers, what happened to Mr.
Malik on the afternoon of April 22 was a minor item, one more civilian statistic in the war that secessionist Muslim guerrillas in Kashmir have been fighting for four years. (The guerrillas say 20,000 people have died in the war, the Indian Army 9,000.)


To Collectors, Gable Is Still a Star
WILL CLARK GABLE'S white silk bathrobe attract the same feverish auction bidding as Judy Garland's red shoes from "The Wizard of Oz," Vivien Leigh's Oscar for "Gone With the Wind" or Elvis Presley's acoustic guitar?
King of Hollywood for 30 years, Gable continues to be an all-time favorite among collectors of movie memorabilia.
To date, however, it has been slim pickings in the market for the star's artifacts.
Those mementos that have surfaced usually bring less than $5,000.
Only his leather-bound script from "Gone With the Wind" has brought more at auction: $77,000.


U.S. Takes a Nuclear Power Step Backward
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Backing Work on Czech Reactors by Westinghouse" (front page, May 22), on the Temelin nuclear power plant in the Czech Republic:
Contrary to Westinghouse's claim that the Temelin design is an "excellent machine," this type of reactor (the VVER 1000) is no more reliable than other Soviet designs.
The Soviets, in their race to keep up with the West in nuclear technology, cut numerous corners in design, most of which will not be addressed by the Westinghouse fixes.


Reader, He Married Her
To the Editor:
Although this must be the 300th letter you've received about V. S. Naipaul's stump-the-band literary questions ("V. S. Naipaul in Search of Himself: A Conversation," by Mel Gussow, April 24), as a professor of French literature, I feel compelled to set the record straight.


THE HAND-OFF
Of all the people in your article, the one who haunts me is Jeremy Leslie, the 3-year-old who had, perhaps, the least to say in the failed co-parenting arrangement.


David Parisier and Rebecca Zimm
Rebecca Lee Zimm, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Zimm of Richmond, is to be married today to David Alan Parisier, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Simon Claude Parisier of New York.
Rabbi David Small is to perform the ceremony at Gedney Farm in New Marlboro, Mass.
The bride is an interior designer in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and the New York School of Interior Design.
Her father owns Alan Zimm Custom Tailors in Richmond.
Her mother, Halina Zimm, teaches and lectures on the Holocaust.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Corrections
A front-page article and picture caption in the Real Estate section today about new school designs misidentify a building next to P.S. 6 in Brooklyn and misstate its relationship to the school.
The building is the old Flatbush Town Hall, not Flatbush City Hall; it is adjacent to P.S. 6, not across the street.


Elisa Kohn, Alexander Taub
Elisa Michelle Kohn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn A. Kohn of Tarzana, Calif., was married last evening to Alexander Joel Taub, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John S. Taub of Wayland, Mass.
Rabbi William Kramer performed the ceremony at Temple Judea in Tarzana.


SURFACING
HAIR  Dread styling: These soft-metallic coils, called love twists, wrap around hair braids and dreadlocks, while popular ornaments (like cowrie shells) dangle.
FASHION  Crocodile's new scales: Trying to recapture its tony image, Lacoste is reissuing polo shirts, now with such detailing as mother-of-pearl buttons and hand-stitched crocodiling.
CHILDREN  Baby sunglasses: Lightweight mini-eyewear not only protects against ultraviolet rays, but also gives babies the look of fledgling hipsters.


Last Ride: Andretti 500 Miles From the Finish Line
If Mario Andretti does not genuflect upon leaving the Indianapolis Motor Speedway on Sunday, try to understand that his introduction to the place was not one to inspire reverence.
"The first time I saw it was in a movie playing in Italy, 'To Please a Lady,' with Clark Gable," Andretti said, talking about the 1950 film in which Gable played an Indy 500 racer.
Andretti offered the recollection while sitting in a patio chair, taking in his latest view of the Speedway: from the balcony of a suite overlooking Turn 2 as shadows began to reclaim the empty, silent track.


Whitman Birthplace to Get Visitor Center
THE beams of the farmhouse at the Walt Whitman Birthplace State Historic Site in Huntington Station are feeling the weight of the poet's "bundle of songs."
"The increase in educational-program activities has placed a great strain on the physical structure," said Barbara Mazor Bart, executive director of the Walt Whitman Birthplace Association.
"Especially when a tour or school group arrives we're are torn between delight in their presence and the fear for the preservation of that which they have come to view."


Tonys Are About Broadway and Are Likely to Stay That Way
To the Editor:
The call to "Widen the Tony's Scope" (editorial, May 22) by including Off Broadway sounds like a good idea, but I believe it is not feasible.
As a former first-night theater critic and former president of the Drama Desk, a critics' organization that makes no distinction between Broadway and Off Broadway for nominations, I was pressed to champion inclusion of Off Broadway in the Tonys.


Plagued by Age, Nursing Home Will Close After 32 Years
The letters went out two weeks ago to the 288 men and women who live in Madonna Residence, a nursing home in Park Slope.
As of next January, they were told, the residence will close.
Four hundred jobs will be lost.
Built 75 years ago as a hotel, the majestic nine-story building at 1 Prospect Park West was converted to a nursing home in 1962.
Over the years, the residence has been plagued by dozens of health- and building-code violations, but the violations have always been corrected, a state health official said, and the closing was not forced by the state.


Brussels Smoking
To the Editor: Although I enjoyed reading Patricia Wells's mouth-watering story on Brussels restaurants ("Choice Tables: Grand or Gregarious in Brussels," April 3), I was dismayed to note there was no mention of the availability of nonsmoking sections.
This leads me to believe there aren't any.
There certainly weren't any when I was in Brussels a few years ago.


Ms. Baschkin And Mr. Paul
Karen-Anne Baschkin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard B. Baschkin of Rye, N.Y., is to be married today to Stephen Walter Paul, a son of Barbara Kimball Cohen of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Walter Paul.
Rabbi Stephen A. Klein is to perform the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Richard Martin, a Presbyterian minister, is to participate, at the Scarsdale Synagogue/Tremont Temple in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Baschkin is a vice president and the acquisitions manager at the Interdok Corporation, a publishing company in Harrison, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.


Where Does Dinner Come From?
DECADES ago, the celebrated French anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss, in his influential study "The Raw and the Cooked," examined the preparation of food to describe the structural levels of pre-modern societies.
After all, to cook food in a pot requires more mastery over the materials of nature than holding it on a stick over a fire, because you have to know how to make a fireproof pot.
In short, cooking tells you where a society is on the slowly ascending hill of technology and complexity.
And so, along came the idea of deconstructing an haute-cuisine meal at a New York restaurant -- pulling it apart morsel by morsel to figure out what is involved in how many far-flung places so that, say, some tuna tartare flavored with mustard oil, extra virgin olive oil, cayenne pepper and mustard seeds, topped with some spheroids of Ossetra caviar and balanced on a latticework of crispy potato could end up on a plate in Manhattan.


The Peak District
To the Editor: In the "Peak District" of England (May 15), Sue Stiles, the author, tells of a child's leather shoe dating from the early 17th century on exhibit at the Haddon Hall Museum, with a card reading: "Found behind paneling in the nursery at Haddon Hall." Ms.
Stiles visualizes an exasperated mother searching fruitlessly for the shoe, nearly four centuries ago.
It's an appealing conceit.
But the true story of the shoe may be very different -- and equally appealing.


Dance Practice


Alison Goodyear, Charles Totten
Alison Harrison Goodyear, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank H. Goodyear Jr. of Norristown, Pa., was married yesterday to Charles Adelle Lewis Totten, the son of May Vaughan of Washington and Col.
Michael Totten of Carlisle, Pa.
The Rev.
William H. Wood 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Gladwyne, Pa.
Mrs.
Totten, 26, graduated from William Smith College.
She is an assistant in the European painting and sculpture department at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


A 22-Year Commuter Says Bicycles Are Safe in the City
To the Editor
Bicyclists have not only taken over the sidewalks of New York, they have also invaded the last refuge of the pedestrian, the Coney Island Boardwalk.
The Parks Department prohibits cycling on the boardwalk except between the hours of 5 A.M. and 10 A.M.
These rules are not enforced by the police.


The Pigeons Are Unmoved By the Make-Believe Owls
To the Editor:
About those fake owls in St.
Vincent Hospital's delightful park on Seventh Avenue (F.Y.I., May 22): The pigeons haven't gotten the word yet that they are supposed to be frightened away; last week they were hopping around the garden in abundance, among the flowers and greenery -- and owls.
The sparrows, however, do seem to keep their distance.
EDWIN KENNEBECK  Manhattan


Gene Trail to Cancer
To the Editor:
"Genes Tell Story of Why Some Get Cancer While Others Don't" (Science Times, May 17) is on track.
Not only are there markers to indicate where a specific alteration in DNA is, but there are assays that may indicate the degree of DNA damage.
There may also be chemopreventive agents to repair damaged DNA before the cell divides and thus prevent the mutations that may cause cancer.


J. A. Carnevale, John A. Lozada
Jennifer Anne Carnevale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Carnevale of Chemlsford, Mass., is to be married there today to Dr.
John A. Lozada, a son of Drs.
Eriberto and Divinia Lozada of Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph Smyth is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
The bride, 26, is a photo editor and researcher at D. C. Heath Publishers in Lexington, Mass.
The couple graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a division manager at the Raytheon Company, the aerospace concern, in Lexington.


Far-From-Mainstream Films: Two That Fight The Current
IN 1989, JOHN N. SMITH AND SAM Grana, a veteran production team for the National Film Board of Canada, found themselves at ground zero of Canada's most explosive scandal in recent years.
They were in Newfoundland for hearings investigating accusations of sexual and physical abuse filed 15 years earlier by numerous boys raised in Mount Cashel, the Irish Christian Brothers' orphanage in St.
John's.
The hearings were telecast daily, and the scandal became a Canadian equivalent of Watergate or the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings in terms of the national soul-searching precipitated.
On Wednesday, "The Boys of St. Vincent," a fictional treatment of the case directed by Mr.
Smith and produced by Mr.
Grana and Claudio Luca, opens at Film Forum in SoHo.
It will not be turning up at theaters nationwide, however.
In fact, the two-part, three-hour film, originally made for Canadian television, has encountered numerous difficulties in being shown since it was completed in 1992.


Roberta Feldman, Scott McLoughlin
Roberta Anne Feldman, the daughter of Nancy Feldman and Allen Feldman, both of Washington, is to be married today to Scott Michael McLoughlin, a son of John McLoughlin of Baltimore and Jeannette Koelbl of Toms River, N.J.
Judge Charles Foley of the Virginia Circuit Court in Warrenton is to perform the ceremony at Poplar Springs, a historic home in Casanova, Va.
The bride, 26, is an investment officer for the International Finance Corporation, an affiliate of the World Bank in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from Georgetown University.
Her father is a lawyer for the Labor Department in Washington.
Her mother is also a lawyer in Washington.


Summer Is Still Endless
WHEN THE FILM maker Bruce Brown released "The Endless Summer" 30 years ago, he thought of it as a very personal documentary that would appeal primarily to his surfing buddies.
To his surprise, the 16-millimeter movie made for $50,000, which followed two surfers around the world in search of the perfect wave, went on to earn more than $30 million worldwide and is now considered the seminal surfer film.
On Friday, in what must rank as one of the slower-arriving sequels ever, comes "Bruce Brown's the Endless Summer II." Using the same travelogue format, the new movie also sets out to dispel the tawdry image the sport has earned on the beaches and in the flood of surfer movies turned out since the original.


Congested. Expensive. Out of Date.
Ann Christopher, a nursing student, says she routinely gets into shouting matches about service and quality with the workers at her loca: Consumers Food supermarket in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Mary Hunter, who was buying a few boxes of pasta last week at an Associated market nearby, regularly pays $13 in cab fare to do her "real" shopping at a Pathmark on the other side of the borough.


Martha Eckhardt, A. J. Westbrook
Martha Rippe Eckhardt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Eckhardt Jr. of Tenafly, N.J., was married there yesterday to Anthony James Westbrook, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
William Westbrook of Binghamton, N.Y.
The Rev.
Kurt Holdereid performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church.


As the World Has Turned, So Has Helen Wagner
Helen Wagner HAS BEEN playing Nancy Hughes on "As the World Turns" since Mamie Eisenhower was a fan and a soap opera divorcee could remarry only after the timely death of her former husband.
Ms.
Wagner delivered the show's first line in 1956, and she was on live television, debating whether her soap son should remarry his faithless ex-wife, when Walter Cronkite broke in to announce that President Kennedy had been shot.
The character she created became an icon for a generation of women who understood her mostly futile attempts to run the perfect household and raise the perfect children.
Nancy was Donna Reed with real problems in the days before soap characters traveled through time, engaged in espionage or almost routinely were reunited with evil twins.


Conversations/Louis Rossetto; The View From Cyberspace: The Revolution Will Be Digitized
ON the wall of his sun-drenched loft office, Louis Rossetto keeps a sheet of paper that says in large type: "Don't Believe the Hype."
At this instant there is no shortage.
Mr.
Rossetto is the publisher, editor and co-founder of Wired, this year's magazine of the moment.
Last year a struggling shoestring start-up, this year Wired has become the first successful life-style magazine of the emerging technoculture.


When Beliefs Clash in Court
IF a possible paradigm for world affairs -- presented to considerable debate by Harvard political scientist Samuel P. Huntington -- is the clash of civilizations, the denouement of the World Trade Center trial last week seemed a perfect illustration.
There in a Federal district courtroom were four men each receiving the extraordinary sentences of 240 years in prison for their involvement in the blast at the World Trade Center last year that caused six deaths and more than 1,000 injuries.
The four men, all of them representing that militant strain of Islam loosely known as fundamentalism, spoke publicly for the first time.
They offered those in the courtroom no eloquent appeals for justice, no remorse, no cries of false conviction.
Instead, the four convicted men gave secular Westerners a glimpse of the spiritual and political universe that, the prosecution in the case maintained, brought terrorism to American soil.


Abby Rosenthal, Nelson K. Stacks
Abby Lee Rosenthal, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Gilbert S. Rosenthal of Great Neck, L.I., is to be married today to Nelson Karl Stacks, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Stacks of Newton, Mass.
The bride's father and grandfather Rabbi Benjamin L. Teller are to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride graduated from Clark University and from the Gemological Institute of America.
She was until recently a gemologist at the Rapaport Diamond Corporation in New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of the New York Board of Rabbis.


Manufacturing Has Had Too Much of a Chance
To the Editor:
In regard to the May 8 Soapbox essay, "Give Manufacturng a Chance," what would you call the more than 30 years during which manufacturing has been given the tightest of zoning protection and the most exotic of governmental incentives?
Yet manufacturing employment has plummeted consistently from 956,000 in 1960 to 283,000, according to the latest Commerce Department report.
And even as manufacturing employment was so steadily declining, the city's land areas zoned for manufacturing only were being increased so that they now total far more than the area of Manhattan.


BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1994
Weeks This Last On Week Week List Fiction


Two Tours Explore The American West
Ghost towns and Indian history are the themes of two tours of the American West being offered this summer.
The Montana Historical Society Foundation and Livery Travel are leading a five-day tour of Montana's ghost towns, dating from the gold rush era of about 1860 to 1910.
The tour, which runs from July 22 to 26, begins in Montana's capital, Helena, and visits the mostly uninhabited ghost towns of Marysville, Bannack and Elkhorn, where the group will see 19th-century houses, saloons, shops and jail houses.
Other stops include the preserved ghost town sections of Pony and Virginia City, the country's largest open pit copper mine in Butte, and the Big Hole Battlefield, where the Nez Perce fought the U.S. military in 1877.
The tour costs $699 a person for lodging, transportation, most breakfasts and some dinners.
Information: (800) 735-6343.


Fancy Food and a Picket Line to Match
In the annals of the labor movement, there has probably never been a picket line like the one at the Box Tree restaurant and hotel at 250 East 49th Street.
Management pipes lilting Strauss waltzes outside, and its mime, in whiteface and a tuxedo, mimics a conductor to try to soften the effect of sometimes raucous strikers hooting "Shame!" at patrons.


Rightist's Rise Poses New Threat to Mexican Party's Rule
Like the hulking sugar mill that feeds on the cane fields outside this quiet town in western Mexico, the Institutional Revolutionary Party has seemed perpetual to most people here, as permanent as government itself.
"Before, you could never believe that the party might go," said Juan Zarate, a 70-year-old farm worker, marveling at the fiery, bearded man prophesizing such change from a gazebo in the town square.
"But this guy hit them very hard, and he was right."


Beth G. Clouser, Truxtun Hare 3d
Beth Garlin Clouser, a daughter of Ralph G. Clouser of Wayne, Pa., and the late H. Muriel Clouser, is to be married today to Thomas Truxtun Hare 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hare Jr. of Edgemont, Pa.
The Rev.
Lewis Mills performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
David's Chapel in Wayne.
The bride is a vice president of the Pennmor Group, an executive recruiting concern in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Bucknell University.
Her father is a lawyer in Wayne.


For New York, User-Friendly Schools
"IN the next 20 years," said the architect Ezra Ehrenkrantz, "there is going to be more change in education than there has been in the last 80 years."
The changes are being brought about by advanced technology and by new ideas in educational and social thinking.
And architects, in designing new schools and remodeling older ones, are more and more having to consider the capacity for change, the flexibility to accommodate new methods of teaching, as a prime focus of their planning.


Puns on 'Rock,' Fine, but Beware of Bamm-Bamm
Crooklyn  Alfre Woodard, Delroy Lindo, Zelda Harris Directed by Spike Lee PG-13 115 minutes


GEORGE BUSH
Thanks to George Plimpton for giving us this glimpse of President Bush in retirement ("George Bush on the 19th Hole," April 24).
It is important to remind ourselves that we have been able to find and elect men of substance, who value family, who are not embarrassed to demonstrate love for our country and its inherent ideals.


Tech Notes; A Hot Prospect in Paper Goods
"NOBODY throws my business card away," said Paul Wakefield, the president of Touch-it Inc. of Ogden, Utah.
"It's alive, and they want to see if it keeps on working."
Well, if not alive, certainly lively.
Mr.
Wakefield's card changes color from a deep purple to a light pink where it is held between thumb and fingers.
But put it down on a cool surface, and it quickly reverts to its original color.


Plagued by Age, Nursing Home Will Close After 32 Years
The letters went out two weeks ago to the 288 men and women who live in Madonna Residence, a nursing home in Park Slope.
As of next January, they were told, the residence will close.
Four hundred jobs will be lost.
Built 75 years ago as a hotel, the majestic nine-story building at 1 Prospect Park West was converted to a nursing home in 1962.
Over the years, the residence has been plagued by dozens of health- and building-code violations, but the violations have always been corrected, a state health official said, and the closing was not forced by the state.


Teacher Demonstrates, And His Pupil Follows
Ryan Thompson calls Bobby Bonilla "the master." Thompson is young and brash, with tremendous athletic potential and a sometimes scattershot approach to the game.
Bonilla is a Mets veteran, a proven hitter on a 10-game hitting streak.
So when he was in a serious hitting slump earlier this month, Thompson consulted Bonilla, whose average was fast on the rise from its anemic perch at .149 late in April.
Bonilla had one major piece of advice for Thompson: Quit swinging for the moon.


Devils Reflect Primarily With Pride
In the wake of the proudest two weeks and toughest two defeats in the history of the young New Jersey franchise, Devils veterans and management took a moment yesterday to look back with pride on their seven-game Stanley Cup semifinal series with the Rangers and look ahead to their rosy future.
Although the Devils lost the war to the Rangers, a 2-1 defeat in double overtime in Game 7, what they won was their identity.
What Coach Jacques Lemaire and his assistants, Larry Robinson and Jacques Caron, ultimately brought to the Devils in this, their most successful season, was a winning identity based on defense and a team-comes-first concept.


Trappists Sing In Unison, Too
To the Editor:
The current popularity of Gregorian chants as evidenced by Angel's "Chant" album reminded me of another, older recording, "Laudate Dominum," by the Trappist monks of the Abbey of Gethsemane, in Kentucky.
It is unique in that the phrases of the psalms being sung are quietly narrated in English by Thomas Merton.


Prehung Doors Need Moderate Carpentry Ability
REPLACING an outside door or a window with a prehung model is seldom as difficult as it may seem.
What is needed are moderate carpentry experience -- driving nails in awkward positions, measuring with a level and tape, using a power circular saw and applying caulking -- and a helper to assist in positioning the assemblies.
Prehung doors and windows are so named because they are sold mounted in their frames.
That eliminates fitting hinges or adjusting window sashes, and also simplifies installation by reducing the job to little more than removing the old unit and its frame and nailing in the new one.


Angels With Designs On Regional Theater
BEFORE Semina De Laurentis, an actress and self-described "arts angel" opened the first professional theater ever in Waterbury, her hometown, she gathered six family members and friends, called the group Seven Angels, and prayed for luck.
"Nunsense," a wildly popular musical spoof that has earned the reputation of rescuing theaters was a logical opener for the Seven Angels Theater in September 1990.
It was, as well, an occasion of sentiment, for Ms.
De Laurentis appeared in the still-running Off Broadway production of the show as the goofy Sister Mary Amnesia.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Return of the Checker Cab, With a $60 Fare
Remember the days of the Checker cab when a family of five fit in the back with ease?
Well, now they're back, sort of.


Naked Came The Midriff
It's a fashion that hits below the belt.
The bare midriff, once the preserve of belly dancers and bikini wearers, has become a significant trend.
Exposed flesh between cropped top and low-slung pants is now much more than a summer phenomenon.
The fall fashion shows were so full of clothes cut out around the middle that you might say the navel is the latest erogenous zone.
Supermodels, walking billboards of anatomical fads, heralded the shift with their craze for navel rings.


Democrats Pick Their Champions
WESTCHESTER'S northern Democrats, meeting in convention, endorsed Hamilton Fish Jr. last week as their candidate to fill the seat being vacated by his father, a Republican, but the closeness of the vote indicated a likely bruising primary in September.
Mr.
Fish outpolled Dennis Mehiel, the former Westchester County Democratic Party chairman, on a second ballot after the initial count showed Mr.
Fish ahead -- with 9,932 votes to 9,222 for Mr.
Mehiel -- but failing to win a majority.


Wall Street; On the Trail of the 'Rogue Brokers'
SO who were the good and the bad brokerage firms in the recent Securities and Exchange Commission's "Large Firm Project," which reviewed hiring and supervision of stock brokers?
And why did the S.E.C. allow the firms anonymity in the May 19 report after having found that several were flying a disproportionate number of red flags?
In August 1992, the S.E.C. began a vast study of nine brokerage firms, hoping to learn more about brokers who were repeat offenders in using bad sales practices and about the managers who apparently were off on coffee breaks whenever those brokers were up to no good.


Three Smuggled Refugees Are Granted Asylum
Three Chinese men detained for nearly a year since reaching New York aboard a smuggler's freighter that ran aground off Queens were released by immigration authorities Friday night, weeks after a judge granted them political asylum on the unusual grounds of their homeland's coercive population-control policies.
Lawyers for the men said yesterday that they believed their clients were the first of about 285 immigrants who straggled ashore from the Golden Venture on June 6 to be released after being granted asylum by an immigration judge because they feared persecution under China's policy of limiting families to one child.


Erica Leventhal, Gary Wohlstetter
Dr.
Erica Joy Leventhal, the daughter of Phyllis and Robert Leventhal of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Gary Wohlstetter, a son of Rhoda and Bernard Wohlstetter of Huguenot, S.I.
Rabbi Joseph Singer is to officiate at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center in Brooklyn.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; The Purse Problem
Like millions of women, Margaret Honey has a problem when she's driving a car: there's no good place to put her purse.
So when a spokesman for Mazda declares that "cars today are genderless," Margaret Honey's reply is instantaneous and unprintable.
Unlike millions of women, though, Honey, a psychologist at the Center for Children and Technology in Manhattan, has been researching precisely what makes men design a car with no purse-place.
She and her colleagues recently asked 15 men and 15 women to imagine a dream machine of the future.
"The men imagined devices that were fantastic and powerful; they circumvented the body," she says.
"One guy's computer plugged directly into his brain. Women imagine things that are friendlier. One woman's computer was a medallion that was both easy to use and a stimulating colleague."


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; A Tale of Two Catalogues
Tibetan prayer flags?
O.K.
Massage oils?
Sure.
The catalogue from Pacific Spirit Whole Life Products in Forest Grove, Ore., looks, at first glance, like any other from the loose nuts who roll west when the country shakes.
But it doesn't take a mystic Inner Eye to see that Pacific Spirit is in a realm all its own.
On page 8, you can find the Interspecies Telepathic Connection Tape Series, which teaches how to "receive telepathic communication" from animals, after which you're ready to learn ways of "contacting animals who have died." On page 13, the catalogue describes a book on "gem therapy," which explains that "gems are mines of cosmic rays. . . . They know the disease. . . . They cure by their omnipotence."


A Reminder of Jim Crow
After reading an article in The City about dating ("Desperately Seeking Someone?" published on Feb. 13), a woman called one of the dating services mentioned.
In a letter to the service, the woman, who asked that her name not be used, described that telephone call and her reactions to it.
I am the African-American woman who called your service recently, only to have you blow me off.
I am writing because it touched a nerve and managed to conjure up for me old feelings of having been brushed off similarly growing up down South in Arkansas, and even now, just living from day to day.


A Blind Life on the Stage
PREVIEWS will start on Saturday for "Flip Side," a musical revue staged by the Theater for the Blind and created by the company's writing workshop.
In an effort to counteract Hollywood images of the blind, the revue includes serious and comedic sketches of the life of the blind including dating, parenthood and guide dogs as well as a game of blind "Jeopardy." Three of the six actors are blind.
The theater's audiences include both blind and sighted people; biscuits are provided for guide dogs.
Ike Schambelan, the director of the revue and founder of the troupe, said the company had evolved from recording plays for the blind to staging standards like Shakespeare to performing works that were written specifically for the blind.


Manufacturing Has Had Too Much of a Chance
To the Editor:
In regard to the May 8 Soapbox essay, "Give Manufacturng a Chance," what would you call the more than 30 years during which manufacturing has been given the tightest of zoning protection and the most exotic of governmental incentives?
Yet manufacturing employment has plummeted consistently from 956,000 in 1960 to 283,000, according to the latest Commerce Department report.
And even as manufacturing employment was so steadily declining, the city's land areas zoned for manufacturing only were being increased so that they now total far more than the area of Manhattan.


Mutual Funds; Sorting Out a Doomsday Argument
THE stage is set, Donald Christensen argues, for a new "bust" in mutual funds.
Twice before in this century, in 1929 and after the go-go 60's, fund investors lost a lot, Mr.
Christensen, a New York investment analyst, tells us in his soon-to-be-published book, "Surviving the Coming Mutual Fund Crisis." And now elements of both crises have resurfaced, he says, to haunt the millions who have flocked to funds in recent years in a mania he likens to the Dutch tulip bulb craze and the flighty period leading to the stock market crash in 1929.


BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1994
Weeks This Last On Week Week List Fiction


Miss Towles, Mr. Kellison
Holly Kimbrough Towles, a portfolio manager at U.S.
Trust in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel John Kellison, a segment producer in New York for the "Late Show With David Letterman." The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth, an Episcopal priest and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Federated Church in Edgartown, Mass.


Holmdel Journal; Plans for Church Fund-Raising Festival Upset Neighbors
WHETHER a Greek Orthodox church fund-raising festival should take place has sent some strong ripples of discontent through this wealthiest of Monmouth County communities.
The festival is expected to attract 8,000 to 10,000 people over three days to a quiet, hilly residential neighborhood overlooking the Garden State Parkway.
Dr.
Henry D. Ferris Jr., a veterinarian and the Mayor of the 17.9-square-mile township, called the festival issue one more example of his rapidly changing suburban municipality's search for a defined identity.
More new homes and more new residents, coupled with highway shopping centers and office buildings, have changed the landscape here forever.


Win a Title! Make That Two!; Knicks and Rangers Fans Double the Hysteria at the Garden
Inevitably there will be some quibbling over who is louder, more impassioned, more devoted, more just plain crazy: the Knicks' pleading fans or the humble following that clings to the Rangers.
Who deserves more tribute, more sympathy?
The man at courtside who kept on cheering last week even as one of his Knicks crashed into him and sent him and his glasses flying?
Or the two men who lay in an aisle Friday night, belly to belly, hugging and weeping over their Rangers like two babies?
There is no Sports God out there to gauge such acts of penance.


Old Gathering Place Breathes Fresh Air
BOBBY VAN'S is jumping again.
The Bridgehampton restaurant, once a hangout for Truman Capote, James Jones and other writers in the 70's, languished in the 80's.
Now new owners have pumped life into the old gathering place.
Whether the 1990's Hamptons literati will make it their own remains to be seen, but crowds of East Enders already have.
Few passers-by on Montauk Highway will miss the newly painted hunter-green storefront highlighted with white awnings.
On a recent warm May evening, the floor-to-ceiling windows were thrown open, giving the restaurant the look and appeal of an outdoor cafe.


THIS LITTLE PIGGY ATE ROAST BEEF
I enjoy Molly O'Neill's food columns.
Many have resulted in outstanding meals, since I enjoy both cooking and eating.
However, "This Little Piggy Ate Roast Beef" (March 27) opens with a tempting photo of rare pork, a no-no!
True, the incidence of infection with Trichinella spiralis in this country is down, but it is far from gone, and there is no mention of this infection in the article.
Readers should be warned to cook their meat well, until it is gray in the middle, or freeze it thoroughly before cooking to insure killing infectious larvae and protozoan cysts.
DICKSON DESPOMMIER Professor of Public Health And Microbiology Columbia University New York, N.Y.


In Paris, a Building That Melts Away Like Ice
SOMETHING SEEN IN A DREAM, at once invasive and elusive: few buildings capture that unsettling, contradictory power of the subconscious image.
Not many even try.
No recent building that I can recall reels in the surreal as stylishly as the new Cartier building in Paris designed by Jean Nouvel, the French architect best known for the Arab World Institute.
Some buildings go up in flames.
This one melts away like ice.
Its crystalline, geometrically precise surfaces of glass and steel dissolve in the light into silhouettes, clouds, reflections, the traffic, trees and skyline of historic Montparnasse.
Talk about Les Must.
Those headed to Paris this summer will want to put 261 Boulevard Raspail at the top of their itinerary.
For once, the support that the French extend to contemporary architecture inspires not only respect for good intentions but awe at a building it has produced.
You can linger here for an hour or longer and not begrudge the time subtracted from a visit to Ste.-Chapelle.
In fact these two very different landmarks have something in common: both join the architect's art to the jeweler's.
Medieval craftsmen, legendarily, ground up sapphires to enrich the color of stained glass.
At Cartier's chapel to contemporaneity, Nouvel gives industrial glass the restrained opulence of flawlessly cut gems.


Jackie O., Who Lived a Mini-Series
IT'S THE VOICE THAT DATES JACQUELINE Bouvier Kennedy Onassis.
Not the face, not the body or the way she moves in the old television news film I watched for hours last weekend.
Those are ageless.
Her clothes (the sleeveless linen sheaths, Chanel suits and soft cashmere turtlenecks) seem timeless, too.
Jackie's image is eternally modern.
But the voice is pure 50's and 60's.
Demure, reserved, gracious.
As I listen to her now, Jackie sounds like a younger, more innocent cousin of Marilyn Monroe.
Soft, tentative, ready to laugh, a bit surprised to find herself being addressed.
Like Marilyn, she is a child-woman, trying so hard to please, to get it right, to be a good girl.
Which is what you did in those days if you were a woman who wanted to get ahead.
Actually, if you wanted to get anything.


Auction For the Met
Metropolitan Museum, May 18.


Javits Center Facing Tougher Outside Competition
Officials at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center say they are finally beginning to crack the stubborn issues that have plagued the hall since it opened in 1986: high costs, wasteful union rules, mob intrusion and thefts.
But now, they say, they face more of an external threat: growing competition from cities building new halls, some surpassing the Javits in size.
Las Vegas, Philadelphia and Atlanta have expanded convention complexes in recent years, and other cities are expected to follow suit.


Rangers Win for the Ages And Now Go After 1940
It is best for the Rangers and for their fans that everyone gets a three-day holiday weekend to settle down and contemplate the next and final round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
All need this respite to recover from a transcendent fortnight of New York sports history that ended near midnight Friday when the Rangers scored in the second overtime period to eliminate the Devils in the seventh and deciding game of the Eastern Conference finals in Madison Square Garden.


When the Stars Come Out
Downtown -- At 2 A.M. last Sunday, the young, restless and fashionably squalid who normally cruise Ninth Street between First Avenue and Avenue A were standing still.
All eyes were on a ramshackle storefront, where the filming of Jim Carroll's "Basketball Diaries," starring the yearling-actor-of-the-moment, Leonardo DiCaprio, 19, was in progress.
"Quiet please, people," said a man empowered by a walkie-talkie, hardly needing to ask, because it already was quiet, almost reverentially so.


Yzaga Jolts Chang at His Own 5-Set Game
With five-set marathons the order of the day at Roland Garros, the French Open's most noteworthy marathon man, its 1989 champion, Michael Chang, should have been in his customary comfort zone.
When it comes to five-setters in general and reversals of two-set deficits in particular, the eighth-seeded Chang has a reputation for extricating himself with Houdini-esque flair.
Chang had defied a two-set deficit here twice before, so the project of dismantling Jaime Yzaga's lead did not strike him as daunting.


The World; Balkan Road Signs: This Way to Chaos
PART museum pieces, part twisted jokes, the road signs of the former Yugoslavia now chart a nation's destruction.
There are countless signs to towns that cannot be reached, countless towns for which there are no longer any signs, and countless reasons for supposing that towns indicated have been reduced to rubble anyway or are swiftly headed that way.
Drive east from Zagreb and a strange thing happens.
There is nothing to the east of Croatia.
Europe plunges into a nameless abyss, for Serbia, and its capital, Belgrade, are too malevolent to mention.


Q and A
Cabo San Lucas
Q.
I would like to visit Cabo San Lucas, in Baja California, Mexico, and wondered if there are any golf or fishing tournaments there this year. -- Gene Fechter, Dumont, N.J.


Synagogues Propose a Ritual Fence
If everything goes according to plan, Adeena Penner will soon be able push her 2-year-old daughter in a stroller to the Lincoln Square Synagogue.
Her husband, Marc, who is to become an assistant rabbi at the synagogue soon, will be able to carry keys to get the family back into their apartment after services.


Career Change


Susan Baer, E. A. Schultheiss
Susan Jayne Baer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Baer of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward Antonio Schultheiss, a son of Evelyn C. Cirigliano of Lebanon, N.J., and the late Edward J. Schultheiss.
Mayor Eileen Pilla of Tarrytown, N.Y., officiated at Tappan Hill there.


The Pigeons Are Unmoved By the Make-Believe Owls
To the Editor:
About those fake owls in St.
Vincent Hospital's delightful park on Seventh Avenue (F.Y.I., May 22): The pigeons haven't gotten the word yet that they are supposed to be frightened away; last week they were hopping around the garden in abundance, among the flowers and greenery -- and owls.
The sparrows, however, do seem to keep their distance.
EDWIN KENNEBECK  Manhattan


Ellen D. Goldlust, Kurt A. Gingrich
Ellen Dara Goldlust, a daughter of Barbara and Sydney Goldlust of Reston, Va., is to be married today to Kurt Andrew Gingrich, a son of Joan Gingrich of Williamsport, Pa., and Dr.
R.
Max Gingrich of Lakeland, Fla.
Rabbi Robert Sachs is to perform the ceremony at Lansdowne, a conference center in Leesburg, Va.


Even for New York City, A Really Big Week
IF you think getting around New York City on a holiday weekend or the week before Christmas is madness, just wait.
Next month, from June 18 to 26, a big gay rights rally will collide with two international sports events -- the World Cup and the Gay Games -- in New York City and northern New Jersey.


Sandwiches Dress Up for Special Summer Occasions
THE official start of summer is several weeks away, but despite the calendar the season starts this weekend.
Cooking and entertaining lighten up, becoming easier and more informal.
This calls for sandwiches.
Of course, sandwiches are essential for picnics and quick lunches, but given adequate embellishment, they can also move to the hors d'oeuvres platter, a weekend lunch for guests or a casual supper.


Commencement; A National Role Is Stressed at Cadet Graduation
The graduating class at the United States Military Academy heard the Secretary of the Army, Togo D. West Jr., say today that they had been trained for national leadership, not just as military commanders.
The Secretary, addressing the 1,031 men and women as cadets for the last time before they were sworn in as second lieutenants, said "You are called not solely to the profession of arms, but as well to the leadership of a nation."


A Technician of the Temper
ERNIE ODOM has just smoked his seventh cigarette in less than an hour.
Perched on a chair in his austere studio apartment in St.
Albans, Queens, he says he never touches alcohol or caffeine.
He drinks spring water and eats one meal a day, macrobiotically sound if he can manage it.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Suzanne Mitchell, Barry Johnson
Suzanne Mitchell, a daughter of Maryjane and John Mitchell of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Barry Lee Johnson, the son of Marie and Walter Johnson of Ottumwa, Iowa.
Msgr.
Donald S. Essex performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The bride, 25, is a law clerk at the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


Sharon G. Siegel and Marc S. Hoffman
Dr.
Sharon Gail Siegel, a radiology resident at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, is to be married today to Dr.
Marc Stuart Hoffman, a resident in internal medicine at Boston City Hospital.
Rabbi Irving Koslowe is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 29, graduated from Brown University and received her M.D. degree from Tufts University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Carole and Bertram Siegel of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Her mother, a research professor of psychiatry at New York University, is the head of the health services research laboratory at the Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research in Orangeburg, N.Y.
The bride's father retired as a systems analyst for the City University of New York.


Riverboat Gambling on the Hudson
THE date was May 4, and the topic under discussion at a public hearing in City Hall was this: Should there be riverboat gambling in New York City?
According to a proposal put forward by the City Council Finance Committee, six riverboats would create as many as 10,000 new jobs and would add at least $300 million a year to city and state coffers.
One of the speakers was Bernard Goldstein, a pioneer of the riverboat casino industry along the Mississippi River.
"I can't think of any place better than New York City for a riverboat," he said.
"Whatever the revenues are on the Mississippi, just add a few more zeroes."


Westward Ho
WHEN CHINA RULED THE SEAS The Treasure Fleet of the Dragon Throne 1405-1433.
By Louise Levathes.
Illustrated. 252 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster $23.


U.S. Takes a Nuclear Power Step Backward; Assessing the Risks
To the Editor:
"U.S. Backing Work on Czech Reactors by Westinghouse" (May 22) reports a controversy concerning the Administration's approval of loan guarantees for safety improvements in completing the Temelin reactors.
Commercial involvement and technical assistance from the United States can lead to significant reductions in the risk of severe accidents at these and similar plants if the often frustrating administrative aspects such as financial liability can be resolved.
There are now about 60 Soviet-designed nuclear power plants operating in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe: 26 reactors in Russia, 14 in Ukraine, 6 in Bulgaria, 4 in the Czech Republic, 4 in the Slovak Republic, 4 in Hungary and 2 in Lithuania.
Because of the need for electricity and lack of alternative energy sources, it seems many of these will remain in operation a while.


Lauren Bigman, Matthew Cohen
Lauren Beth Bigman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Bigman of Glen Cove, L.I., is to be married there today to Matthew William Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Cohen of Tappan, N.Y.
Rabbi Lawrence Kotok is to officiate at North Country Reform Temple.


Journal; Search And Replace
If ever there was a reason to become computer literate, it is to savor every byte of Sony's "Complete Multimedia Edition" of "The Haldeman Diaries," the late chief of staff's daily chronicle of the Nixon Administration.
By loading a $69.95 compact disk into the CD-ROM drive of the nearest PC, you can not only wallow in Watergate but relive in audio-video splendor such forgotten, golden White House moments as the Pam Agnew wedding, a gala East Room recital by Red Skelton and a dinner for Golda Meir to which the President invited "a few gentiles, like Connally."
"The Haldeman Diaries" have become notorious in the two weeks since their publication as a nearly 700-page book, especially those passages in which the President rails against "the total Jewish domination of the media" and a neurotic Henry Kissinger makes Dr.
Strangelove seem tame.
But except for Billy Graham -- who protested that some of his best friends are Jewish in a statement denying an entry in which he refers to "Satanic Jews" -- no one has seriously challenged Mr.
Haldeman's accuracy.
Stephen Ambrose -- the nonpartisan Eisenhower and Nixon biographer and D-Day historian -- soundly endorses "The Haldeman Diaries" in its introduction.


Myanmar
To the Editor: What fabulous memories were brought back by "On the Road to Myanmar" (April 24).
The mind-boggling Shwedagon Pagoda of Yangon is almost beyond description and is now even more accessible than Philip Shenon's article would indicate.
On Jan. 23, our cruise ship, the Song of Flower docked in Yangon's harbor.
After a voyage on the river that allowed us to see the small fishing boats and their fishermen close enough to hear them shout, at last we discerned the gleaming spires of many pagodas, as well as the glow of the Shwedagon Pagoda itself.
We were objects of the most wonderful welcoming reception imaginable.


Ronald Lawson and Nina Klyvert
Nina Marie Klyvert, the daughter of Dr.
Marlene Moss-Klyvert of New York and the late Norman A. Klyvert, was married yesterday to Ronald Richard Lawson, the son of the late Richard and Louise Lawson.
The Rev.
Anthony Settles, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul Smith, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Klyvert-Lawson is the dance program coordinator at the Harbor Performing Arts Center in New York.
She graduated from Emerson College and received a master's degree in dance education from Columbia, where her mother is an associate clinical professor of dentistry and oral surgery.
Her father was a probation officer in Manhattan with the youth division of the New York City Department of Corrections.


Rostenkowski Is Said to Reject Plea Agreement in Graft Case
Representative Dan Rostenkowski has rejected a proposed plea agreement that would allow him to avert a broad criminal indictment on Federal corruption charges, lawyers in the case said today.
His lawyers, who are still urging him to accept the agreement, have told Federal prosecutors of the decision but asked them not to consider it final until the Government's deadline on Tuesday, in the hope that Mr.
Rostenkowski may change his mind over the weekend.
But there appears to be no firm reason for thinking he may do so, the lawyers said.


But Will She Ever Need Algebra?
To the Editor:
"Stepping Into the Heels of Their Career Moms" (Executive Life, May 8), your article on career mothers who were influenced by their mothers who also had careers, was marred by a very disturbing ending.
The statement by a 13-year-old girl -- "In my career, I'm never going to use algebra" -- should not be left unchallenged and should certainly not be greeted with a "V" for victory sign by her mother.
College-level mathematics is required for more than 75 percent of university majors from sociology and business to all the sciences.
If a 13-year-old girl has already decided that she does not want to do mathematics, it does not matter how serious she is about a career.
She may not have too many careers to choose from.
DANIELLE R. BERNSTEIN Metuchen, N.J., May 9 The writer is professor of mathematics and computer science at Kean College in Union, N.J.


Florio's Spotlight Dims, but Stage Widens
In the comfortable surroundings of the same law partnership where Richard M. Nixon spent his first stint as a political exile, former Gov.
Jim Florio is settling not so readily into what many had expected would be his own isolation from politics.
Since leaving office four months ago, Mr.
Florio has avoided a high public profile.
But with the backing of President Clinton, he has eased quietly and with remarkable swiftness back onto the political landscape through a series of appointments with the potential to influence Washington's policy on issues as varied as international trade, East-West relationships, Civil Service reform and health care.


Clinton and China: How Promise Self-Destructed
Warren Christopher was in China, and the President was furious.
The Secretary of State's high-profile trip in March was supposed to have been the capstone of the Administration's strategy of working intensively with Beijing to resolve their dispute over human rights.
Instead, things were getting worse by the day.
Mr.
Christopher was trading insults with the Chinese authorities, who were preoccupied with their annual National People's Congress, and he was facing harsh criticism from the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing.


Corrections
A review on page 5 of the Times Book Review today, about "The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope," misidentifies the first manned mission to the moon.
It was Apollo 11, not Apollo 1.


Eve Zimmerman and Seth Lloyd
Eve Kathleen Zimmerman, a Ph.D. candidate in Japanese literature at Columbia University, is to be married today in Tyringham, Mass., to Seth Lloyd, a postdoctoral fellow in theoretical physics at the Los Alamos (N.M.) National Laboratory.
Aletta Belin is to conduct a Quaker ceremony at the farm of Millicent Carey McIntosh, the bridegroom's maternal grandmother and a former president of Barnard College.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Logos for Baby
Children can be so, well, childish.
It's downright annoying, if not enough to put off the most conscientious of parents.
But Munchkin Bottling Inc., of Van Nuys, Calif., has stepped in to make the little aliens look just a tiny bit more, you know, like us.
The company has plastered such familiar brand names as Dr Pepper, Pepsi and 7-Up on re-usable baby bottles.


Data Bank
May 29, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.7
-1.8
Gross Domestic Product
I Q'94
IV '93
III Q'94
1987 dollars, percent change
3.0
7.0
2.9
Weekly Jobless Claims
May 20
May 13
May 6
In thousands
366
367
382
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,903
1,918
1,921
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
May 27
May 20
May 13
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.03
$18.92
$18.21
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.16
4.13
4.10
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.61
4.53
4.66
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.39
7.30
7.49


Proposal to Move Amtrak Would Be User Unfriendly
To the Editor:
In regard to the May 1 article, "Grand New Amtrak Terminal: Arriving, the First $10 Million," while from a visual angle the $315 million project to relocate Amtrak's trains from its present Penn Station to a new one at the old Post Office looks like a grand idea, from a users' perspective the proposal is a disaster.


Jennifer Schindler and Mickey Lowitt
Jennifer Anne Schindler, an assistant corporation counsel at the New York City Law Department, is to be married today to Michael R. Lowitt, a tax lawyer at Arthur Anderson, the accounting firm in New York.
Rabbi William Berman is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Ohr Torah in Woodmere, L.I.
Miss Schindler, 26, graduated from Lehigh University and received her law degree from Hofstra University.
She is the daughter of Judge Stella Schindler of New York and Theodore Schindler of Huntington Beach, Calif.
Her mother, a judge of the Queens Family Court, was the director of the Mayor's Office for the Homeless in the Koch administration.
The bride's father is a computer consultant in Huntington Beach.


THE HAND-OFF
As the father of Jeremy Leslie (his real name is Jeremy Leslie-Friedman), and as a public-health professional, I am familiar with the difficult issues surrounding AIDS orphans like Christy Mirach.
Children like Jeremy, who live in homes where adoption is contemplated and who have already experienced the loss of the two-parent family, should not be made to endure the sudden gain and loss of purported siblings.
Nor, obviously, should children like Christy, facing a parent's terminal illness, have their hopes so cruelly raised and dashed.
SAM FRIEDMAN Staten Island


Victims of Violence Compete to Be Colombia's President
One candidate, a former Cabinet minister, carries four bullets in his body, mementos of a machine-gun attack by right-wing commandos at Bogota's airport five years ago.
Another, a former Bogota Mayor, still has flashbacks to a week in 1988 when he was held hostage by Pablo Escobar's cocaine trafficking cartel.


The A.M.A. -- Deja Vu, Again
Until recently, it looked as if the American Medical Association would vigorously support national health reform and thereby end an inglorious 50-year record of steadfast opposition.
In 1990, the A.M.A. embraced employer mandates (the requirement that employers pay for their workers' policies) as the swiftest route toward universal coverage; and last year it supported, with conditions, managed competition (President Clinton's system of providing private health insurance through huge purchasing cooperatives).
But now that the debate over reform is approaching a climax, the A.M.A. is changing its tune.
It has backed away from employer mandates and last week proposed a bill, laughably named the Patient Protection Act, that could eviscerate the Clinton plan.
Same old A.M.A.


John Andres and Conny Sasfai
Conny Sasfai, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ron Sasfai of Benton, Ark., is to be married today to John Andres, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard P. Andres of Allenhurst, N.J.
The Rev.
Brian Croak is to perform the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Rumson, N.J.
The bride, an actress and a dancer based in New York, recently completed the national tour of "La Cage aux Folles." She graduated from Oklahoma City University.
Her father is the used-truck division manager at Arkansas Kenworth in Little Rock, Ark.
Her mother, Brenda Sasfai, is an administrative assistant at Williams Tire and Service in Benton.


Ireland Brings Cup Team With an English Accent to America
According to the ancient chronicles, the early Celts were fierce warriors whose only fear was that the sky might fall on their heads.
According to virtually every Irish soccer fan, the only dread for the Irish national team is that it might never score a goal in its first-round World Cup games against Italy, Norway and Mexico.
This is an Irish anxiety as easy to find as the rain here and it is not daft.
For Coach Jack Charlton's team, which managed to advance to the cup quarterfinals four years ago without winning a game and with only two goals in five games, is a tenacious defensive gang still in search of a young striker to replace Niall Quinn, whose English club, Manchester City, won't let him play this summer's international soccer tournament in the United States.


Marilyn Gamzon And Scott Ostro
Marilyn Susan Gamzon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Gamzon of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married on Thursday to Scott Robert Ostro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Ostro of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Rabbi Shlomo Balter officiated at the New York Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Ostro, 33, is the president of the young leadership division of Alyn-New York, an organization that raises money for the medical treatment of physically handicapped children.
She graduated from New York University.


Melissa Chun And John Vecsey
Melissa Maelynn Chun, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan W. T. Chun of Honolulu, was married there yesterday to John Christopher Vecsey, the son of Mrs.
Richard Sutro Rothschild of White Plains and the late Armand J. Vecsey.
The Rev.
Wallace Kuroiwa performed the Congregational ceremony at the Nuuani Church.
The bride, 31, is a sales representative for the Emigrant Mortgage Company in New York.
She graduated from Pacific University.


No More McJobs for Mr. X
Tired of all the rumination and hand wringing about Generation X?
So, he says, is Douglas Coupland.
"It's beyond a cliche by now," said the author of "Generation X," a chronicle of twentysomething angst and sensibility whose title has become part of the vernacular.
Cliche or not, Mr.
Coupland's quirky first novel about three untethered young people in Palm Springs, Calif., with glossary entries in the margins for terms like McJob ("a low-pay, low-prestige, low-benefit, no-future job") and bleeding ponytail ("an elderly sold-out baby boomer who pines for hippie or pre-sellout days"), is still doing well.


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Heads Up
It's a little dark cloud on the bright horizon of next month's World Cup soccer championship, being played for the first time in the United States.
Even during the relatively soccerless years 1979-1993, the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report, 18 people (most of them children) were killed and 9 were injured by falling soccer goal posts.
Watch out.


Vancouver's Diverse Dining
VANCOUVER, the pristine city-on-the-bay that is considered one step below heaven by the environmentally conscious, is similarly reaching elevated heights with food.
Always considered a culinary country cousin to Seattle, about 150 miles to the south, this thriving port city of nearly half a million residents now offers ample opportunities for visitors to sample Northwest cooking at its best.
What is Northwest cooking, anyway?
Ask three chefs and you will likely get three answers.
Fundamentally, it is based on indigenous products like salmon, sea scallops, Dungeness crab, oysters, wild mushrooms and game.
And the vast influx of Chinese and other Asians in the past decade has added a bright new thread to the region's gastronomic quilt.


Tissue Illness And Implants: No Tie Is Seen
A new study of the causes of scleroderma, a devastating disease of the body's connective tissue, has failed to find an association between the disease and silicone breast implants.
Scleroderma is among the worst afflictions suspected of being caused by the implants.
A disease that apparently results from an attack by the immune system on the body, it hardens skin like a shell, causing disfigurement, and can damage the internal organs irreversibly.
There is no approved treatment, and people with severe cases die.


Ms. Diamond, Dr. Block
Deborah Diamond, the daughter of Miriam and Samuel Diamond of Philadelphia, is to be married there today to Dr.
Jonathan L. Block, a son of Anne and Alfred Block of Oakland, Calif.
Rabbi Aaron Landes is to officiate at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.


Ms. Hernandez And Mr. Lord
Amanda Hernandez, an associate at Sullivan &amp; Liapakis, a law firm in New York, is to be married today to Michael Harris Lord, an associate at Kittay, Gold &amp; Krebsbach, a law firm in White Plains.
Judge Howard A. Levine of the New York State Court of Appeals in Albany is to officiate at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
To Live Under a Big Tank
CALL it "One room, water view, both outside and inside." The historic-house tour in Roslyn on Saturday includes one historic nonhouse.
It's a water tower.
"But it's a very unusual building," said Dr.
Roger Gerry, president of the Roslyn Landmark Society.


With Three Cases on File, Police Units Work to Overcome Corruption Blemish
ARRESTS earlier this month of three Mount Vernon police officers on Federal charges capped the third large-scale corruption scandal in less than a month to hit the New York City-Westchester area.
And while some law-enforcement officials worried that a few dishonest officers were giving the rest a bad name, others claimed that efforts to root out corruption were long overdue.
The United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York moved first on 14 police officers in New York City's 30th Precinct, arresting them last month on charges including stealing from drug dealers and taking protection money.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
104.28
105.30
107.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6435
1.6470
1.5850
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3866
1.3795
1.2713
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5105
1.5065
1.5605
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.20
$385.60
$378.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


'The Deep Forbidden Music': How Doo-Wop Casts Its Spell
IN THE DIM BLUE LIGHT OF A suburban basement, Tony and Linda dance, almost motionless, wrapped in each other's arms, barely swaying to the music of the scratchy 45 that plays over and over.
"Earth angel, earth angel, will you be mine?" implores the singer in a raw trembling tenor over soft piano triplets as the group's other voices well up behind him with pleading "oh-woe-woes."
"Earth Angel" has been Tony and Linda's song since they began going steady two months ago.
It has become a shared heartbeat, an inner voice murmuring their deepest feelings.
As they cling to each other in a trance of desire, Linda's head rests on Tony's chest.
"I'm just a fool, a fool in love with you," the singer cries, floating them to a place they recognize as heaven on earth.


THE HAND-OFF
I want to applaud Ted Conover's painful and explicit portrait of Evelyn Mirach and Susan Leslie ("The Hand-Off," May 8).
I hope your readers appreciate how unexplored this territory is.
The moral dilemma depicted is all too familiar to anyone whose life has been touched by AIDS.
Evelyn Mirach is sick.
Her body is a battlefield.
She has no choice but to focus on herself.
Because Susan Leslie is "the healthier one," she is expected to rise above everything that's thrown her way and act responsibly.


More Than Sour Notes
To the Editor:
Michael Beckerman's comments on the Haydn sonata forgeries  [ "All Right, So Maybe Haydn Didn't Write Them. So What?" May 15 ]  are ill informed.


Fighting Colitis in the Computer Age
THE first time I had any symptoms, I thought it was dysentery caused by food poisoning," said Paul A. Gangi, a product manager at Prodigy, an on-line computer service in White Plains.
"The next time," Mr.
Gangi continued, "the attack was much worse, and I went to my family doctor who treated it as a stomach virus and put me on antibiotics. But I kept getting worse and losing weight. Finally, after many false starts, in 1989 I was diagnosed by Dr. Burton Korelitz, a specialist in the field, as having Crohn's disease."


Daniel Flood, 90, Who Quit Congress in Disgrace, Is Dead
Daniel J. Flood, who as a Congressman helped direct the billions of tax dollars that poured into Federal social programs in the 1960's and 1970's but resigned in disgrace in 1980, died yesterday at Mercy Hospital in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
He was 90 and lived in Wilkes-Barre.
The cause was pneumonia, according to the hospital.


It's Small, Cheap and Not a Hyundai
A GIANT monster rampages through a city as people flee in terror.
"There's only one thing more frightening to Japan," reads the text accompanying this clip from a science fiction movie.
"A well-made car for under $8,500."
The commercial, being shown in some parts of the United States, is for the Sephia, a compact car with a base price of $8,495 that is being introduced into the American market by Kia Motors Corporation, South Korea's No. 2 auto maker, behind Hyundai.
The Sephia will be followed at the end of the year by the Sportage, a small sport-utility vehicle that is drawing rave reviews.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  In a city where a jostle can become a fistfight, or worse, Ernie Odom fights anger with a mediator's measured calm.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Deconstructing dinner: Investigating the restaurant business, course by course, ingredient by ingredient.


If You're Thinking of Living In Spuyten Duyvil; Sunsets Over the Palisades, and Legends
FERNE LaDUE can tell it's spring when she hears the coxswains rhythmically barking strokes to Columbia University shell teams practicing on the Hudson River below her duplex in Spuyten Duyvil.
Her co-op in Villa Charlotte Bronte, where she and her family have lived for 25 years, is perched 150 feet above the river.
"I feel like I'm on a ship," said Mrs.
LaDue, who can see magnificent sunsets over the Palisades across the river.


GEORGE BUSH
George Bush in retirement demonstrates the same wrongheaded obliviousness to real life that he did in office.


Correction
An article last Sunday about New York City's Congressional delegation misstated a vote cast last year by Representative Carolyn B. Maloney.
She voted for President Clinton's economic stimulus package, not against it.


POSTINGS: Vincent Scully Lecture; Preservation, And How It Grew
It sometimes seems as if the entire architectural community in New York studied under the celebrated historian Vincent Scully, who taught at Yale University from 1947 to 1991.
For those who didn't -- or wish to again -- he is speaking on "Preservation and Modern Architecture," Wednesday at 6 P.M., at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue.
Tickets are $75, benefiting the New York Landmarks Conservancy, which is giving Mr.
Scully its Lucy G. Moses Preservation Leadership Award that night.
"He has shaped New York many times over simply by the breadth of his influence on architects and writers," said Peg Breen, president of the conservancy.


Puns on 'Rock,' Fine, but Beware of Bamm-Bamm
Trading Mom  Sissy Spacek, Anna Chlumsky Directed by Tia Brelis PG 82 minutes


BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
13
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
1
5
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
3
3
3
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
4
4
6
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
5
6
94
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
6
5
6
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder, stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
7
9
7
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
11
4
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
9
1
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $22.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, who lives in Montana.
10
7
15
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
11
13
5
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart transplant operation, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
12
8
59
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
13
14
19
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
14
10
7
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
15
1
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
55
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
6
2
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
3
2
4
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The memoirs of the country singer.
4
3
23
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
4
12
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
7
2
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
7
5
7
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
8
10
13
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician reflects on "life's final chapter."
9
9
6
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
10
14
20
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A discussion of love and relationships.
11
12
6
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
12
10
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
13
8
26
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
14*
11
34
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
15
92
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
16*
15
11
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
5
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
3
3
19
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
53
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 14, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time, by Jonathan Weiner. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating look over the shoulders of biologists who watched natural selection in motion over some 20 years in finch populations.
THE CONFIRMATION MESS: Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $21.) A law professor argues cogently that the Federal confirmation process has become a monster, grotesquely unfair to nominees of both right and left.
EDITH WHARTON: An Extraordinary Life, by Eleanor Dwight. (Abrams, $39.95.) This life of the novelist in whose work architecture serves virtually as a language lays special emphasis on the houses and gardens Wharton inhabited and carefully made her own; copious illustrations.
LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of Flexibility, by Bennett Harrison. (Basic Books, $25.) An economist's polemic against analysts who see small, efficient businesses as the models for social organization in a world of rapid change.
MASTERS OF AMERICAN SCULPTURE: The Figurative Tradition From the American Renaissance to the Millennium, by Donald Martin Reynolds. (Abbeville, $67.50.) A clear, readable art historian's guide, handsomely illustrated, to modern American figurative sculpture.
REMEMBERING SATAN, by Lawrence Wright. (Knopf, $22.) This stunning story about the perils of recovered memory concerns a man who, charged by his daughters with sexual abuse, generated his own memories of the events.
SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND, by Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft, affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.
SPECIAL TASKS: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster, by Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P. Schecter. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A valuable book about Stalin's terror apparatus by a man who served it, written with the help of his son and two journalists.
SUGGESTIONS OF ABUSE: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma, by Michael D. Yapko. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A simple explanation from an expert on hypnosis about why recovered memories, dredged up with the help of abuse therapists, are so unreliable.
UNCHAINED MEMORIES: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found, by Lenore Terr. (Basic Books, $22.) A psychiatrist relays tales of lost memories, including that of a woman who recovered the memory of her father murdering her childhood friend 20 years before.
A WAY IN THE WORLD, by V.S.
Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance, made of complementary narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.


Uproar Over a Plan to Bury Silt Offshore
For many residents of Rockaway, the prospect is outrageous.
The Army Corps of Engineers is planning to dredge 6.5 million cubic yards of contaminated silt from New York Harbor and bury it in an underwater pit about two miles off Breezy Point.
"You're taking it from a place where no one swims and almost no one fishes and dumping it in an area where you have great use of the waterways," said Jonathan Gaska, the district manager of Community Board 14, which comprises Rockaway and Broad Channel.
"It could affect the fragile ecosystem of Jamaica Bay, which has been improving. And the surrounding area -- Staten Island, Brooklyn and Rockaway and Broad Channel -- all could suffer from the effects of this."


Typed Orders by Phone
For customers with impaired hearing or speech, 1-800-Fly Cheap (359-2432), a telephone travel agency specializing in discounted airline tickets, has installed a text telephone system.
The text telephone, (800) 999-9981, enables clients to order airline tickets through typed conversations with an agent at the San Diego-based travel service.
Tickets are shipped by the U.P.S. two-day air service.


Shades of Success in Purple
To the Editor:
Bravo for your article on Orit Gadiesh, chairman of Bain &amp; Company ("Don't Ever Judge This Consultant by Her Cover," Profile, May 1).
For years, rock stars have proved that purple hair is no deterrent to making million-dollar profits -- if you tune in to your customer the right way.
Nice to see adaptive thinking being wielded -- albeit unintentionally -- as a tool for success by leaders like Ms.
Gadiesh.
Way cool.
KARIN M. DOUCETTE Seattle, May 2 The writer is the principal of Marketing Communications Solutions.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CREATURE ENGINEERING
It's not the beavers that interest Paul Harper, it's their dams.
He has studied the complex structures exhaustively and come up with an entire exhibition of "Beaver Pond Drawings" that may be seen through June 12 at the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London.
The drawings were executed over the past year and a half in charcoal on 38-by 50-inch watercolor paper, and the result is a fascinating demonstration of abstract design and functional engineering.
Mr.
Harper is a retired advertising executive who studied at the Art Students League in New York, the Institute of Design in Chicago, the Lyme Academy of Fine Arts in Connecticut, and with Robert Reed in New Haven.
He has also served as a trustee of the Brooklyn Museum in New York, the Rhode Island School of Design and the Lyme Academy.


U.S. Tied in Road Match Played at Home
The United States got another dose of virtual reality today in preparation for the World Cup, playing a road game at home to finish an inconclusive Eastern swing with a 1-1 draw against Greece.
After a 3-2 defeat to Bayern Munich of Germany and draws against the World Cup finalists Greece and Saudi Arabia in the span of eight days, the United States remains an unknown quantity, displaying flashes of promise on attack and recurring moments of disarray on defense.


Melon Blight Leaves Georgia Growers With Sour Outlook
The Fourth of July and watermelon.
Both are probably rivaled only by mom and apple pie in evoking a tableau of Americana.
And each year in late June, rail cars, tractor trailers and dusty pickup trucks laden with watermelons rumble out of this town of 10,000 people in south-central Georgia, their cargoes headed for picnics, family outings and holiday celebrations throughout the eastern United States.
But growers like Oren Childers are nervous.
They are walking their sandy fields, eyeing their half-grown fruit for early signs of a new, stealthy scourge: watermelon bacterial fruit blotch.


Herb Heaven Must Be Something Like This
WHEN a certain breeze blows across my Brooklyn rooftop, smelling of the river, I long to get out east, where the light is brighter from reflecting off all that water -- Long Island Sound to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the south -- where plants thrive in the sandy loam and the salt air, where the growing season is long and luxurious.
It's a garden writer's privilege to shun the office on such days and say with urgency, "I have to get out to the Peconic River Herb Farm." So last Tuesday, I headed down the Belt Parkway (to ride beside the sparkling water) and on to the Southern State, jogged north up the Sagtikos and gunned my old Trooper eastward along the (unjammed!) Long Island Expressway to Exit 71.


May 22-28; Neither Player nor Hall of Famer
Throughout the history of major league baseball, only 16 players have hit at least 245 home runs before their 30th birthdays.
All are in the Hall of Fame with the exception of those still active.
Eddie Murray.
Jose Canseco.
And, until last week, Darryl Strawberry.
Strawberry, baseball's troubled prodigal son, the player with so much potential, so many demons, is no longer active, nor is he a Hall of Famer.
The player who admitted to having a substance abuse problem last month was given his unconditional release by the Los Angeles Dodgers Wednesday.


Pamela Von Essen and John W. Keller
Pamela Von Essen, a daughter of Rita and Thomas Von Essen of Rockville Centre, L.I., is to be married there today to Dr.
John Warren Keller, a son of Martha and Roy Keller of WaKeeney, Kan.
The Rev.
James F. Quigley is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.
The bride, 25, is the law clerk for Judge John W. Lungstrum of Federal District Court in Kansas City, Kan.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, and both received professional degrees from the University of Kansas, she in law, he in medicine.
Her father is the president of the New York City Uniformed Firefighters Association in Manhattan.


A Taste of French Music On City Island
PIERRE SAINT-DENIS, the owner of Le Refuge Inn on City Island, says he opened his bed-and-breakfast establishment "to bring a little bit of France" to the Bronx.
On opening day about a year ago, he brought a little bit of music there too, beginning a late-morning series of free concerts titled "Tous les Matins du Monde," after the celebrated film about composers and viola da gamba players of the French Baroque era.
While Mr.
Saint-Denis looked after the antiques-filled Victorian house, Ilan Rechtman, the Israeli-born pianist (and more often harpsichordist, because the series is devoted to early music), organized the recitals, bringing in ensembles of up to 16 players every Sunday at 11:30 A.M.
"The concerts are generally packed, mostly with people from Westchester," he said.
"About half the programs are performed on original instruments, but aside from the musical content, what makes them so special are the beautiful French country-style surroundings."


Housing Jewel in the Bronx Loses Its Luster
When Merna Wright, 48, an immigrant from Antigua, bought her two-bedroom apartment in the Parkchester housing development for $36,000 eight years ago, she thought she had achieved the American dream.
But now that dream is crumbling like the soggy plaster in her apartment.
Her dank apartment stinks of decay.
Mold and mildew cover her walls, and the paint is peeling.
All her possessions, save a sofa and some knickknacks, are in the middle of the room, covered with plastic sheets.


Harriet Gans; Photographer, 55
Harriet Gans, a photographer who showed her work in New York galleries and museums, died on Wednesday at her home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
She was 55.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Most Playgrounds Are Unsafe, Report Says
More than 90 percent of the nation's playgrounds are too dangerous for children, according to a survey released this week by the Consumer Federation of America and the United States Public Interest Research Group, a consumer watchdog group.
The survey, based on 443 playgrounds in 22 states, revealed that 406 of them, or 92 percent, had no cushioned surfacing under jungle gyms, slides, swings or other equipment.
Fifty-five percent had equipment that children could get their heads stuck in, and 57 percent had equipment so high that falling from the top would cause injury.


Correction
An article last Sunday about New York City's Congressional delegation misstated a vote cast last year by Representative Carolyn B. Maloney.
She voted for President Clinton's economic stimulus package, not against it.


Ancient Rock in Crosscurrents of Today
On Sundays at St.
Thomas the Apostle Church, in a gang-ridden area near downtown, the pews fill up for the Spanish-English Mass at 10:45.
Then at the noon Mass, the one that features a mariachi band in gray costumes with gold buttons down the legs, the aisles are jammed and the congregation spills out the front and side doors onto the sidewalk.
"Between 5,000 and 6,000 come each Sunday -- 10,000 on the big feast days," said the Rev.
Dennis O'Neil, St.
Thomas's 54-year-old pastor.
The worshipers are largely Salvadorans, Hondurans, Guatemalans and Mexicans, including lots of young couples with babies in their arms and toddlers in tow.


Fresh Air Fund Finds New Generations
In 1934, Mary Armato, then 12 years old, boarded a train that took her far from the Manhattan apartment she shared with 10 siblings and her mother, to a small family farm in Schaghticoke, N.Y., for two weeks that she has never forgotten.
"It was a very quaint town," she said.
"On the farm, we hunted for eggs and watched the cows being milked. We would play all day and sometimes we would go to a fair, or to Sunday church. I have very lovely memories of that time."


QUEENS UPDATE
ROCKAWAY: What's left of the beaches along the Rockaway Peninsula, after a stormy winter, will open this weekend.
And though the sand may be sparse, Queens Borough President Claire Shulman last week offered some hope for the future: a long-sought $20 million replenishment of the Rockaway shoreline will begin early this fall.
The Army Corps of Engineers, which is overseeing the project, will put the contract out for bid next month.
The Corps will pump sand from the ocean and deposit it along the heavily eroded peninsula between Beach 20th Street and Beach 149th Street.


U.S. Takes a Nuclear Power Step Backward; Eximbank's Standards
To the Editor:
An important issue mentioned only briefly in your May 22 article on Czech reactors and Westinghouse is the United States Export-Import Bank's lack of adequate procedures for reviewing the environmental impacts of the projects it guarantees.
The Eximbank's environmental procedures are far weaker than those of other Federal agencies, such as the Agency for International Development and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation.
In Congressional testimony Feb. 23, Kenneth Brody, Eximbank president and chairman, called procedures "obviously unsatisfactory," acknowledging they had to be "substantially strengthened." Eximbank's activities should be transparent and publicly accountable, and consistent with United States environmental foreign policy, including the Rio Climate and Biodiversity Conventions.


Kim A. Kellogg, Alan D. Devoe
Dr.
Kim Anne Kellogg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwight A. Kellogg of White Plains, is to be married today to Alan Daniel Devoe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel F. Devoe of Coronado, Calif.
The Rev.
William S. James performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Tarrytown House, in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is a second-year resident in pathology at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received her medical degree from Tufts University.


In America; Chasing the Truth
At first it was annoying, but it also seemed kind of funny.
Jim Grossman of the Howard Rubenstein public relations firm, which has been hired to spruce up the image of the Harvard Club in its dispute with striking workers, was telling me that the club was not trying to get the workers to contribute to the cost of their health insurance.
I knew he was wrong, but it seemed like an easy thing to clear up.
He insisted he was right and our conversation began to sound like one of those increasingly incoherent exchanges in a Martin Scorsese movie:


Ilana Feldberg and David Adelman
Ilana Feldberg, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Meyer Feldberg of New York, is to be married today to David Jerome Adelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Adelman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Edward Feld is to officiate at the Arden House in Harriman, N.Y.
The bride, 23, graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
She is an assistant buyer at Bloomingdale's, in New York.
Her father is the dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Business.
Her mother, Barbara Feldberg, is an artist.


Michele Crespo, Anthony Fierro
Michele Crespo, a nurse instructor for the AIDS services program of the Visiting Nurse Service of New York, was married yesterday to Anthony Fierro, a partner in Raytburg &amp; Fierro, a Brooklyn law firm.
The Rev.
Rudolph Gonzalez officiated at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Candido DelPizzo, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25, graduated from New York University, she cum laude.
Ms.
Crespo-Fierro is a candidate for combined master's degrees in nursing and public health at Hunter College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson Crespo of New York.


Political Partying: Whatever the Party, One Hotel Serves
Two of the longest-running parties at the Sheraton hotel complex on Seventh Avenue are the Democrats and Republicans.
The New York State Republican Party just concluded its convention there on Wednesday.
The week before, it was the scene of Mayor Giuliani's $1,000-a-plate dinner, drawing more than $1 million.
His Democratic predecessor, David N. Dinkins, held his election-night rally there in November, as did Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi and Public Advocate Mark Green.
The year before, the Sheraton served as headquarters for the Democratic National Convention.


Corinne Walsh, Charles Peterson
Corinne Low Walsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter D. Walsh of Franklin Lakes, N.J., is to be married there today to Charles William Peterson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John W. Peterson of Carbondale, Ill.
The Rev.
John Fitzgerald is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Most Blessed Sacrament Church.
Ms.
Walsh is the office administrator for the Open Hearth Association, a shelter for homeless men in Hartford.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a senior vice president at Tradition Inc., a financial services company in New York.


Virginia Registers Upset of Syracuse
"The fight was the most important thing," said Dom Starsia, the Virginia coach.
He spoke not of fisticuffs but of the will to fight from behind.
And twice the Cavaliers did, each time coming back from five goals down against mighty Syracuse.
Then, in sudden-death overtime today, Virginia beat the defending champions who were seeded No. 1 in this National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I lacrosse tournament.
No. 5 Virginia, behind by 8-3 in the second period and by 12-7 at the end of the third, won, 15-14.


Technology; An Electric Bus Bypasses a Battery Barrier
FUELED by clean air rules, the electric vehicle may be just down the road.
But the weak point in electric vehicles is still generally believed to be batteries.
But Joseph P. Maceda is showing off a 30-foot, 25-passenger electric transit bus, complete with wheelchair lift, 150-mile range and acceleration as good as a diesel, and it has hardly any batteries at all.


The Executive Computer; Data Base Workhorse Goes Windows
MOST long-lived software products engender a degree of commitment among users, but some, like dBase, come to inspire an almost religious devotion.
So when Borland International Inc. set out to convert this venerable product to the Windows format, it took on a considerable task.
Nearly three years later, dBase for Windows is scheduled to ship at the end of June.
Along with the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet and the old Word Star word processor, dBase was one of the software products that drove the early success of the personal computer a decade ago.
But although it was packaged in shrink-wrapped boxes and sold alongside those products, dBase was never a ready-to-run application.


Discoveries Made Along The Croisette
THE REWARDS OF THE CANNES international Film Festival go well beyond the pleasure of hearing the word Hudsucker pronounced with a French accent, though certainly that was one of them.
Cannes offers an incomparably broad overview of world cinema, with all its contrasts and extremes.
The arts of self-promotion are as well displayed here as the artistry on screen, and it takes a cool head to keep them separate.
Nearly two weeks' worth of cinematic overload and celebrity drumbeating do not encourage cool thinking, but then that's the whole point.
The first step to frenzy is well-orchestrated confusion.
Cannes thrives on that.
You arrive here to daily press handouts that do not necessarily intend to shed light.
From one Monday's listings, some sample film synopses: "A deluded bank robber believes he is King Arthur." "The humdrum life of a couple is disrupted by the arrival of an anonymous love poem." "A nocturnal homosexual preys on elderly women, kidnapping them and killing them." "A retired judge wins the affection of a young model who accidentally hit his dog with her car."


Synagogues Propose a Ritual Fence
If everything goes according to plan, Adeena Penner will soon be able push her 2-year-old daughter in a stroller to the Lincoln Square Synagogue.
Her husband, Marc, who is to become an assistant rabbi at the synagogue soon, will be able to carry keys to get the family back into their apartment after services.


One Man's Tribute to War Veterans


SUNDAY, May 29, 1994; Deep Freeze, Cool Sound
The people from Thermal Curv don't look musically inclined when they pull into town with an ice-encrusted tank of liquid nitrogen and what looks like a basement meat locker on the back of their truck.
But among musicians, word has been spreading that a night spent in the minus 300 degrees of the Ohio company's box will do wonders for any metal instrument.
For reasons no one entirely understands, extreme cold is good for metal, apparently removing stresses created during its manufacture.
Swiss watchmakers have long stored parts high in the mountains, and nitrogen-freezing technology has been developed over the last 20 years for drill bits, saw blades and other tools.
What draws the musicians, though, is the effect on sound.
Which is?
"The sound has more belly," says Victor Rislow, a trumpeter who has sent all eight of his instruments into the icy blast.


Susan Thomsen, Norman Trepner
Susan Thomsen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Thomsen of Jackson, Miss., was married yesterday to Norman Trepner, the son of Ivan Trepner of Las Vegas, Nev., and Barbara Epstein of Hackensack, N.J.
Don R. Johnson, a leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at the society's center in Manhattan.
The bride is the assistant editor of the Goings On About Town section of The New Yorker.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.


K. G. McAnaney, G. D. Molinsky Jr.
Kathleen Glennon McAnaney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. McAnaney 2d of New York, was married on Friday to George Donald Molinsky Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Molinsky of Kettering, Ohio.
The Rev.
Michael J. Heppen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Molinsky graduated cum laude from Harvard University, and she and her husband rceived law degrees from the University of Notre Dame.
The couple expect to become law associates in Cincinnati in September, she at Vorys, Sater, Seymour &amp; Pease and he at Taft, Stettinius &amp; Hollister.
Her father, a lawyer, is the president of the Peter B. and Adeline W. Ruffin Foundation in New York, a foundation supporting education.


Trying to Get Day Workers Off the Street
For more than 15 years, scores of men have gathered daily along 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst, desperately waiting for trucks, vans or cars to pull up -- their drivers in search of unskilled laborers for low-paying jobs, often involving construction, moving or restaurant work.
But the day workers, mostly undocumented immigrants from Mexico and Central America, have never been met with open arms by the residents and merchants along 18th Avenue between Bay Ridge Avenue and 72d Street.
They have complained that the workers are nuisances who litter and harrass passers-by.
Last year residents' complaints led to arrests and fines for loitering. (The police say they do not have specific arrest figures.)


A Blue-Shirted Beast Worth a Goal a Game
Far below us, no larger than his image on a television screen, the Ranger goalkeeper was lost in the moment.
As were we.
The game was tied, there were no winners or losers yet, all was hope.
Mike Richter had forgotten exactly which game this was, precisely what score it was, the bumps on the journey that had brought him to this moment, or the possible turns in the road ahead.
All he knew, he would later say, was that he wanted to win because this season had been so good it had to go on.


Nameless, Fameless Canucks Are Year's Biggest Giant-Killers
They dusted off the news footage from 1982 on Thursday, playing back the pictures and sounds on Canadian television.
Included was a segment taped on the streets of New York titled, "What's a Canuck?"
"An Indian name, right?" a Long Island woman asked.
"A Canuck," shouted a Brooklyn cabbie, straightfaced, "is the plural of Canucker."


When a Life Honors Art
The Studio Museum in Harlem salutes a patron and an artist at its 26th anniversary celebration, May 16.


The Water Table
Sometimes the rivers that splice the American landscape roll cheerfully along, soaking and softening the land.
Other times, they churn like a hell-born fury, eating up fields and farms, topsoil and towns.
It is precisely this wild, unpredictable nature that's made the river an icon of freedom.
Beneath the surface of even the most placid stretch lies a perennial reminder of human vulnerability.
And that's how we began, two on a raft, gliding serenely down a patch of the Yampa River between Colorado and Utah.
We pushed off into a bastion of deceptive calm, lulled by the swish of the oars, caressed by the slog of benevolent brown water.


As the World Has Turned, So Has Helen Wagner
Helen Wagner HAS BEEN playing Nancy Hughes on "As the World Turns" since Mamie Eisenhower was a fan and a soap opera divorcee could remarry only after the timely death of her former husband.
Ms.
Wagner delivered the show's first line in 1956, and she was on live television, debating whether her soap son should remarry his faithless ex-wife, when Walter Cronkite broke in to announce that President Kennedy had been shot.
The character she created became an icon for a generation of women who understood her mostly futile attempts to run the perfect household and raise the perfect children.
Nancy was Donna Reed with real problems in the days before soap characters traveled through time, engaged in espionage or almost routinely were reunited with evil twins.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
IN THE PARKS  Discovering Happy Trails In the Middle of the City
If you missed the Urban Park Rangers' Bass Blast on the East River two weeks ago that celebrated a certain striped fish, be of good cheer.
On Saturday at parks in all five boroughs, the rangers will be leading the first urban celebration of National Trails Day.


CRIME
You need an annotated, indexed program to sort out the good guys from the bad guys in TAKE (Foul Play/Countryman, $20).
A witty tragi comedy of errors, Bill James's British police procedural examines an ill-fated armed robbery from every angle before coming to a cynical conclusion: cops and crooks are kin beneath the skin, and only blind chance determines who prevails in the end.
Colin Harpur, the provincial detective who gives this series its clever tongue and cutting edge, does not so much detect as stumble across the ambitious payroll heist being organized by a career criminal so cautious he is known as Planner.
Harpur and Planner have always regarded each other with respect; as well they might, given the similarity of their work ethics and domestic values.
But because these adversaries also share the vanity of middle-aged males, both ignore their instincts about this job to prove that they are still young and virile leaders of men.


How Yemen Is Coming Undone
A FEW days before full-scale war broke out this month in Yemen, armored brigades from the north and the south clashed at an army base north of the capital, Sana.
The entanglement left scores of dead and wounded, and the usual detritus of battle.
And in its wake, hundreds of armed mountain tribesmen, partisans of neither side, descended on the camp and made off with stockpiles of weapons and other combat gear.
If the battle was a prelude to the vicious civil war now engulfing this country of 13 million people on the tip of the Arabian Peninsula, the stripping of the dead may be a signpost to what will follow.
What Yemen entered, even before the south formally seceded, is a struggle not only between the regular armies of north and south, but among the tribes, militias, clans and families that rule patches of territory as if there were no federal government -- as if the Middle Ages had never ended.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
10
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
2
6
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
3
5
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
4
1
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
5
4
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Their mother's sins haunt a boy and girl.
6
2
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A terrorist conspiracy.
7
15
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young boy learns a deadly secret.
8
5
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
9
6
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
10
3
SURRENDER MY LOVE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) A viking seeks revenge.
11
4
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) The Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
12
4
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
13
5
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A physician in a Texas town.
14
21
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
15
1
INTEREST OF JUSTICE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A judge's pursuit of the murderer of her sister and brother-in-law.
16*
1
THE LEGACY, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.99.) Upon returning to Australia to care for her ailing father, a woman rekindles an old love.
17*
10
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities behind an outwardly happy family.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
20
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
4
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
3*
551
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
2
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
5
20
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6
67
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
3
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A young woman's mental illness.
8
6
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
9*
52
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
10*
5
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
11*
9
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
12
137
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
13
30
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
14
151
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15
150
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
16*
12
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
17*
1
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
167
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
174
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
32
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
4
THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $6.99.) Health and fitness advice for women.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 14, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Food Exported to Haiti Does Not Violate International Embargo


BENEFITS
Jobs for the Handicapped  TUESDAY -- Just One Break was founded in 1947 by Eleanor Roosevelt, Orin Lehman, Bernard Baruch and Dr.
Howard Rusk to support the idea that disabled people should be given job opportunities.
A black-tie benefit will be held for the organization at the Plaza.
Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Petrie, the philanthropists, will be honored.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 685-1095.
Historic House Party  WEDNESDAY -- A group of young supporters of the Old Merchant's House, Greenwich Village's only historic house museum, will hold a fund-raiser at the museum, 29 East Fourth Street, from 6 to 9 P.M.
There will be cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a swing band, and guests may browse through the museum's three floors.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 685-1095.
The Subject Is Architecture  WEDNESDAY -- Vincent Scully, the architectural historian, will deliver a lecture at Sotheby's, where he will also receive the Lucy G. Moses Preservation Leadership Award from the New York Landmarks Conservancy.
Cocktails and the lecture will be at 6 P.M. followed by dinner at 8 o'clock at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street.
The event benefits the conservancy.
Tickets, $250, or $75 for cocktails and lecture alone, from (212) 995-5260.
Building New York  WEDNESDAY -- The Settlement Housing Fund, a private, nonprofit group that has developed 6,500 units of moderate-priced housing throughout New York City, will hold a party celebrating its 25th anniversary.
The benefit will be under a tent at South Street and Rutgers Slip near the Manhattan Bridge.
This is in the Two Bridges Urban Renewal Area, in Manhattan between the Manhattan and Brooklyn bridges, a neighborhood where the group has created 1,166 apartments.
There will be cocktails and an extensive offering of foods.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 265-6530.
Rockefellers Honored  WEDNESDAY -- The Rockefeller family will be honored for its conservation efforts by Scenic Hudson, an organization dedicated to the preservation of the 150-mile-long historic Hudson Valley.
The black-tie benefit at the Plaza starts with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner, dancing and an auction of trips and special events.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660.
Reception for Horse Lovers  WEDNESDAY -- A reception and private viewing of sporting and marine paintings and sculpture at Sotheby's will benefit the National Horse Show Foundation.
The event, from 6 to 8 P.M., will support amateur equestrian sports.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 686-2929.
Dancers at the Joyce  WEDNESDAY -- An evening called "Dancers and Friends," with performances by leading dancers and choreographers like Margie Gillis, Gregory Hines, Julio Bocca, John Kelly and Daniel Ezralow, will benefit Friends in Deed, a nonmedical support center in SoHo for people with severe illnesses.
The 7:30 P.M. performance at the Joyce Theater, Eighth Avenue at 19th Street, will be followed by a buffet dinner at the Loft, Fifth Avenue near 17th Street.
Tickets, $250 for performance and buffet, $100 for the performance alone, from (800) 996-5433. 'Grill a Politician'  THURSDAY -- A score of city and state legislators and officials will be on hand for questioning on environmental issues at the annual fund-raiser for the New York League of Conservation Voters.
The black-tie "Grill a Politician for Dinner" benefit will aid the nonpartisan group's lobbying efforts for environmental causes.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at the St.
Regis will be followed by dinner, questions for the politicians, dancing and an auction of trips, special events and other items.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 777-3536.
For Jewish-Arab Coexistence  THURSDAY -- The Abraham Fund, created to support Jewish-Arab coexistence in Israel, will hold its second fund-raiser at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
The event starts with dinner at 6:45 P.M., which will be followed by speeches by the Mayor of Jerusalem, Ehud Olmert, and the highest-ranking Arab in the Israeli Government, Deputy Minister of Health Nawaf Massalha.
Then, a group of American and Israeli entertainers (Jewish and Arab), headed by Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson, will perform.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 303-9420.
Lincoln Center Picnic  THURSDAY -- Beatrice Arthur will be the host of a picnic lunch under a tent in Damrosch Park to benefit Lincoln Center Productions.
After a cocktail reception at noon, guests will hear previews of upcoming events, including performances by the Tokyo String Quartet and Max Roach.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 875-5460.
Animation Auction  THURSDAY -- Variety, a children's charity, will benefit from the auction of 72 animation drawings, including signed originals and limited editions used in the creation of some now-famous cartoons.
The auction starts at 6:30 P.M. and includes a buffet dinner at the Copacabana, 617 West 57th Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 247-5588, or $45 at the door.
Street Dancing Indoors  THURSDAY -- Dancing in the Streets, the performing group that has presented productions in public spaces ranging from Grand Central Terminal to waterfront warehouses, will celebrate its 10th anniversary with a benefit at the Winter Garden in the World Financial Center.
The performance at 7 P.M. will represent the group's diverse activities, with performances by the Palladium Mambo Dancers, the New York City Ballet, Bebe Miller &amp; Company and Meredith Monk and Theo Bleckmann.
The performances will be followed by dancing and a buffet dinner at Sfuzzi, also at the Winter Garden.
Tickets, $100, or $175 a couple, from (212) 989-6830.
Aiding a Tutorial Program  THURSDAY -- To help meet a goal of raising $100,000 for the East Harlem Tutorial Program, the authors Calvin Trillin and George Plimpton have organized a benefit at the 92d Street Y on Lexington Avenue, featuring the Alvin Ailey dancers, readings from several authors and other entertainment.
A reception will follow the 7:30 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $50, or $250 for preferred seating, from (212) 831-0650.
Library Party  THURSDAY -- The New York Public Library will hold its annual spring benefit at the library on Fifth Avenue at 42d Street, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Dinner and dancing follow.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, or $300 for people 35 and under, from (212) 930-0730.
Dinner on the Lake  THURSDAY -- The New York Division of the American Cancer Society will hold its annual benefit at a dinner-dance in the Boathouse Cafe on the Lake in Central Park from 7 to 11 P.M.
The benefit will include a raffle of European and Caribbean trips and other prizes.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 237-3890.
Cabaret at St.
Bart's  THURSDAY, FRIDAY, SATURDAY -- The St.
Bart's Players, the acting company that takes its name from St.
Bartholomew's Church at Park Avenue at 50th Street, in whose annex it performs, will stage three cabaret shows to benefit the company.
On Thursday and Friday, the shows, with music from Broadway musicals of the 1950's, will be at 8 P.M.
On Saturday, there will be a matinee at 2 P.M.
Beverages will be available for sale.
Tickets, $12, from (212) 751-1616, extension 219.
Hospital's 150th  FRIDAY -- The Brooklyn Hospital Center will celebrate its 1844 founding with a dinner-dance in tents on the Esplanade of the Brooklyn Bridge next to the River Cafe in Brooklyn.
During the party there will be a water display from a fireboat on the East River.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (718) 250-8325.
Jazz at the Abyssinian  SATURDAY -- The Wynton Marsalis Sextet will perform the trumpeter's "In This House, on This Morning," a composition reflecting the influence of African-American churches on many styles of music, especially jazz.
The 7 P.M. performance at the church, 132 Odell Clark Place (132 West 138th), will benefit the Children's Defense Fund and various church programs.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 862-7474.


Selling A Small Co-op
TALES of a strengthening marketplace in New York City are cold comfort for anyone trying to sell a studio or one-bedroom apartment.
While neighbors in larger units may boast of many offers, the smaller sizes still sit unwanted and apparently unloved.
In Manhattan there were even more one-bedroom apartments for sale this month than 12 months earlier -- 3,261 versus 3,163, according to the Corcoran Group, which compiles Manhattan figures.
Studios fared marginally better -- 605 versus 774 at the same time in 1993.


F.Y.I.
Coffee Break?
Q.
Although I believe I have figured out many of our city's oddities, one mystery remains: what happens when hot dog vendors and the like need to take a break?
Must they go the whole day without going to the bathroom or using the phone?


Sandwiches Dress Up for Special Summer Occasions
THE official start of summer is several weeks away, but despite the calendar the season starts this weekend.
Cooking and entertaining lighten up, becoming easier and more informal.
This calls for sandwiches.
Of course, sandwiches are essential for picnics and quick lunches, but given adequate embellishment, they can also move to the hors d'oeuvres platter, a weekend lunch for guests or a casual supper.


St. Petersburg
About St.
Petersburg, an echoing, haunted city, there is no end of dreaming.
Created at enormous human cost out of the marshes by the singular will of Peter the Great, who wanted to force his country's face toward the West in the early 18th century, St.
Petersburg embodies the torn, neurotic spirit of Russia.
With its elegant vistas and pale ice-cream colors, it is a dream-like version of Europe -- barely an Asiatic onion dome was allowed on these churches -- executed in the Russian totalitarian style.
In June, this month of White Nights, the poet Joseph Brodsky writes, the buildings, deprived of shadow and roofs rimmed in gold, look like fragile china.
The sky becomes tawny pink, and it's difficult to fall asleep, he says, "because it's too light, and because any dream will be inferior to this reality."


Loren B. Fleisig, Bruce M. Frankel
Dr.
Loren Beth Fleisig, the daughter of Gail Hasson of Wantagh, L.I., and Norbert Fleisig of San Antonio, is to be married today to Dr.
Bruce Michael Frankel, a son of Fanita and Irving Frankel of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Bennet Herman is to officiate at Westbury (L.I.) Manor.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25, received medical degrees from Syracuse University, where they expect to begin residencies in July, she in obstetrics and gynecology and he in neurological surgery.


Traffic Jams or Easy Riding? Two Views
With two warring traffic studies in hand, the Bureau of Standards and Appeals is about to rule on a major issue for the Upper West Side: whether to allow a 117,000-square-foot gym to open in the huge cluster of development at Lincoln Square.
One study, commissioned by the club's developers, Reebok and Spectrum Sports Clubs, found that the gym, at Columbus Avenue and 68th Street, would not create a noticeable difference in automobile and pedestrian traffic in the area.


Vancouver's Diverse Dining
VANCOUVER, the pristine city-on-the-bay that is considered one step below heaven by the environmentally conscious, is similarly reaching elevated heights with food.
Always considered a culinary country cousin to Seattle, about 150 miles to the south, this thriving port city of nearly half a million residents now offers ample opportunities for visitors to sample Northwest cooking at its best.
What is Northwest cooking, anyway?
Ask three chefs and you will likely get three answers.
Fundamentally, it is based on indigenous products like salmon, sea scallops, Dungeness crab, oysters, wild mushrooms and game.
And the vast influx of Chinese and other Asians in the past decade has added a bright new thread to the region's gastronomic quilt.


A 'Romeo and Juliet' That's True to Form
THE New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's "Romeo and Juliet" starts with a shriek and a brawl.
The director, Jimmy Bohr, has fashioned what you might call an in-your-face production, from the first wild fray to a final bloody love death.
Although verse is on hold while the swords play, do not think that the director's priorities are askew.
Glad to say, the company does not fail the words.


Tagged Stuffed Animals Circle The Globe for a Third-Grade Class
THIS year Cynthia Evan's third-grade class at the Ridgeway School here has visited a turtle farm in the Cayman Islands, a Buddhist temple in Thailand and an office building in Tokyo.
They have flown over active volcanoes and crossed the international dateline several times.
The class trips have been vicarious, though -- the children, in an effort to learn about the world they live in -- sent out stuffed animals as their emissaries.
But what started out as an innovative exercise in geography also turned out to be a lesson on the creativity and thoughtfulness of strangers.
Through the efforts of dozens of people unknown to the class but willing to help them with their project, the stuffed animals -- teddy bears, giraffes, even a toucan -- traveled farther and wider than anyone had anticipated.
Cards and Letters From Afar
The venture began last December, when Miss Evans asked class members to bring a stuffed animal (not their most beloved, in case it didn't return from its travels) to class.
The toys were outfitted with small knapsacks and wore a tag around their necks, which read:


The Nation; Denny's Gets A Bill for the Side Orders Of Bigotry
IT seemed like a bad time warp, a throwback to the era when black Americans were relegated to the rear of the bus and were turned away from lunch counters.
Announcing last week that it had broken widespread discrimination at the Denny's restaurant chain, the Justice Department described incidents of bias occurring well into the 1990's, involving thousands of black customers who told of being refused service or being forced to wait longer or pay more than white customers.


Jessica Feinberg, Kenneth S. Lesnik
Jessica Ann Feinberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Feinberg of New York, was married last evening to Kenneth Stuart Lesnik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Lesnik of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Paul Steinberg performed the ceremony at Temple Rodeph Shalom in New York.
Mrs.
Lesnik, 26, and her husband, 28, graduated from Union College in Schnectady, N.Y.
She is studying for a master's degree in social work at Columbia University.
Her father is a psychiatrist in New York and an assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her mother, Mary-Ellen Feinberg, is an owner of Gemini Antiques in Great Barrington, Mass.


May 22-28: Realpolitik Wins; Europe Shies Away From Rwandan Slaughter
The tragedy unfolding in Rwanda has shaken Europeans just as it has shaken people around the world.
But although the mass killings there have sparked much sympathy and anguish, they have not led to calls for European intervention.
Exasperated by the refusal of most countries to send troops, United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said, "Unfortunately, let us say with great humility, I failed. It is a scandal. I am the first one to say it, and I am ready to repeat it."


Engineers, M.B.A.'s And Teamwork
To the Editor:
We at M.I.T. read with interest "The Lesson: M.B.A.'s and Engineers Need Each Other" (May 15).
As you stated "the hope is that students will go on to help overcome the divisions between specialties that make American manufacturers less competitive."
We believe that these programs are an important part of our educational system, and we hope that many other universities adopt similar approaches.
M.I.T., in partnership with 13 leading American manufacturers, has taken a leadership role in these programs.
While most of the current programs are in their infancy, we instituted our dual-degree program in manufacturing in 1988.


Post-Party Depression
LIFE, LIBERTY AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS By Peggy Noonan. 255 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


May 22-28; Neither Player nor Hall of Famer
Throughout the history of major league baseball, only 16 players have hit at least 245 home runs before their 30th birthdays.
All are in the Hall of Fame with the exception of those still active.
Eddie Murray.
Jose Canseco.
And, until last week, Darryl Strawberry.
Strawberry, baseball's troubled prodigal son, the player with so much potential, so many demons, is no longer active, nor is he a Hall of Famer.
The player who admitted to having a substance abuse problem last month was given his unconditional release by the Los Angeles Dodgers Wednesday.


Jacqueline Miller, H. W. Hawkey Jr.
Jacqueline Ann Miller, a daughter of Anne and Lynn H. Miller of Evergreen, Colo., was married yesterday to Harold Willis Hawkey Jr., a son of Joan and Harold Hawkey of Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Kenneth C. Williams, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Rockland Community Church in Lookout Mountain, Colo.
Mrs.
Hawkey, 30, is an associate at William Blair &amp; Company, the Chicago investment bank.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Texas.


POSTINGS: New Studios in Rockefeller Center; NBC's 'Today' Finds a Future in Its Beginnings
Viewers of NBC's "Today" show will get regular views of the sidewalks of New York when the network opens its new $15 million production studios in Rockefeller Center in mid-Manhattan next month.
The three-story, 18,000-square-foot studios, at 49th Street and Rockefeller Plaza, will also be the home of the weekend edition of "Today" and "Now With Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric."


Puns on 'Rock,' Fine, but Beware of Bamm-Bamm
Maverick  Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, James Garner Directed by Richard Donner PG 125 minutes


Fancy Food and a Picket Line to Match
In the annals of the labor movement, there has probably never been a picket line like the one at the Box Tree restaurant and hotel at 250 East 49th Street.
Management pipes lilting Strauss waltzes outside, and its mime, in whiteface and a tuxedo, mimics a conductor to try to soften the effect of sometimes raucous strikers hooting "Shame!" at patrons.


Of Boards, Banks and Co-op Units
Q I am attempting to purchase a co-op unit in Manhattan to use as a pied-a-terre.
The unit in question is being offered by the bank that foreclosed against the previous owner.
The proprietary lease states that the bank, as secured party, can sell the unit "without board approval but with consent only of the co-op's managing agent which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed."


A 22-Year Commuter Says Bicycles Are Safe in the City
To the Editor:
As a daily bicycle commuter for some 22 years, I found your May 15 article "New York on Two Wheels" welcome except for the over-emphasis on security.
In those 22 years I have "lost" just two bikes, and one was not locked.
I lock up each day on the street with one Kryptonite lock rather than the two suggested, but I do ride a three-speed clunker, as also suggested.
The risk of theft is really no bigger than with a car.


Gary N. Wilcox, Wendy Y. Clarke
Dr.
Wendy Yvonne Clarke, the daughter of Garvey and Yvonne Clarke of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gary Norman Wilcox, a son of Dr.
Judith Wilcox of Pleasantville, N.J., and Norman Wilcox of Bloomfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Belvie H. Jackson performed the ceremony at the Greater Centennial African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Dr.
Wilcox, 27, graduated from Brown University and received her medical degree this month from the Health Science Center at Syracuse.
In July, the bride is to begin her residency in obstetrics and gynecology at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.


Lest We Forget, They Were War's Victims
To the Editor:
On May 30 we will celebrate Memorial Day, and on June 6 we will commemorate the 50th anniversary of D-Day.
Both occasions will honor as heroes all those killed in our wars.
Some of the dead were heroes, but all were victims, of political expediency and of vengeful and backward-looking diplomacy.
Instead of perpetuating for young people the glory of dying for our country, we should examine our failures, tracing the paths that led to catastrophe.
On these holidays let us mourn our war dead as the victims they were.
MARTIN HIRD New York, May 18, 1994


A 22-Year Commuter Says Bicycles Are Safe in the City
To the Editor
Bicyclists have not only taken over the sidewalks of New York, they have also invaded the last refuge of the pedestrian, the Coney Island Boardwalk.
The Parks Department prohibits cycling on the boardwalk except between the hours of 5 A.M. and 10 A.M.
These rules are not enforced by the police.


Mirror, Mirror
In "Sleepless in Seattle," last summer's hit romantic comedy, Tom Hanks's character, a widower in his 30's who hasn't been on a date for 15 years, asks a friend for advice.
"I just want to know what it's like out there," he says.
"That's what I'm trying to tell you, what women are looking for -- pecs and a cute butt," says his friend, played by Rob Reiner.
"You can't even turn on the news nowadays without hearing about how some babe thought some guy's butt was cute. Who the first woman to say this was I don't know, but somehow it caught on."


He Told. He Suffered. Now He's a Hero.
Mark Jorgensen thought he was just being an honest guy, exposing fraud in the real-estate funds he managed for the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
Then his world fell apart: The boss who had once been his friend abandoned him.
His circle of colleagues at work shunned him.
Company lawyers accused him of breaking the law.
The once powerful and respected executive soon found himself hiding in the local public library, embarrassed that he had been forbidden to return to the office and hoping not to be seen by his neighbors.
His long and successful career seemed to be dwindling to a pathetic end.


Lucerne's Rebuilt Chapel Bridge Open Again
The Chapel Bridge of Lucerne, a landmark and symbol of the Swiss city that burned in a spectacular fire last August, was reopened last month after reconstruction.
The 219-yard Kapellbrucke, originally built in 1333, is the oldest and longest covered wooden bridge in Europe, crossing obliquely over the Reuss River at the mouth of Lake Lucerne.
The gabled roof was adorned in the early 17th century with 158 painted panels depicting moments from Swiss history and the life of the patron saints of Lucerne, Leger and Maurice.
Over the centuries, the bridge had been restored and partly reconstructed at least 10 times.
Two-thirds of the 122 original paintings that hung from the arched roof of the bridge were destroyed or severely damaged by the fire.
Copies of those works are currently being made and should be hung on the bridge early next year.


The Oldest Community Garden Is Bulldozed


Correction
An article last Sunday about older leading men in movies with younger women misidentified the actress who played Cary Grant's mother in "North by Northwest." She was Jessie Royce Landis, not Clara Thornhill (which was the character's name).


Rhena Levine, Stuart Waldman
Rhena Anne Levine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Levine of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Stuart Harris Waldman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Waldman of East Northport, L.I.
Rabbi Solomon Kahane is to perform the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.


Overalls All Over
Fashion's new best friend is the uniform of farmers, carpenters, housepainters and railroad workers: overalls.
With bib front, wide suspenders and roomy pockets, the unconstricting garments are quickly becoming popular with young people, who wear them with T-shirts.
They're a favorite of Rollerbladers, who in warm weather are known to make them into cutoffs.
Their popularity has much to do with comfort, function and inexpensive price (there's no celebrity designer label on the back pockets).
The fashion industry has been trying since the 1960's to design a one-piece garment that doesn't inconvenience women when they have to go to the bathroom and that isn't limited to a one-size-fits-all crotch.
With overalls, at least, they don't have to struggle out of sleeves, and adjustable suspenders allow the wearer to establish a comfortable crotch.
Well-constructed commercial overalls come in blue, white and black denim and in stripes.
Like jeans, their signature is copper rivets and buttons.


Formal or Unruly, Blossoms in a Pot
THIS is the last call to set out young plants in containers, those redwood tubs, window boxes, barrels, large clay pots, plastic rectangles or whatever that can contain enough soil so plants thrive.
If these sorts of showpieces have not been put together, then by all means this is the weekend to finish.
Besides, being creative with plant combinations can be fun.
Weather should be no problem any longer.
At least the snows and hard freezes have gone and the rainfall that does come is most welcome.
So is the sunshine and longer days to be outside.


No Headline
"They've become so paranoid about being bugged that I wouldn't be surprised this summer if they hold meetings on the beach in swimsuits." JOSEPH J. COFFEY of New York's Organized Crime Task Force.  [ 28:1. ]


EuroSwatches
Tom Rolnicki owns 275 Swatches, including the coveted model designed by Keith Haring, the artist who died in 1990.
"But it's possible to have more than 1,000," he said.
Mr.
Rolnicki, who lives in Minneapolis, built his collection during frequent visits to Europe, and along the way, he gathered a network of sources.


A Coveted Bathtub On Wheels
WHAT: The Porsche 356, an antique bathtub-shaped sports car made in various permutations, both coupes and convertibles, from 1948 to 1965.
Highly valued by car collectors: 76,300 were built, and about 20,000 are thought to remain on the road.
The Porsche 356 Registry has over 4,000 members, some of whom own several models.
Celebrity owners include Jerry Seinfeld (a blue 1958 Speedster) and Ralph Lauren (a black 1959 Speedster).
PRONUNCIATION: PORSH-ah, please. Not PORSH.


Quinn Moss and Kai Sheng
Patricia Quinn Moss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Moss of Garrison, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kai Sheng, the son of Guozhen Jiao of Brooklyn and the late Guo Sheng.
The Rev.
James Tubridy performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Moss, who is keeping her name, is known as Quinn.
She is an associate in the New York office of Orrick, Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe, a San Francisco law firm.
She graduated from Radcliffe College and received her law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
Her mother, Kathryn Moss, is the assistant to the director of vocational development at the Vera Institute of Criminal Justice, a private foundation, in New York.


The Citadel's 152-Year Tradition Clashes With an Age-Old Issue
Behind the constitutional arguments, the piles of paper and two weeks of arcane testimony in the lawsuit challenging The Citadel's all-male tradition lies a single, extraordinarily complicated issue: the differences between men and women.
Lawyers for Shannon R. Faulkner, the 19-year-old woman trying to gain full admission to one of the last two publicly supported, all-male military colleges in the nation, have argued methodically, if at times subtly, that The Citadel would not be harmed by having women in its student ranks and could even benefit.


The Historian Vs. the Critic
To the Editor:
I read with particular appreciation Herbert Muschamp's tribute to Manfredo Tafuri, "Nocturne for the Marxist of Venice"  [ May 8 ] .
Nearly 20 years ago, Tafuri delivered a lecture at Carnegie-Mellon University, where I was then a faculty member and chairman of the visiting critics and lecturers committee.
In one of my courses, a theory seminar, my students and I had been examining Tafuri's "Architecture and Utopia."


THE HAND-OFF
I was very disturbed by Conover's article.
Evelyn and Susan are acting childishly, while Christy is being asked to make adult decisions.
The problems that arose between 11-year-old Christy and 3-year-old Jeremy, Susan's son, could have been resolved by the two mothers.


'White House Horrors'
To the Editor:
John B. Judis has faithfully summarized Jonathan Aitken's "Nixon: A Life" (May 8).
Mr.
Aitken is perfectly entitled to his favorable views of our former President; Mr.
Judis, too, has a similar right.
But misrepresentations of the historical record deserve a response.
The book is an embarrassment to many of Nixon's friends; it is, most of all, an insult to the idea of scholarship.
First, Mr.
Aitken has made little use of the Nixon papers, except for those conveniently provided by a very grateful subject who spent the last 20 years of his life mapping out what his history should be.
Mr.
Aitken also visited extensively with Nixon, and apparently he proved to be an easy mark for the former President.


Bradley and Gingrich Back Trade Curbs on North Korea
Responding to reports that North Korea continues to remove spent fuel from a nuclear reactor, possibly to build nuclear weapons, leading members of Congress today endorsed economic sanctions unless the removal stops, or proceeds more slowly and in the presence of international inspectors.
Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, and Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican who is the minority whip, said the United States should consider urging Japan and China to cut their economic ties to North Korea.


Erich Honecker, Ruler of East Germany For 18 of Its Last Years, Dies in Exile at 81
Erich Honecker, the stolid Marxist who ruled East Germany for 18 years until a people's uprising swept him aside in October 1989, died yesterday in Chile.
He was 81.
His doctor said the cause of death was liver cancer.


Syntex Corp.(SYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Turnover in Congress Won't Match That of 1874; We All Have to Suffer
To the Editor:
"Self-Limiting Terms in Congress" (editorial, May 16) persists in opposing term limits, relying heavily on the twin arguments that members of Congress are themselves bowing out in nearly record numbers and that Americans should have the freedom to vote for the candidates they want, even a rascally incumbent who is long overdue for retirement.


Rohr Inc.(RHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Treatment of Pain Should Be Discussed
To the Editor:
"When Is It Right to Die?" (Op-Ed, May 17) by Ronald Dworkin misses a crucial point on euthanasia.
Many reasonable people agree that a person should be allowed to die, rather than suffer from intractable pain of a terminal illness.


Palestinians In Jordan See Bleak Future After Accord
You can still get a haircut and a shave at Hussein Ali Ahmed's tiny barbershop, although he wishes you couldn't.
You can still hear the Palestinian men sitting on his worn vinyl couches argue politics, although he is sick of their discussions.
What you can't do anymore, according to the 56-year-old barber, is dream.
"This is the end for us," he said wistfully, as he churned shaving soap and water in a small metal bowl.
"This deal Yasir Arafat cut with the Israelis means that people like me do not exist, that we will never go home. We have been sacrificed."


Review/Rock; Same Old Eagles: Something for Everybody
"Everybody's so different, we haven't changed," Joe Walsh sang at the first Eagles concert since 1980, overstating only a little bit.
Change is the last thing the music needs or the band's fans want.
Tonight at the Irvine Meadows Amphitheater on the band's home turf in Southern California, the Eagles' return was greeted with absolute adoration by an audience that brought together baby-boom couples and young fans in tattoos and grungewear, which isn't all that different from the Eagles' old flannel shirts and blue jeans.
The reunited band used the Eagles' 1978-80 lineup -- Glenn Frey, Joe Walsh and Don Felder on guitars, Don Henley on drums and Timothy B. Schmit on bass -- along with four backup musicians.
In more than two and a half hours of music, the band played about half of its hit singles, most of the "Hotel California" album, four new songs and plenty of material from band members' individual albums.
Even with opening-night jitters (although the group has already taped an "MTV Unplugged" appearance), everything was in place: the aching sincerity of the lead singers, the steadfastly unhurried tempos, the poised guitar lines and the cushion of high harmonies, with dozens of different ways to arrange "ooh."


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States are closed today in observance of Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses are also closed.


Logicon Inc.(LGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Theater; D-Day Get-Together With a Captive Guest List
As D-Day veterans gather for the 50th anniversary of the Allied landings in Normandy, proving Vera Lynn a prophet, it seems only fitting that some small commemoration be held for the pilots, navigators, gunners and bombardiers who flew vital missions out of Italy against industrial targets inside Germany.
"The Last Sortie," a play by George Rattner at Theater for the New City, provides a nostalgic fly past for one American crew of the Allied Heavy Bomber Force, which flew B-17's out of an old German airfield at Foggia.


Memories Today for Those Who Served Yesterday


Review/Pop; 3 Women Rap Out Their Independence
Sex and religion have had an on-again-off-again relationship over the years, and at Salt-n-Pepa's sold-out concert on Friday night, the first of four at Radio City Music Hall, everything was friendly.
The three women -- Salt, Pepa and Spinderella -- came out, turned around, put their rear ends up in the air and shook them in the direction of the audience.
Half an hour later, they were down on their knees, praying to God.
And the three, backed by an aerobics class full of dancers, didn't make it seem like too much of a contradiction.
Their stance, both verbally and physically, implies women in control.
Their sexuality is theirs, and if that means fullfilling the needs of a male gaze, so be it; it's still power and they'll use it, thank you.
Salt (Cheryl James), said after one piece: "Women should have fun. Have your hair done; have your nails done; take a champagne bath. Then make sure he pays for it."


Review/Television; Eric Stoltz and Randy Quaid As Patients Gaining Insight
AIDS is still not an easy sell as a subject for prime-time drama.
Since "An Early Frost" in 1985, pitifully few network movies (traditionally addicted to diseases of every stripe), have tackled one of the century's deadliest viruses.
What had been known exclusively as a "gay disease" became a lightning rod for various groups ready to pounce on any depiction of homosexuals that might look sympathetic.
But very gradually, times are changing on commercial television, not least because of the success of films like "Philadelphia" and HBO's "And the Band Played On" (subsequently given a network broadcast).
Tonight on NBC there's "Roommates," starring Randy Quaid and Eric Stoltz as the title characters.
Mr.
Quaid is Jim Flynn, a homophobic former convict on parole for bank robbery.
He contracted the disease from a blood transfusion.
Mr.
Stoltz is Bill Thomas, a gay, Harvard-educated expert in government grants.
Bill plays Chopin at his family's comfortable home in mid-America.
Jim has bitter arguments with his father, Barney (Charles Durning), in a dim gin mill.
Bill and Jim end up sharing an apartment in Seattle at the Residence, a hospice for people with AIDS.


Economics By Ripples
Trying to maneuver the economy with a series of interest rate increases is like trying to change the heading of a supertanker on a collision course: each decision is followed by an agonizing wait before any effect is discernible.
But for the economy, unlike the supertanker, this waiting period will last as much as a year, rather than minutes.
So nobody can answer definitively the question of whether the Federal Reserve's four short-term interest rate increases in four months will be effective in preventing future inflation without drastically slowing economic growth now.


Petrolite Corp.(PLIT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Dance; Bournonville's Sylph: Three Interpretations
A prosperous Scottish farmer is about to marry when suddenly his life is disrupted by a woodland sylph.
That is the deceptively slender pretext for one of the most enchanting ballets of all time, "La Sylphide," as it has come down in the celebrated version that August Bournonville choreographed for the Royal Danish Ballet in 1836.
In 1983, Erik Bruhn, another giant of Danish ballet, restaged the work with surprising and effective baronial splendor for American Ballet Theater.
It is this version, highlighted by three very different and sterling casts, that returned to the company over the weekend.
Only two more Metropolitan Opera House performances (tonight and Tuesday) remain of this remarkably fresh and vibrant production.


Two Centrists to Face Run-Off Vote in Colombia
In Colombia's most peaceful election in recent memory, voters today reduced a crowded field of 18 presidential candidates to two centrist finalists.
A runoff is to be held June 19 between the two moderates, Ernesto Samper Pizano, a Liberal, and Andres Pastrana Arango, a conservative.
With 96 percent of the vote counted, the two front-runners were separated by less than 1 percent of the vote.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; For a CBS Stung by Fox, New Questions of Direction
Like a battleship that has just been torpedoed in its engine room, CBS spent the hours immediately after Fox Broadcasting's sneak attack last week doing damage assessment.
The conclusion: despite the loss of several big affiliated stations to Fox, CBS is in no danger of sinking.


Bard Graduates Receive Diplomas and a Musical Treat


Julius Boros, 74, a Pro Golfer Known for His Masterly Touch
Julius Boros, whose rhythmic swing and tranquil tempo helped him win two United States Open championships and 16 other professional tournaments, died Saturday at his favorite spot on the Coral Ridge Country Club golf course near his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 74 years old.
Boros had taken a golf cart and driven to a bridge near the 16th hole at Coral Ridge, where he was found sitting in the cart beneath a willow tree by two country club members.
He had suffered a heart attack, family members said.


SOCCER: World Cup '94; Miracle Worker or Nutty Professor? U.S. Coach Has Yet to Decide
On a recent Friday evening, Bora Milutinovic, coach of the United States soccer team, sat in his airy living room in Laguna Niguel, Calif., and made dinner reservations at a favorite oceanside restaurant.
This being California, he was less concerned with the food than the view.
He wanted an outdoor table overlooking the Pacific.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A commission created by President Clinton has concluded that the American workplace cannot become truly efficient and globally competitive until hostility is greatly reduced between labor and management -- particularly when unions are trying to organize a company.  [ Page 33. ]


Yanks' Offensive Prowess Goes for Naught in Loss
Every starter in his lineup had at least one hit.
There were 16 Yankee hits, including 6 in a 4-run second inning.
But throughout nearly all of Buck Showalter's ejection-shortened, frustrating afternoon, the continuing struggle of starting pitcher Terry Mulholland forced his team to play from behind.
"On a day you score six runs," the Yankee manager said, "you'd like to come away a winner."


The Evolving Outlook Of Japan's No. 1 Banker
Only a few years ago, an awesomely wealthy Japan was in the vanguard of the international financial system that used joint control of currency and interest rates to solve big economic crises.
There was great optimism here over the benefits of active policy coordination.
It takes only a few minutes with Yasushi Mieno, the plain-spoken governor of the Bank of Japan, to get a sense of how much things have changed.
Mr.
Mieno, (pronounced mee-AY-no), a gregarious 70-year-old whose passion outside of monetary statistics is sumo wrestling, may well become known as the governor of diminished expectations.
Discussion Replaces Action
With Japan getting little help in halting the punishing rise of the yen these days, the Government being criticized for not doing enough to end the recession and the flood of Japanese capital abroad having become a trickle, coordinated action by the industrialized nations has been largely transformed, in Mr.
Mieno's words, into a passive exchange of information about basic policy goals.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about travel to Vietnam misidentified the owner of the cruise ship Club Med 2.
The ship is owned by Club Mediterranee, not Seabourn Cruises.


Tyranny of the Minority
Many Americans think the primary cause of gridlock in Congress is the inability of a majority to agree on action.
The real problem is more basic.
In the Senate, majority rule is becoming the exception rather than the rule.
Week after week, we see as many as 59 of the 100 senators ready to act on legislation -- to pass or defeat it.
But Senate rules permit a minority of 41 or fewer to filibuster -- to prevent the majority from voting at all.
To stop a filibuster, 60 votes are needed.
A minority -- sometimes one senator -- can demand ransom in exchange for providing the 60th vote; often, the price is either watered-down legislation or "pork." Today, once a filibuster is announced -- no speeches are necessary -- the Senate takes up other business until deals can be struck for the 60 votes.


Supporters and Critics Equally Ardent in Judging Hynes
Charles J. Hynes appeared to have all the ingredients for success when he took over as Brooklyn District Attorney in 1990: the prosecutor's background, the air of independence and integrity that came with winning convictions for the Howard Beach racial killings, and the support of major figures in the Democratic Party.
"He was the great hope," said Joyce David, president of the Kings County Criminal Bar Association.


Corrections
A review on Thursday about the new Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh misstated the number of works on view.
There are 500 in the opening exhibition, not 200.


INSIDE
Nation of Islam Figure Shot
Khallid Abdul Muhammad, who has stirred controversy with his verbal attacks on Jews, was shot after speaking in Riverside, Calif.
Page 6.
What the Class of '94 Heard
Raising a family, finding religion, promoting equality, rejuvenating feminism: those were among this year's graduation messages.
Page 22.
Revising Work Relationships
A Presidential commission says the United States cannot become competitive until labor-management hostility is greatly reduced.
Page 33.
A Comeback in Hungary
Former Communists made a stunning comeback in Hungarian elections and seem to be able to form a Government on their own.
Page 3.


Budget Battleground: Funds for the Young
On any given afternoon, after the neighborhood schools let out, the North Bronx Family Service Center in the University Heights section of the Bronx resembles a raucous boarding school rather than an institution where government programs are administered.
On the parlor floor of the large frame house, youngsters aged 7 to 12 screech in delight as they dash from a tutoring session to a Caribbean dance class.
Others are eating a snack in a basement lounge; others are preparing for a meeting of an after-school track team.


Hynes and Orthodox Jews: Role at Issue
The delicate balance between being a politician and being a prosecutor has been most evident in District Attorney Charles J. Hynes's dealings with Brooklyn's Orthodox Jewish population.
"He has seen to it that a constituency that had been excluded from the process was brought into the mainstream," said Lew Fidler, Mr.
Hynes's campaign manager in 1989 whose work with Orthodox Jews in Brooklyn helped Mr.
Hynes carry those neighborhoods in the Democratic primary against Assemblyman Daniel L. Feldman.


Off the Court, Tennis Is in a Slump
With the French Open under way and Wimbledon just weeks away, tennis has many problems, even apart from Jennifer Capriati's arrest on marijuana possession charges, the lack of strong competition for Steffi Graf in the women's division, Pete Sampras's dullness, the proliferation of tournaments and Bud Collins's pants.
The tennis equipment industry of racquets, balls and shoes has been reeling from a combination of tumbling sales, insufficient technical innovation and a lack of inspiration from the current crop of charisma-impaired players.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSHC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Trevino Rings Bell Again at Malvern  Lee Trevino shot a two-under-par 68 yesterday on one of the most difficult courses on the senior tour to win the Bell Atlantic Classic for the second time in three years.
Trevino, who captured his fourth title of the year, finished with a 206 total and won by two strokes over Mike Hill in Malvern, Pa. (AP) Daniel Recovers and Triumphs: Beth Daniel drove her final tee shot under a tree, then made a remarkable birdie to win the Corning Classic in upstate New York by one stroke over Nancy Ramsbottom and Stephanie Farwig.
Daniel collected $75,000 for her 28th Ladies Professional Golf Association victory.
She shot 69 and had a 10-under total of 278. (AP)


Transactions
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Traded Deion Sanders, outfielder, to the Cincinnati Reds for Roberto Kelly, outfielder, and Roger Etheridge, pitcher.
Activated Gregg Olson, pitcher, from a rehabilitation assignment with Richmond of the International League.
Designated Milt Hill, pitcher, for assignment.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Placed Delino DeShields, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 26.
Activated Dave Hansen, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


Books of The Times; Ear to the Ground and Nose to the Grindstone
Walking Shadow  By Robert B. Parker  270 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $19.95.
White Shark  By Peter Benchley  324 pages.
Random House. $23.
As almost always with one of Robert B. Parker's Spenser mysteries, you fall into "Walking Shadow" as if into a favorite hammock.
Just as you are getting comfortable, Spenser, while attending a waterfront repertory theater near Boston with his friend Susan Silverman, the psychoanalyst, witnesses the fatal shooting of an actor onstage.
The actor was singing the words, "Lucky in love, lucky in love, what else matters if you're lucky in love?"


Review/Dance; A Passage Through Time, From Robbins and Ives
Jerome Robbins's "Ives, Songs," presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, is an evocation of songs by Charles Ives and of another era's idea of community.
It touches on the Romantic ideal of the artist as a solitary onlooker in the midst of life.
At its heart, however, it deals with the dualism of much of Ives's spiky, haunted music.
The music, sung with impressive clarity by Timothy Nolen, moves from sentimental family songs to the distanced work one associates with Ives.
Music and ballet gradually push against parlor windows and out into cool, scented night air.
Ives knew both worlds intimately.


CLINTON CRITICIZED AS TOO AMBITIOUS WITH VACCINE PLAN
Members of Congress and makers of drugs say the Clinton Administration has gone far beyond what Congress intended when it passed legislation last year to insure that all children would be vaccinated.
Although Congress did not specify how the vaccine would be distributed, lawmakers say the Administration is now planning a much larger role for the Federal Government than they ever envisioned.


'Let's Go, Sweep!' Mets Respond and Mop Up Reds
When baseball was invented, this was what they had in mind.
An afternoon of sunshine, a grass field, the ninth inning and fans bellowing for that final strike while the enemy's most dangerous hitter waits on deck to tie the game with a mighty swing.


Erich Honecker Dies


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co.(LMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Scherer (R.P.) Corp.(SHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treatment of Pain Should Be Discussed; Kevorkian a Symptom
To the Editor:
I was disappointed in the unilateral tone of "First, Do No Harm" (Op-Ed, May 9) by Dr.
Walter Reich.


Man Is Found Shot to Death In Hotel Room
A man was found shot to death in a bed in the Roosevelt Hotel in midtown Manhattan yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The victim, who was believed to be a hotel guest, was not immediately identified by the police.
A hotel maid entered Room 1787 to clean about 12:15 A.M., saw blood and notified the police, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Turnover in Congress Won't Match That of 1874; For Term Limits
To the Editor:
"Self-Limiting Terms in Congress" (editorial, May 16) contends that the decisions by large numbers of senators and representatives not to run again next November, and other Novembers, make the term limits movement unnecessary.


METRO DIGEST
CONGRESSMEN SHARE A PAD United States Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn shares a town house in Washington with three other Congressmen, making the residence one of the capital's highest-powered political domiciles outside 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
But amid the beer and frozen soy burgers, stale tortilla chips and lost laundry, their little den on D Street resembles nothing so much as a fraternity house, giving the lie to notions of the Congressional high life.
Page 1.
FIGHT OVER ONASSIS PHOTO As Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis lay dying on May 19, a fierce competition had already begun among magazines looking for photographs to illustrate forthcoming memorial tributes.
And less than a week later, the personal photographer of John F. Kennedy cried foul, saying he may sue Newsweek magazine for publishing what he says is a copyrighted photograph without his permission.
Page 35.


Balaguer Says He'll Enforce Curbs on Haiti
Faced with American pressure and widespread accusations of voting fraud in his latest election, President Joaquin Balaguer now says he will do what he has scoffed at for months: enforce the international embargo against neighboring Haiti.
The Dominican border is the weakest point of the embargo, which is the major element in President Clinton's troubled effort to unseat the Haitian military.
The embargo was toughened a week ago to include everything but food, medicine and cooking gas.


Mother Nature Never Intended This; Pollution and Not Enough Care Afflict City's Street Trees
In a rectilinear and pushy city, New York's street trees offer a green canopy of healing and hope.
But many are dying, others will die sooner than they should, and all are in a state of grim siege.
The trees, a city responsibility, are simply not being taken care of.
Maintenance has been reduced mainly to removing dead trees, a process itself running more than five years behind schedule.


The Thomas Cole House May Become Historic Site
On a clear day in the 1840's, Thomas Cole, the founder of the Hudson River school of painting, could sit on his porch here and look to the west to the Catskill Mountain scenery that he put into his paintings.
Today, almost 150 years after his death, Congress is considering bills to make his home a national historic site and the focus of an artists' historical park encompassing the mountains and streams depicted in his work.


Corrections
A Benefits listing in Styles of The Times yesterday, about a lecture by the architectural historian Vincent Scully this Wednesday, misstated the location.
The event will be at Christie's, not Sotheby's. (The dinner following the lecture will be at the Metropolitan Club, as the listing stated.)


Israelis Perplexed by Palestinians, and by Leaders
Rachel Cohen says she has managed to keep the Israeli Government line straight in her head.
As articulated to her during the last week by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and other senior officials, it runs like this:
Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, has almost no credibility, yet Israel must nonetheless keep on negotiating with him.
Some Jewish settlements in the occupied territories are all but worthless, yet Israeli soldiers must defend them with their blood.
The Israeli Army might return in force to the Gaza Strip if things go sour there, yet everyone is glad that Israel has finally shaken Gaza's dust from its clothes.


Corrections
A picture about New York sports fans in some editions of the Metro Report yesterday carried an incorrect caption.
The picture, in which the most prominent figure was a man wearing an NBC T-shirt, was taken at the Rangers game at the Meadowlands on Wednesday night, not at Madison Square Garden on Friday.


Turnover in Congress Won't Match That of 1874
To the Editor:
I agree entirely with the substance of "Self-Limiting Terms in Congress" (editorial, May 16).
Why impose mechanical term limits when retirements have swelled, and elections can give voters the last word?


Building Owners May Face Fines for Leaving Graffiti
The City Council wants to fight graffiti, but rather than going after those who deface property, it is considering penalizing the owners of buildings who do not clean up graffiti fast enough.
The Council is scheduled to vote on June 7 on an ordinance saying that the owners of defaced buildings have 21 days to clean them up before being issued summonses and then fines from $100 to $1,000.
An owner who does not cooperate could have a lien placed on his property for the amount of the cleanup.


Review/Rock; Forcing a Guest to Improvise
Third Person is a band with a hole in the middle.
The improvising trio consists of two permanent members -- the cellist Tom Cora and the percussionist Samm Bennett -- and one guest musician.
The band's operating principle is simple: two against one.
Mr.
Cora and Mr.
Bennett team to provide either a simple musical backdrop for the featured soloist or, more often, a latticework of rhythm and noise that keeps their guest on edge.
On Wednesday night at the Knitting Factory, with the reeds player Kazutoki Umezu sitting in, Third Person sounded more like a cohesive band than an improvisatory game.
Mr.
Umezu, who has played with Third Person several times, responded quickly and humorously to Mr.
Cora and Mr.
Bennett's musical promptings.
When Mr.
Cora began scraping his cello in quick, small strokes, as if trying to remove a stain from one of the strings, Mr.
Umezu took out a penny whistle and blew a tune for him to work to.


Rostenkowski Is Pondering His Options
As the deadline loomed for the most important decision in Representative Dan Rostenkowski's political career, lawmakers from both parties wrangled today about what it would mean for the nation if, as expected, the powerful Illinois Democrat surrendered his leadership of the Ways and Means Committee.
Lawyers in the case have said that Mr.
Rostenkowski expects to be indicted on Tuesday on a range of graft charges, which will force him, under House rules, to resign as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee just as it is working on legislation to overhaul the health care system.


Don't Know Pavel Bure? You Will
They are waiting for him outside, he knows.
He hears the cameras.
As the side entrance to the Pacific Coliseum opens, he suddenly guns his coal-black, Mercedes 500 SL coupe past the mob, leaving 25 adolescent girls cooing.
"They are 12 through 15, just kids," he says. "I am used to this."


A Call for Easing Labor-Management Tension
A commission created by President Clinton has concluded that the American workplace cannot become truly efficient and globally competitive until the hostility between labor and management -- particularly when unions try to organize a company -- is greatly reduced.
The White House wants the findings of the 10-member commission, which includes three former Secretaries of Labor, corporate executives and union leaders, to serve as the centerpiece for whatever labor legislation it might propose in the President's first term.


50 Years After D-Day, a Newsstand Invasion
If D-Day was the culmination of the biggest military preparation the world had ever seen, the celebration of its 50th anniversary must be a high-water mark in media preparation.
The marketing of the D-Day anniversary is in full force, on television and in books, newspapers and magazines.


Andretti's Career Ends To the Brickyard Blues
It was high noon, hardly a shadow anywhere under the bright sun.
All that was missing was the mournful tone of Tex Ritter rasping the words, "Do not forsake me, my relief valve." It was noon, and Mario Andretti was done for the day, and done forever at the Indy 500.
Of course, Andretti also escaped the crashes and the injuries that were eliminating many of his fellow drivers from the race, but he or any driver would have taken the chance if they only could get back in the race.


Schools' Budgets Cut By Council Members
Mark Mutter can't do his shopping these days without being stopped by friends and neighbors with a message: cut school spending.
As a council member for Dover Township, Mr.
Mutter and hundreds of council members like him throughout New Jersey have been rewriting school budgets, as the state requires them to do, in the wake of the most widespread voter rejection of school board budget requests in 20 years.


For 4 Collegial Congressmen, Life Looks a Lot Like College
Sam cooks, Dick cleans, George collects the rent and Chuck raids the refrigerator.
Weeknights, they shoot the breeze in their underwear in the Capitol Hill town house where two of them sleep in unkempt beds in the living room like so many superannuated frat boys, and check to see if anyone they know turns up on "Nightline."
Weekdays, as members of Congress, these four help make the trade, farm, environmental and crime laws of the United States.
Their little den on D Street may be the capital's highest-powered political domicile outside 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, so celebrated that it became the subject of a proposed TV sitcom called "Four in the House." (The President has a standing invitation, but hasn't come so far.)


Crimea Is Waging a War of Nerves With Ukraine
Two men who both claim to be the chief of law enforcement of Crimea sit in the same government building.
They use separate entrances and act as if the other does not exist.
A sign at the front door says the Crimean Interior Ministry.
On Thursday, workers hastily erected a large plaque over the rear entrance declaring the building the Ukrainian Interior Ministry's department in Crimea.
It is perhaps the oddest episode in the war of nerves over how far Crimea will go to gain autonomy from Ukraine.
Valery Y. Kuznetsov, the man appointed interior minister by the president of Crimea two months ago, controls the 15,000-man police force.
But 10 days ago, the President of Ukraine ordered Ivan F. Kolomy tsev, the former head of the local K.G.B., to replace Mr.
Kuznetsov.
The 1,000 members of the department's security force answer to Mr.
Kolomytsev.


WEIGHING OPTIONS, U.S. AIDES ASSESS INVASION OF HAITI
United States intelligence officials have concluded that an American-led invasion to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power in Haiti would succeed easily.
But they warn that it would not bring a quick end to the turmoil and violence that have swept the country, and that an international force to maintain order could be needed there for years.
The view, which represents a broad consensus among intelligence agencies and some of Father Aristide's staunchest supporters, comes as the Clinton Administration is struggling to develop a plan both to return the deposed President and to create conditions so he can govern peacefully.


The World's Shrinking Armies
With the end of the cold war, demobilization is on the march.
Around the world troop levels are dropping and so is military spending.
This little noticed trend, documented in data compiled by the U.S.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, offers hope that global military tensions may diminish and that scarce resources can be diverted to more urgent civilian needs.
It also raises questions as to whether the United States is reshaping its own military as rapidly as it should to reflect the receding threat.


Solzhenitsyn's 'Deepest Russia': Is It Still There?
In one of his early short stories, "Matryona's Home," Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn wrote a hauntingly prophetic passage about a prisoner coming home from the labor camps:
"In the summer of 1953 I was coming back from the hot and dusty desert, just following my nose -- so long as it led me back to European Russia. Nobody waited or wanted me at any particular place, because I was a little matter of 10 years overdue. I just wanted to efface myself, to lose myself in deepest Russia . . . if it was there."


Applying Antitrust to Insurance
Price-fixing and other anti-consumer practices plague the insurance industry because the 1945 McCarran-Ferguson Act exempts the industry from antitrust laws.
But after decades of struggle, relief is in sight.
Last week Representative Jack Brooks of Texas, with representatives of the industry and consumer groups, announced an agreement to pare back the exemption.
A detailed bill has not been written yet.
But the basic proposal appears to be good for consumers and fair to insurers.
Property and casualty insurers, especially the small companies, argue that they need to share data on claims so they can price products according to the best available information.
That is a valid argument -- and Mr.
Brooks's plan would preserve the right of insurers to share raw data.
But the companies have also used their antitrust exemption to jointly analyze the raw data in order to project future claims losses.
These shared projections become the basis for collusively setting prices.
That would be a crime in any other industry; Mr.
Brooks's bill would also make it, and several other collusive practices, illegal in insurance.


On Adding a Calculus of Risk to Health Care
To the Editor:
If William Safire thinks in "Let's Make a Deal on Health" (column, May 23) that "Smokers and drinkers and gluttons should pay more" -- for health insurance -- "than nonsmokers and teetotalers and dieters," how about higher premiums for people with injury-risking vocations or avocations, like airline pilots, tennis players, ballet dancers, whitewater rafters?
How about higher rates for excessive drivers, women who bear more than a fixed number of children or those who choose to live in dangerous, polluted places like New York?


The More Mature Pierce Is on a Steamroll in Paris
Relative peace, along with the only teen-ager to wear a tennis dress, carry dual passports and become notorious for her very public divorce from the most pernicious tennis father in the business, reigned at Roland Garros.
There was finally a slowdown today in the disappearing act done by the seeded players at the French Open.
With the exception of seventh-seeded Natalya Zvereva, who lost to Julie Halard, all of the favorites fought through to the quarterfinals.


Searching Its Soul: The U.S. Catholic Church -- Second of four articles.; Wellspring of Priests Dries Up, Changing Much of Parish Life
To a traditional Roman Catholic, Sunday at St.
Mary of the Assumption parish would come as a shock.
The morning services are mostly run by Sister Virginia Welsh, who greets the worshipers, directs the choir and offers "reflections" in lieu of the sermon that under Vatican rules she is not allowed to preach.
On hand to say the Mass itself is an elderly priest who divides his time between this parish and another.


Officer Held in Vice Sweep
An off-duty New York City police officer was arrested early yesterday in Queens during an anti-prostitution sweep, the police said.


Muslim Figure Is Wounded in California
Khallid Abdul Muhammad, the former Nation of Islam spokesman who has stirred controversy with his verbal attacks on Jews and other whites, was shot and wounded today by a black gunman after a speech at a college here.
Mr.
Muhammad appeared to have been shot in the left leg or foot.
Two bodyguards were also wounded when the gunman fired at short range with a pistol, and at least two bystanders were hurt when members of the crowd began to riot.


Gotta Be the Engine: Unser, and Penske, Rule Indy
Blame the rules or credit Roger Penske, but this much is certain: The Penske Mercedes turned the 78th Indianapolis 500 into a two-car race from the start, and it became a one-car race on the 185th lap when Emerson Fittipaldi crashed while leading, giving his teammate, Al Unser Jr., his second Indy victory.
Before that crash, it looked as if Fittipaldi would win his third Indy 500 and second straight for himself and Penske.
He was a few car lengths from putting the second-place Unser a lap down, but as Fittipaldi dived low into Turn 4, he went too low, hitting the indentations in the pavement that serve as a warning strip.
The warning came too late.


Washington's Decline Is the Issue
Four years after a blue-ribbon panel found that the District of Columbia was facing an immediate fiscal crisis that was undermining the quality of life, the city appears to be in worse shape than ever.
Beyond the gleam of the White House, Capitol Hill, embassies and the tourist stops, more than 2,200 public housing units are boarded up while 8,200 families are on waiting lists, the crime rate is higher than ever, children pass through metal detectors in every high school and nearly every junior high school, one of every eight residents receives financial aid from the city and one of every six receives food stamps.


McLean Is Hero In Canuck Revival
To reach the Stanley Cup finals, the Rangers had to get past the Devils and their brilliant young goaltender, Martin Brodeur.
To actually win the cup, they have to beat perhaps the hottest goalie around.
Just under a month short of his 28th birthday, Vancouver's Kirk McLean, like Brodeur a product of the Devils' farm system, is finally living up to the promise he showed two regular seasons ago, when he won 38 games and was voted runner-up in the Vezina Trophy balloting.
That season, the Canucks won the now-defunct Smythe Division before losing in the second round of the playoffs -- a scenario they repeated a year ago.


Moynihan Calls On Rival To Dismiss Campaign Aide
In a sign of jockeying to come, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's re-election campaign today called on his Republican rival, Bernadette Castro, to dismiss her newly hired political consultant, Edward J. Rollins, calling him "the grandfather of Republican dirty tricks."
"Senator Moynihan deplores the hiring of a political operative who thinks it is appropriate to slander African-American clergy in order to inflate his own ego and reputation," Mr.
Moynihan's campaign manager, William Cunningham, said in a statement.
"Mr. Rollins should be relieved of any duties in the Castro campaign." Old Controversies Follow
Mr.
Cunningham was referring to Mr.
Rollins's boast -- later retracted and then debunked by a Federal investigation -- that he had paid black ministers to suppress voter turnout in heavily Democratic areas in last year's New Jersey gubernatorial race, when Mr.
Rollins was working for Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican nominee.


A Photographic Dispute Over Jacqueline Onassis
As Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis lay dying on May 19, a fierce competition had already begun among magazines looking for photographs to illustrate forthcoming memorial tributes.
And less than a week later, the battle left a photographer crying foul.
Time, Life, Newsweek and Town &amp; Country had expressed interest in a spectacular series of photographs taken by Jacques Lowe, the personal photographer of John F. Kennedy, during the summer of 1960 at the Kennedy home in Hyannis Port, Mass.
The series included portraits of the young Mrs.
Kennedy in a yellow-and-white sleeveless summer dress.


Twining Continues His Unbeaten Ways
His name is Twining, he is a small but trim son of the renowned Forty Niner and he was still growing up this spring when his more mature classmates were busy trying to anoint a superstar in the Triple Crown races.
But unlike most of them, he is still fresh and undefeated heading into the second half of the racing year, and he stayed that way yesterday when he won the Peter Pan Stakes at Belmont Park by seven and a half runaway lengths.
"He's a grand little horse," said his trainer, Scotty Schulhofer, suppressing his enthusiasm.
"And the way he ran was pretty impressive."


Bridge
Consider the following experts, all of whom have won numerous national titles: David Berkowitz, Jim Cayne, Larry Cohen, Bobby Levin, Michael Rosenberg, Alan Sontag, Kathie Wei-Sender and Zia.
One might think this a list of contenders in the Goldman Pairs, played during the weekend at the New York Sheraton, Seventh Avenue and 53d Street, and many of them were.
Or perhaps it is a list of leading players in the Reisinger Knockout Teams, which begins at the Sheraton this afternoon.
It is, however, a roster of celebrities who will lecture for the next eight Wednesday evenings at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street.
At an earlier lecture, the problem of finding the club queen on the diagramed deal was discussed.


No Headline
"What is at stake is not just whether we'll have more priests, or women and married priests, but what is the mission for the priesthood. I think we're struggling with what's the mission of the church at the end of the 20th century, and what is the priest's role." -- THE REV.
PHILIP J. MURNION of the National Pastoral Life Center.  [ 7:6. ]


Review/Music; At Spoleto Festival, Moral of the Day Is Redemption
On Saturday evening, three days into the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. here, John Kennedy sounded an unofficial keynote in the first of the 20th-Century Perspectives concerts he directs at Grace Episcopal Church.
Pointing to a theme of redemption in the programming this year (most notably in Beethoven's "Fidelio"), he opened with Henry Cowell's brash "Return," written in 1940 when Cowell was released from a three-year prison term.
Mr.
Kennedy directed the series from 1990 to 1992 but bailed out last year after a dispute with the new music director, Steven Mercurio.
Now everything has changed.
Gian Carlo Menotti, who founded the festival in 1977 and directed it through 17 seasons, resigned last fall after years of farcical bickering with the board and the city, and Milton Rhodes, the former director of the American Council for the Arts, took over as general manager.
Mr.
Mercurio left, and his predecessor, Spiros Argiris, was reinstated as part of a triumvirate of artistic directors.
Mr.
Kennedy's brief exile has ended.


Sanders's Trade for Kelly Is More Than Lefty-Righty
The Atlanta Braves traded Deion Sanders to the Cincinnati Reds for Roberto Kelly yesterday in what on the surface seemed a simple matter of right and left.
The Braves, missing Ron Gant's right-handed power a great deal, acquired some pop in the form of Kelly, the Yankee prospect who had developed into an All-Star with Cincinnati.
Sanders, another former Yankee prospect but a left-handed batter, nicely meets a Cincinnati need, the team being overloaded with right-handed hitters and in need of Sanders's type of speed.


Al Unser Jr. Wins His Second Indy 500


An Inventor Whose Laboratory Is the Theater
Mac Wellman wants to "debamboozle" society.
In plays like "Sincerity Forever" and "A Murder of Crows," he has unfurled a comic screed against global inclemencies and other aspects of a fast-fade culture.
Mr.
Wellman's variant on "Dracula" was recently at the SoHo Rep in an environmental production, and "The Hyacinth Macaw," a "sister play" to "A Murder of Crows," opened early this month at Primary Stages.
Theatergoers have been offered a prismatic look at an intrepid experimentalist.
In the words of one character in "The Hyacinth Macaw," the playwright has "an inescapable penchant for acts that defy convention." In one of his flagrant political maneuvers, he dedicated "Sincerity Forever" to Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon "for the fine job you are doing of destroying civil liberties in These States." Mr.
Wellman's plays deal pungently with such subjects as censorship, corruption and pollution in all their forms.
As he says, "I see no reason for playing it safe." Joycean Rap
Stylistically, he is a member of a nonaligned pack of word jugglers whose roster also includes Eric Overmyer, David Ives and Suzan-Lori Parks.
Specializing in Mobius strips of language -- onomatopoeia mixed with archaisms and slangy neologisms -- he is James Joyce reborn as a rap artist.


Texfi Industries(TXF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


CHRONICLE
If EUGENE McCARTHY, the former Senator, had been elected President in 1968, as he had hoped when he entered the Democratic primaries, he would have named MORT SAHL his press secretary, he said the other day.
"His principal function would have been to make sure that every morning The Washington Post, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal were thrown over the fence at the White House and it would have been his duty to read them," Mr.
McCarthy said.
"Then we would throw what we didn't like back over the fence."


Petsmart Inc.(PETM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Essay; That $100,000 'Profit'
Bit by excruciating bit, like an adhesive being pulled off an old wound, the cover story about the Clintons' amazing, one-year 10,000 percent "profit" in the commodities markets is being peeled away.
With each disclosure of blatantly preferential treatment and credit improperly extended, of trades made in their behalf with little or perhaps no Clinton input, and of records strangely missing for one in five key transactions -- it becomes harder for the Clintons and their apologists to maintain the fiction that their financial bonanza had anything to do with business judgment or even luck.


World Economies


Hunt Pressed For 2 Killers Who Escaped
A manhunt for two killers who seized a hostage at gunpoint and escaped from a maximum-security psychiatric center in Orange County intensified across the New York City area yesterday.
Investigators sought to trace the source of the gun they used and disclosed new details about the fugitives and their getaway.
Canvassing old haunts, the homes of relatives and friends, even a cemetery where one of the two is known to have slept in mausoleums, 100 state police officers and dozens of city officers joined the search for Herbert Arnold, 50, of Brooklyn, and John Casablanca, 51, of the Bronx, who have been linked to eight killings, two rapes and two kidnappings over the last three decades.


Overcoming Lure of World to Take an Increasingly Rare Path
"I played Mass as a kid and all that stuff," Keith Stripe, who is now 30, recalled about his childhood in a small Ohio town.
But in adolescence, he said, "I didn't think that celibacy was even possible."
He studied business in college and went to work for National Cash Register as a commodities buyer, living in three cities over the next five years.


Asian Women Savor Mystique of Smoking
To the Editor:
Reading about the upsurge of cigarette smoking in Asia in "Asia's Having One Huge Nicotine Fit" (The Week in Review, May 15), particularly among women, I realized it was inevitable that Asian women should behave as we in the West did on the eve or in the wings of our social and sexual emancipation.


Memorial Day
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices will be closed.
POST OFFICE There will be no regular home delivery.
Express Mail and special delivery only.
The main post office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue will be open.


Patents
AS soccer fans prepare for the first World Cup tournament to be held in the United States, beginning in mid-June, a New York architect has patented a small-scale enclosed soccer court for inner cities and other places where field space is hard to come by.
"As an architect, I've been intrigued by how people improvise games in makeshift, odd places like Washington Square Park," said David G. Cagle, who was granted his patent two weeks ago.
"I set out to create a standardized setting for small-scale soccer."


The Weather Was Warm, but the Beat Was Hot


Baseball Answers Question
In the coming days, the Major League Baseball Players Association will press the appeal of suspensions for both John Cangelosi of the Mets and John Smoltz of the Atlanta Braves for the brawl the two initiated at a game at Shea Stadium May 14.
Well, if everybody's right, as each player will argue on behalf of himself, then everybody must be wrong.


For Graduates of 1994, Praise, Caution, Cajoling And Words to Leave By
Raising a family and finding religion, rejuvenating feminism, promoting racial equality and understanding, looking (with unease or enthusiasm) to the future of technology: these were among the many messages delivered to the graduating classes of 1994 at colleges and universities nationwide.
The speakers ranged from the cartoonist Cathy Guisewite to the Presidential adviser David R. Gergen.
These excerpts were taken from transcripts provided by the respective universities and colleges.
North Carolina Central University, May 14  VERNON E. JORDAN JR.
Lawyer
Those students of the 1960's, your mothers and fathers, were in the grip of a powerful idea -- the idea of equality -- whose time they hastened and whose force overcame the tread of mighty armies of racism and segregation.
They took that maturing experience to become pioneers themselves, blazing trails in corporate America in government and in the professions.
You may think that's ancient history, events that happened before you were born.
But the struggle is not over.
Yesterday's students began something that today's young people must finish.
For despite the tremendous gains that have taken place over the past three decades, too much -- far too much -- remains the same.
Discrimination still flourishes, although it is now illegal. . . .
You must enter into the serious business of helping black people survive and thrive in the 21st century.
Catholic University, May 14  TED KOPPEL Television journalist
Our society finds truth too strong a medicine to digest undiluted.
In its purest form, truth is not a polite tap on the shoulder.
It is a howling reproach.
What Moses brought down from Mount Sinai were not the Ten Suggestions.
They are commandments.
Are, not were.
The sheer brilliance of the Ten Commandments is that they codify in a handful of words acceptable human behavior, not just for then or now, but for all time. . . .
The tension between those commandments and our baser instincts provides grist for journalism's daily mill.
What a huge, gaping void there would be in our informational flow and in our entertainment without the routine violation of the Fifth through Tenth Commandments. . . .
Tell me if this doesn't remind you of something: 'Honor thy mother and father.
Thou shalt not murder.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not bear false witness.' Sounds like a script outline for the story of the Menendez brothers, doesn't it?
Juilliard School, May 20  JANE ALEXANDER Chairman, National Endowment for the Arts
This occasion lends itself to speculation, to the bittersweet.
The poet Samuel Hazo writes about life's journey in a poem called "The First and Only Sailing," of which I'll quote the last few lines:
Expect nothing,
and anything seems everything.
Expect everything, and anything
seems nothing.
To live
you leave your yesterselves
to drown without a funeral.
You chart a trek where no
one's sailed before.
You rig. You anchor up. You sail.
Your time at Juilliard has been spent learning when to tack or when to open your sails to the wind; it has been filled with hard work and wild ideas, friendship, love, the camaraderie of community.
Ithaca College, May 14  JEAN-MICHEL COUSTEAU Oceanographer
As a culture, we are coming to our senses after a 40- or 50-year bad trip of raping the natural and human environment as if there is no tomorrow.
Today, we recognize that current industrial society is literally unsustainable.
We admit that trashing the future is bad business. . . .
You will inherit a planet that, while remarkably resilient, is unmistakably damaged.
But today we have the opportunity to turn society around and point our policies, our technology, our dreams in a more positive direction.
State University of New York at Geneseo, May 14  DAVID R. GERGEN
Counselor to President Clinton  People who are willing to get off the sidelines and get into the arena make the difference.
Your generation has been dismissed as too cynical, too skeptical, and you have reason.
After all, the faith has been broken too many times in the past.
There is no guarantee that we as a people will succeed.
But if you don't get into the arena, I guarantee you we will fail.
Syracuse University  KURT VONNEGUT Novelist
I had a bad uncle named Dan, who said a male can't be a man unless he'd gone to war.
But I had a good uncle named Alex, who said, when life was most agreeable -- and it could be just a pitcher of lemonade in the shade -- he would say, "If this isn't nice, what is?" . . .
Now, if he hadn't said that so regularly, maybe five or six times a month, we might not have paused to notice how rewarding life can be sometimes.
Perhaps my good Uncle Alex will live on in some of you members of the Syracuse Class of 1994 if, in the future, you will pause to say out loud every so often, "If this isn't nice, what is?" Gettysburg College, May 22  ANDY ROONEY Television commentator
I was thinking -- just as an example of how much the times influence what a person does with his life -- if Abraham Lincoln were alive today, would he be standing here making his Gettysburg Address and saying, "Four score and seven years ago, our forefathers brought forth upon this continent a new nation . . ."?
Of course not.
The nation isn't new any more.
He'd have to say, "Ten score and 18 years ago." . . .
Lincoln would probably be a relatively obscure lawyer who was turned down for the Supreme Court because he and Mary had a live-in maid for whom they never paid Social Security.
Haverford College, May 15  CORNEL WEST Harvard University professor
I have only a brief word for the class of 1994, namely that you are now part of a tradition of rich Quakerism on the one hand, but also of grand but still flawed democratic tradition on the other.
I think T. S. Eliot was absolutely right when he wrote in 1919 that tradition is not something you inherit.
If you want it, you must obtain it with great labor.
It is a perennial process.
And it means then that one is going to have to cut radically against the American grain, because it means on the one hand, you are going to have to have a sense of history and understand the present as history.
And in my own humble opinion, the major forms of idolatry of our day are the market way of life and the tribal way of life.
The Citadel, May 14  SENATOR BOB DOLE
American leadership is still required.
And sometimes that leadership will mean that Americans will make the supreme sacrifice.  . . .
Is it America's destiny to be the world's policeman?
No.
There are crimes against humanity and against freedom committed every day in countless countries across the world, and America does not go in, guns blazing, to make it right.
Instead we lead by example. . . .
If we are to maintain our credibility as an economic and moral influence, then we must deal with our problems, like the deficit and crime.
And we must remember and teach the values that made America great -- values like decency, honesty and individual responsibility.
Wesleyan University  LOWELL P. WEICKER JR.
Governor of Connecticut
A few weeks ago I went to South Africa to attend the presidential inauguration of Nelson Mandela.
An event so sweeping as this was undreamed of even by its most ardent supporters. . . .
Decades of legally dehumanizing all races but white were buried under an avalanche of paper ballots.
Yet there was not one of us witnessing history in Pretoria, as representatives of the United States, who didn't comprehend that what was ending in South Africa as a matter of law was thriving in our own country as a matter of practice.
The long moral finger of outrage that we for so long had pointed at South Africa was now more properly directed at ourselves.
University of Michigan, April 30  CATHY GUISEWITE Cartoonist
I graduated with a class committed to open love, open thinking open doors, open everything. . . .
Twenty-two years later, the people of my class are getting cash out of a machine, dinner out of a clown's mouth and it isn't even possible to get a human being on the phone at the phone company.
In Los Angeles, my only chance of having a meaningful encounter with a person is if I smash into one with my car. . . .
You've grown up in a strange time where people seem more bonded by the bad stuff than the good.
Where in a lot of communities the main common link between neighbors is that everyone knows someone who's been mugged.
Everyone knows someone in rehab.
And everyone's been touched by a life that ended way too soon.
If you want something to change, you personally have to do something different.
You have to take a stand when it isn't convenient.
Try something nobody else has tried.
Defy your own group.
Rebel against yourself.
Knock down your walls and get out of your way.
University of Southern California, May 6  STEVEN SPIELBERG Film maker
It doesn't matter what path we take, we have to remain curious and fearless.
We have to look at the world and question what we see.
We have to be unafraid to say no and change what is unacceptable.
Each of us has the ability to do this.
Each of us has the responsibility to do it.
New York University, May 12  JAMES EARL JONES Actor
You are facing new worlds of technology so fast that if they don't throw you into a catatonic fit, they will challenge your imagination just to keep up, and threaten to overwhelm your ability to absorb it.
It has been predicted that the social implications of this technology promise to be somewhere between the eruption of a volcano and the discovery of fire.
Susquehanna University, May 15  CHAIM POTOK Novelist
You can detach the two lines that form an X and realign them so that they take the shape of a gallows, a crucifix, a plus sign, an equals sign.
What will it be, this X Decade?
A decade of growing hatreds, hardening separations and Balkan tribalism?
A decade of continuing postmodern, American-style lynchings and crucifixions?
Or a decade in which we add to the well-being of the country?
A decade in which we learn more about the true nature of equality for all Americans?
Carnegie-Mellon University, May 17  LAWRENCE ELLISON Software-company executive
Within a decade or so, anyone will be able to view anything from anywhere at anytime.
Text, numbers, audio and high-resolution video will all be integrated on your screen. . . .
The impact of these innovations will be no less than that of Westinghouse's electric power on demand.
They will so profoundly change our world that 20 years from now, scarcely anyone will be able to remember what life was like without them.
Boston University, May 22  ROSS PEROT Former Presidential candidate
Financial success and happiness are unrelated. . . .
I'm no happier today than I was as a boy in the depression in Texarkana.
I was rich then because of my parents. . . .
A bell is no bell till you ring it.
Don't just sit there and look at the bell, ring it.
A song is no song till you sing it.
Forget everything I've said so far and listen to these last two lines.
This is the most important thing I'll say: Love in your heart isn't put there to stay, love isn't love till you give it away.
Johns Hopkins Medical School, May 26  DAVID A. KESSLER Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration
We have known of the dangers of smoking for more than 30 years.
But only recently has a picture begun to emerge of the decisions and the research that have been occurring inside the tobacco industry about the hazards of cigarettes.
It is time to ask the tough questions.
We cannot passively cede to the tobacco industry the right to determine the future health of so many of our children.
University of North Carolina  at Chapel Hill, May 15  DR.
FRANCIS S. COLLINS Director, National Center for Human Genome Research
Dr.
Collins, a geneticist, spoke effusively of the enduring nature of love and romance.
You could say he was inspired: three weeks earlier, a graduating business administration major, James Vanke, asked Dr.
Collins to help him propose to his girlfriend, a classmate.
In a letter, he urged the scientist to be "as cheesy as possible."
I encourage each of you to consider these three questions and decisions carefully.
What will be your life's work?
What are you going to do about faith?
And what role will love play in your life? . . .
Love should be the center of life, the enduring, glowing fire.
And I'm happy to see no evidence currently of it dying out.
And if you don't accept that, I would like to present as evidence Exhibit A over here in the business section.
I would like to ask James Vanke and Suzanne Woloski to please stand up.
Right here, right in the front.
O.K., everybody, James and Suzanne have been dating for over a year and as you can see, they are head over heels in love.
And so, folks, right here, in front of 30,000 people, we are about to witness a big moment.
Suzanne didn't know about this.
Suzanne, James wants to know if you will do him the honor of becoming his wife. . . .
She said yes.
Love conquers all.
You're all invited to the wedding.


New (Political) Cry: Remember the Alamodome
With four skyward-soaring towers and brightly colored suspension cables, the San Antonio Alamodome has been hailed as an architectural inspiration.
The less reverent call it the Armadillodome, pointing out that the concrete towers and the dome's curved steel roof inspire images of an animal often seen on Texas highways, upside down and in rigor mortis.


Rangers Skating Into the Unknown
The crowds came to Playland for a holiday weekend, kids riding the rides, parents purchasing cotton candy, the pathways surrounding the ice rink mobbed with people out for a good time.
Most of the Rangers, the area's regular winter residents, have never seen Playland this way.
Their parking lot is gone, used for attractions, and they must put their cars on the other side of the building.
Not many mind.


Sports of The Times; Why's Ewing So Pleasant These Days?
BELIEVE it or not, at this late stage in his career to say nothing of the late stage in all our careers -- there is something new to be said about Patrick Ewing.
Patrick Ewing, raconteur.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  NO PANACEA FOR HAITI  Intelligence officials feel the United States could easily reinstate the exiled President of Haiti using force, but that it would not end violence there and that troops would have to remain there to keep order.  1


Let the Chancellor Intervene
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines is trying to make sure the nation's largest school system actually teaches children.
He has identified 40 troubled schools for aggressive intervention -- including removal of principals.
He has given them specific deadlines to show improvement, and asked the State Legislature for new authority to combat what he calls "educational corruption."
This is not a mad or selfish grab to re-centralize power.
Mr.
Cortines is appropriately resorting to drastic measures to address an educational emergency.


Pedestrian Safety Needs a Higher Priority
To the Editor:
Prof.
James Donald Wynne, an original member of the faculty of York College in Jamaica, Queens, was killed while crossing the busy boulevard that cuts through the York campus by a car with a suspended driver at the wheel (news article, May 19).
His death was a tragedy, more so because the site was long known as dangerous.


CHRONICLE
RUSH LIMBAUGH, the conservative radio and television personality, began the holiday weekend with his own wedding.
Mr.
Limbaugh, 43, who is twice-divorced, married MARTA FITZGERALD on Friday at the Virginia home of CLARENCE THOMAS, the United States Supreme Court Justice, a spokesman for Mr.
Limbaugh, Kit Carson, told The Associated Press.
Justice Thomas performed the ceremony.


Airboats Banned From Part of Big Cypress Preserve in Florida to Protect Environment
Propelled by its huge fan, Tim Spaulding's airboat sped the Beeler family across the grassy flats of Ochopee Prairie, stirring up mud and frightening birds out of their resting places.
Splashing to a stop at an alligator hole, Mr.
Spaulding turned to the family of four from Seattle and told them sadly that they were among his last passengers through this corner of the Big Cypress National Preserve, which is northwest of the Everglades.
The Federal Government has ordered the prairie closed to airboats and is considering extending the ban to the entire preserve.


Ouagadougou Journal; A Samaritan Lightens African Women's Cross
Moise Yameogo pulled his hand out of the sack, held up a tiny mound of flour and let the white granules flow through his fingers.
It was a prideful gesture, like a farmer breaking a clod of beloved soil into dust.
"Nobody can believe it," he said with a grin.
"They think it's some kind of miracle. They say: 'But where did you get this? Surely not here in Burkina Faso.' "


For High School Graduates, A Job Market of Dead Ends
For hundreds of thousands of people graduating from high school this spring, the diploma is a one-way ticket to low-paying, part-time jobs at best.
Most graduates who are planning to go straight to work are offered the same low wages, the same part-time hours and the same assignments in the restaurants, supermarkets, motels and gasoline stations where they worked in after-school jobs they held as students.


Communists In Hungary Win Majority
Four years after being voted into near oblivion, Hungary's former Communists swept back to power today in the final round of parliamentary elections and appeared likely to form a government on their own rather than in coalition, as had been expected.
In the stunning comeback, the former Communists, revamped as the Socialist Party, won seats in all sections of the country, and unofficial results showed the Socialists with 209 seats in the 386-seat Parliament.


Tridel Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Abroad at Home; Guilt For Vietnam
In the years 1969 through 1972, when Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger made policy on Vietnam, 20,492 Americans died in the war.
At the end of that time the United States got out the same way it could have at the beginning: on terms that led before long to a Communist victory.
President Nixon and Mr.
Kissinger understood all along that there was no feasible way to "win" in Vietnam.
They knew that after all the U.S. forces were gone, a South Vietnamese Army that would not fight was likely to be overwhelmed before long.
But they wanted to delay that denouement for political reasons.


Embargo Leaves Serbia Thriving
With hyperinflation overcome, new boutiques overflowing with Italian shoes and American jeans, food abundant and industry showing a modest recovery, Serbia today suggests that a long trade embargo stimulates ever more sophisticated ruses to circumvent it.
At a time when the United Nations has tightened sanctions on Haiti in an attempt to dislodge its military rulers, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia appears stronger than ever two years after the imposition of draconian trade sanctions.


Redman Industries(RDMN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Who Will Protect Us From Altered Foods?
To the Editor:
Give me my bread without trans fatty acid margarine, my milk without recombinant bovine growth hormone and my tomatoes without laboratory engineered genes that never existed in nature.


System Software Associates Inc.(SSAX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
It's been 25 years since WILLARD GAYLIN and his neighbor in Hastings, N.Y., DANIEL CALLAHAN, decided to create the Hastings Center, a bioethics research center where weighty moral issues raised by scientific advances are studied.
Now it is time to step aside as chairman of the board, said Dr.
Gaylin, a psychiatrist, who has taught at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, at Columbia Law School and at the Union Theological Seminary.
He will be honored at the Hastings Center's 25th anniversary dinner at the United Nations on Friday.


Review/Pop; Guitar Pounding and Roars By a Victim of Love and Life
When the neck snapped off his guitar four songs into the Wedding Present's set on Thursday night at CBGB, David Gedge, who is also the lead singer of the nine-year-old band from Leeds, England, looked bewildered.
"I've never smashed a guitar before," he stammered.
There is plenty of room for misfortune in Mr.
Gedge's world but no room for accidents.
The perfectionist spurned two different replacement guitars that were offered and then muttered something about the set list being ruined before picking up the spare guitar he uses for certain songs.
The Wedding Present's music is a carefully balanced mix of rhythm-driven pop and big guitar noise augmented by Mr.
Gedge's thick, slurred Northern English accent, which tends to become a low bellow.
The band's songs are a series of minor tragedies and lovers' quarrels.
Mr.
Gedge is the victim of all these events, and they are never his fault.
In "Big Rat," one of many new, unreleased songs the band performed, Mr.
Gedge confesses his infidelity to his girlfriend.
Instead of apologizing, however, he blames her.
"I'm a big rat," he sings, "but I get scared when you start talking like that."


At Wellesley, or 'First Lady Central,' the Talk Is About, Well, First Ladies
At Wellesley College graduation on Friday, there was talk of first ladies, as there often is on a campus where, when women refer to Hillary, it can mean only one Hillary, their Hillary, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Class of 1969.
"It's been sort of First Lady central," the commencement speaker, Cokie Roberts, a correspondent for ABC News and National Public Radio, and a Wellesley alumna, told the graduates.


Review/Jazz; Expressionism in Action
Yosuke Yamashita's show on Wednesday night at Sweet Basil was almost completely extroverted.
Mr.
Yamashita, a Japanese pianist who only occasionally works in New York, brought in a band that included Cecil McBee on bass and Pheeroan Aklaff on drums, along with a guest, Joe Lovano on tenor saxophone.
Without too much finesse, it muscled its set into activity.
Mr.
Yamashita is a limited pianist when performing mainstream jazz; instead, he brings expressionistic ideas to the field.
He'd follow a piece's harmony for a bit, then start spinning off clusters, mechanically whirring ideas that in their chromaticism ignored a tune's path.
His compositions jumped around quickly, from mood to mood, working around odd melodies and skewed bass lines.
They invited experimentation; to follow them closely while improvising would have required too much constraint.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Friday about American veterans visiting a cemetery in France in observance of D-Day carried an erroneous credit.
It was by Alan Riding of The New York Times, not Agence France-Presse.


Knicks Find 68 Is Hard To Believe
It was hard to believe that Patrick Ewing was held to 1 point Saturday.
It was not hard to believe that the Knicks had another bad offensive game.
Few people question the Knicks' defense, but their inconsistent offense has been a yearlong concern.
And after New York's 88-68 loss in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference final, the Knicks had a lot to think about today as they practiced for Monday afternoon's game against the Indiana Pacers.


Phillies Pitchers Can't Quite Go Distance for No-Hitter
Phillies 4, Astros 2
David West, making only his second start of the season, and Heathcliff Slocumb held Houston hitless until a leadoff single in the ninth inning by Steve Finley, and the Philadelphia Phillies beat the visiting Astros, 4-2, yesterday.
West (1-4), moved from a relief role into the rotation after injuries deprived the Phillies of three of their starters, pitched six innings.
He struck out seven and walked three before being pulled after 102 pitches.


Pacers Are on a High Instead of a Vacation
The Pacers held practice this morning.
While that might seem commonplace to a team like the Knicks, for Indiana, it is pretty spectacular.
For a city used to celebrating a break in the weather and the Indy 500 this time of year, the Pacers are delightfully out of season and everyone's loving it.


Review/Television; Following a Love Story: New Kind of Virtual Reality
"These are not actors. This is not a re-creation. This is the actual story unfolding before your eyes." Such assurances are delivered periodically in the course of "Kristin Is Missing," lest viewers assume from the subject, the overlapping images and the heavy doses of country music that they are watching just another made-for-television movie.
This first offering in a new series known as "Before Your Eyes" is an effort by CBS News to tell true stories as they occurred, without the hokum common to video versions.
Welcome though the enterprise is in some ways, it creates difficulties for producers.


No Headline
"Federal prosecutors threaten to indict me if I fail to plead guilty to a series of crimes I did not commit. I will not make any deals with them. I did not commit any crimes. My conscience is clear and my 42-year record as an elected official is one I am proud to once again run on." -- DAN ROSTENKOWSKI.  [ A11:2. ]


Knicks Can't Shake Cold as Pacers Turn Up Heat
The Indiana Pacers gave the Knicks a last-minute chance to steal a victory.
The Knicks dropped the ball.


Cocaine Injustice
Snorting powder cocaine and smoking crack cocaine: two efficient ways to get addicted, two parts of a drug culture that spreads human misery and foments violent crime.
Powder and crack are identical chemically, yet the law treats crack as though it were up to 100 times as dangerous.
Is the law right?
Congress is just beginning to ask why, under Federal laws initially designed to reduce sentencing disparities, such an extreme gap in penalties exists.
Congress is also starting to address the ugly consequence of the disparity, including the fact that African-Americans, the majority of crack smokers, are getting the long sentences and whites, mostly powder snorters, the shorter.


Market Place; Electronic fingerprinting is growing but pace can be erratic.
GOVERNMENT efforts to root out welfare fraud with electronic fingerprinting is generating renewed interest in companies that make the almost-foolproof identification systems.
In April, Los Angeles County became the first place in the nation where parents applying for welfare for their children must have an index finger pressed to a glass scanner.
The record is stored in a computer and the fingerprint can be retrieved to insure that applicants have not used assumed names to apply for multiple benefits.


The Penske Machine Is Rolling Right Along
Roger Penske told a post-race victory story in his garage today.
It was just before the Persian Gulf war when one of Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf's aides called Penske's diesel-building company and requested some engines to transport tanks.
The aide asked Penske how soon they could be delivered and Penske said he replied: "How soon do you need them?"
The logistical might of Penske Racing, the Indianapolis 500's version of the military-industrial complex, was on full display on Sunday at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
The overwhelming Indy 500 victory by Al Unser Jr. -- which came after the even-more-overwhelming car of Emerson Fittipaldi crashed with 15 laps to go -- symbolized better than any of Penske's nine other Indy victories the unparalleled leverage that his team can exert in this race.


On My Mind; Beijing's New Prisoner
Soon it will start sinking in -- just how much President Clinton and the United States will have to pay for his broken official promises about China.
The truth is that payment has started already.
Politically the Chinese Communists have taken a new prisoner -- the President.
And at a time when misunderstanding about American intent could bring war with the North Koreans, how are they now supposed to figure out what Mr.
Clinton means, really, or does not mean, really?


Soweto Journal; What's 'Shock' in Zulu? Whites Visiting to Say Hi
If Ursula Pretorius was surprised to find herself, for the first time in her 29 years, in a black township, it was nothing compared to the amazement she created -- a fair-skinned Afrikaner woman with long auburn hair and vermilion eyeshadow, on foot in Soweto on a Saturday morning.
The shoppers and the children playing dodge ball and the front-yard gossipers stared as, smiling nervously, this pale apparition crossed the dusty street and opened her mouth.


Grey to Promote World Trade Center
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has selected Grey Advertising of New York and its subsidiaries, including Grey Direct and the GCI Group, to handle domestic and international advertising and marketing for the World Trade Center, which is owned by the Port Authority.
The account, with billings estimated at $3.4 million, had been handled by Keyes Martin of Springfield, N.J., since 1990.
Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the authority, said on Friday that Grey had been awarded the account after a five-month review that was narrowed to Grey, Keyes Martin and three other New York-based finalists: Bozell, the Dentsu Corporation of America and Wells Rich Greene BDDP.


Congressman's Statement Vowing a Fight
Following is a statement issued here today by Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who heads the House Ways and Means Committee:
Federal prosecutors threaten to indict me if I fail to plead guilty to a series of crimes I did not commit.
I will not make any deals with them.
I did not commit any crimes.
My conscience is clear, and my 42-year record as an elected official is one I am proud to once again run on.


Only Bills For Auction This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
A 13-day cash management bill auction will be held tomorrow.
The regular bill auction, usually held on Mondays, is today because of the Memorial Day holiday yesterday, .
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.16 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 4.61 percent.


Three Youths Die and One Is Hurt as Stolen Car Veers Off Road and Crashes
The police in Irvington, N.J., said yesterday that they were still trying to piece together what happened Sunday night when a stolen car carrying four teen-agers went out of control, flipped over and hit a fire hydrant, killing three of the occupants.
Witnesses told the police that the car appeared to be traveling about 90 miles an hour when the accident happened about 10:45 P.M.
The car, which was stolen in Hillside on Saturday, was a 1993 Honda Accord, a favorite of the young car thieves whose nightly activities have given Newark and its immediate suburbs one of the highest rates of car thefts in the nation.


A Message That Guns Are Lethal Weapons
The scene: A bedroom.
A little boy is playing with a gun.
The gun goes off and the bullet begins its swift journey of destruction.
It zooms through walls, shattering the windows of a car.
It travels through a living room where a man is relaxing with a beer as he watches a baseball game on television.
The bullet blows up the television set before it speeds relentlessly toward its final destination: a baby in a highchair.
Another scene: The emergency room at Elmhurst Hospital in Queens.
Doctors and nurses are working furiously on a young man, 18 years old, who has been shot in the head.


FIFA Leaders to Lobby Clinton
Soccer officials in Zurich said yesterday they will appeal personally to PRESIDENT CLINTON in an attempt not to have fences around the Cotton Bowl in Dallas and Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington during the World Cup. (AP)


A New Level for the Rangers' Low-Key Star
When Brian Leetch entered his apartment building last weekend, the doorman stopped him and smiled somewhat sheepishly.
From beneath his desk, the man produced a few items -- two Ranger caps, a rally towel, a trading card -- left by tenants of the luxury building on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
For a long time, few residents paid much attention to Leetch, the Rangers' star defenseman, who happened to be their neighbor.
Suddenly, everyone seems to care.
"They're all coming out of the woodwork now," Leetch said, smiling, as he willingly obliged the autograph requests.


CHRONICLE
They're been a low-profile family for the past quarter of a century, but JAMES ALLEN HENDRIX and JANIE HENDRIX-WRIGHT, father and sister of Jimi Hendrix, the late rock guitarist and composer, intend to make up for lost time.
For starters, they are scheduled to fly in from Seattle, to a dinner-and-jam session tribute to Hendrix, who died in London in 1970 at age 27.
At the time, "unknown causes" including drugs were among reasons given for his death.
It is such persistent rumors his family is attempting to erase.


Gaza's Militants Must Decide What to Do Now
Khalid Tafish and his friends used to saunter through dusty alleys in this town, armed with rifles and grenades, occasionally clashing with Israeli soldiers and shooting suspected informers and thieves to maintain a kind of frontier justice.
Now they have turned in their guns and enlisted in the new Palestinian police force that arrived with self-rule.


In Mississippi, a Clue to Low-Inflation Economics
Two years ago, business was so bad that the Georgia-Pacific Corporation was forced temporarily to shut its thundering linerboard plant on the Pearl River a few miles outside of town, idling 600 people, in an effort to reduce inventory.
"The marketplace was completely flooded," Asa D. Hardison, the general manager, recalled.
"The box plants filled up and there were no orders out there."


High Homicide Rate Leaves New Orleans Fearful
The casual visitor here sees the city's beguiling facades, but, like the rows of boarded-up houses only a few blocks from the elegant ones, fear lurks nearby.
Murder is booming in New Orleans.
In 1993, with nearly 80 homicides per 100,000 people, the city's homicide rate led Detroit and Washington, two other high-crime cities, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In the first quarter of this year, the homicide rate for the city of New Orleans was up 36 percent over last year, and it was still leading the other two cities' rates.
The homicide rate of the New Orleans metropolitan area led all others in 1992, the last year for which Federal figures are available.


One Show Honors For Martin Agency
The Martin Agency of Richmond won the most honors last week at the One Show awards for creative excellence in advertising, presented by the One Club for Art and Copy.
At the organization's 18th annual ceremony, held in New York, Martin won 10 medals -- 2 gold, 4 silver and 4 bronze -- for its work for clients like Stuart Circle Pharmacy and the Edgar Allan Poe Museum.


Ambivalence Like Rye's May Re-elect Cuomo
Ask the residents of this Westchester County town to assess the state of New York State and the response sounds at first like a living advertisement for why Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is sure to be swept from office this November.
Their property taxes drift upward each year.
Jobs keep fleeing once-redoubtable local companies like I.B.M.
And while their azalea-filled town remains safe enough that car keys are sometimes left in the ignition overnight, they look at crime in New York City and plead for the death penalty.


Virginia Makes It to the Wire, But Princeton Goes Beyond It
Virginia, a team with few expectations but big dreams, took Princeton into overtime today before losing to the favored Tigers, 9-8, before the largest crowd ever to see a college lacrosse game.
An audience of 24,730 in Byrd Stadium saw Kevin Lowe, Princeton's all-America attackman, score the winning goal 42 seconds into the sudden-death overtime period, a goal that gave the Tigers the Division I national championship for the second time in three seasons.


Germans Remember Little Good of Honecker, and Much Evil
Few tears were shed in Germany today over news that Erich Honecker, East Germany's longtime Communist leader, had died Sunday in Chile.
Politicians and news commentators recalled him as a harsh dictator who built the Berlin wall, enthusiastically joined the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia, and rejected efforts to humanize Communist rule in East Germany.


Ignore the Date. Summer Is Here.; Picnics, Tourists and Ice Cream Trucks Are Telltale Signs
Summer in New York is not a date.
People ignore the calendar the way they ignore the DO NOT WALK sign.
Summer in New York is a 4-year-old girl who wiggles to reggae in the warm grass of Astoria Park in Queens, and 60,000 Dominicans who dance to salsa at Riverside Park near 155th Street.


No Headline
Ezra Taft Benson, the president of the Mormon Church since 1985 and a Secretary of Agriculture in the Eisenhower Administration, died yesterday at his home in Salt Lake City.
He was 94.
Mr.
Benson, who had been in frail health in recent years and rarely appeared in public, died of congestive heart failure, said Bruce Olsen, a spokesman for the church.
Mr.
Benson suffered a broken hip several years ago when he was standing near a horse and it rolled over on him.


Miscoding Is Seen as the Root of False Memories
IN a scientific nod to the frailty of memory, neurologists and cognitive scientists are coming to a consensus on the mental mechanisms that can foster false memories.
The leading candidate is "source amnesia," the inability to recall the origin of the memory of a given event.
Once the source of a memory is forgotten, scientists say, people can confuse an event that was only imagined or suggested with a true one.
The result is a memory that though false, carries the feeling of authenticity.


Struggling Mariners Go Out And Win One for Griffey
Mariners 12, Twins 0
Randy Johnson pitched a two-hitter for his second straight shutout and Keith Mitchell hit his first two home runs of the season, leading visiting Seattle over Minnesota, 12-0, yesterday.
But the biggest impact of the resounding victory could be on Ken Griffey Jr.'s attitude.


Funeral Coverage Left Out Religion
To the Editor:
I was disappointed with coverage of the funeral of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis by you and the other media.


Q&amp;A
The Cutting Edge
Q.  Does cutting paper with good scissors dull the blades?


Misguided Dominican Policy Bears Bitter Fruit; A Sovereign Country
To the Editor:
As a Dominican citizen I take issue with "Mr. Balaguer's Dubious Victory" (editorial, May 20), which suggests use of extralegal means to address allegations of fraud in the Dominican election.
The suggestion that foreign organizations such as the National Democratic Institute, "along with observers from the Organization of American States, could convene a meeting of interested parties . . . to decide how to proceed once the final tally is in" is without justification.


Patterns
Guns, Blood and Fashion
Jean Baptiste Mondino's commercial for Jean-Paul Gaultier is the most fashionable thing on Paris television these days, a surreal dinner with guests like Eve Salvail, the bald model, and with Mr.
Gaultier making a digital metamorphosis into an old woman.
The video he directed for Madonna, "Justify My Love," was one of the first to be banned by MTV for its kinky content, which owed more than a little to the hard-edged photos of Helmut Newton.


Police Officers Need Continuing Education
To the Editor:
As Gerald W. Lynch, president of John Jay College, states in "We Must Find and Train Better Police Officers" (letter, May 13), a police officer's role goes beyond law enforcement and "involves understanding human behavior and good judgment." He urges that we "move policing into the university and expose officers to the humanities, sciences, modern technologies, ethical issues."


Reviews/Dance; New Faces in Familiar Paces at City Ballet
While presenting the showcase of 12 new works called the Diamond Project, the New York City Ballet has found time to rehearse a series of debuts in its regular repertory.
Dancers seen in new roles at the New York State Theater on Sunday included Ethan Stiefel and Kyra Nichols in "Union Jack" and Igor Zelensky in "Brahms-Schoenberg Quartet."
Mr.
Zelensky, who came from the Kirov Ballet in Russia two years ago, has yet to be seen in George Balanchine's most experimental works to contemporary music.
Perhaps this is because he has still to master the required timing and convoluted partnering.
Perhaps it is also because both he and the company have not applied themselves to exploiting his special gifts.


Astros Ready to Cut Williams
The Houston Astros are expected to announce today that they are releasing MITCH WILLIAMS, whose late-inning relief problems have continued since he gave up the home run that decided last season's World Series.
BOB WATSON, the Astros' general manager, said last night that he, Manager TERRY COLLINS and the club's owner, DRAYTON McLANE JR., discussed the Williams matter yesterday.
"We have come to a conclusion about Mitch's status with the Astros and we'll announce it tomorrow," Watson said by telephone from his home in Houston.


Holy Bull Is Redeemed, by a Mile
Three weeks after he was battered and beaten in the Kentucky Derby, the big gray colt Holy Bull revived his ranking as a speed demon yesterday when he outran older stars from wire to wire and won the $500,000 Metropolitan Handicap by 5 1/2 lengths over Cherokee Run.
It was his first performance since he ran 12th in a field of 14 in the rain and the rough-house of the Derby, and it was memorable.
He led every step of the way against a distinguished cast, he ran the third-fastest Metropolitan Mile in the 101-year history of the race and he became only the 15th horse to win it at the age of 3.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Some old assumptions about inflation may no longer hold.
Business is booming at the Georgia-Pacific linerboard plant near Monticello, Miss., which is running at beyond 100 percent of its intended capacity.
But the plant exhibits few characteristics of previous boom times.
Defying the conventional inflationary assumptions, American factories appear to be undergoing a profound shift that finds them doing more with less.  [ Page A1. ]
The Federal Communications Commission is about to overhaul its plan for selling off radio frequencies covering a new generation of wireless telephone and data "personal communication services" in an effort to make the licenses more attractive to bidders.  [ D1. ]
After 12 years of perceived neglect by the Federal Communications Commission, the role of members of minority groups in broadcasting has moved up on the agenda as the commission tries to increase minority ownership and employment.  [ D1. ] International
Responsibility for millions of dollars in damages from certain types of nuclear accidents outside the United States could shift from private companies to the Federal Government, under a draft proposal for a new international nuclear liability treaty sought by the Clinton Administration.  [ D1. ]
Germany's medical establishment is in turmoil over accusations by the nation's biggest health insurer that medical supply companies bribed surgeons at public hospitals to overcharge the national health care system by millions of dollars annually for artificial heart valves.  [ D1. ]
Six years after Vietnam began changing to a market economy, the country's scientists have lost their Government subsidies for research and are now struggling to feed their families.  [ C9. ] Companies
Farm equipment makers are repeatedly surprising Wall Street lately with sharp earnings increases, thanks to stronger-than-expected sales of tractors, combines and other equipment, and following more than a decade of drastic cost-cutting, losses and consolidation.  [ D1. ]
Forget Karl Malden.
Soon, if you leave home without them, you can buy your American Express travelers checks at the automated teller machine.  [ D6. ] Markets
International financial markets were mixed in light trading, with exchanges closed for holidays in the United States and Britain.
The dollar was up against leading European currencies.  [ D4. ]
Today's Columns
Efforts to root out welfare fraud with electronic fingerprinting are generating renewed interest in companies that make the almost-foolproof systems.
Market Place.  [ D4. ]
Time again to ask 20 questions inspired and provoked by advertising and marketing.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ]


Pope Rules Out Debate On Making Women Priests
Pope John Paul II told the world's Catholics today to abandon any thought of women being ordained as priests, saying that the issue was not open to debate and that his views must be "definitively held by all the church's faithful."
Although the Pope's words fell just short of a formal statement of infallible doctrine, the particularly severe and authoritative tone of his letter to bishops suggested that he was seeking to remove the idea from the Roman Catholic agenda for decades to come.


Chess
Just 11 moves into Gary Kasparov's game with Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine in Round 4 of the Euwe Memorial Tournament in Amsterdam on May 16, the Professional Chess Association's world champion saw his position disintegrate.
Ivanchuk had caught him by surpise with a devilish move that virtually decided the contest.
This did not mean that Kasparov had to abandon the fight at once, but it did mean that, if his opponent played without a mistake from this critical juncture on, the champion would not be able to rescue himself.
Ivanchuk's technique turned out to be impeccable and, for the second time in his life, he scored a much-prized victory over Kasparov.


Mets Learn 3 Plus Galarraga Equals 4
All right, class.
Surely everybody knew what the key pitch was yesterday, Professor Dallas Green demanded.
Someone suggested it was the one turned into a grand slam by Andres Galarraga of Colorado in the sixth inning, a home run that broke open a close game as the Rockies dismantled the Mets, 12-2, at Shea Stadium.
Wrong.


Suspect Linked to Muslim Fringe Group
The man being held in the shooting of the former spokesman for the Nation of Islam was identified today as an expelled member of the group who was trying to build his own following with a religious program on a Seattle cable television station.
The police identified the man as James Edward Bess, 49, of Tacoma, Wash.
They said he would be charged with attempted murder of the former spokesman, Khallid Abdul Muhammad, who was hit in the lower legs by a bullet from a 9-millimeter automatic pistol.


Remembering Other Victims of the Nazis


Bosnia Threatens to Boycott Geneva Talks Over Gorazde Pullout
The Muslim-led Bosnian Government, saying that Serbian forces are still close to the center of Gorazde, threatened today to boycott talks on a Bosnian cease-fire that are scheduled to begin in Geneva on Thursday.
The talks, called by the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia, Yasushi Akashi, have been the object of elaborate preparations and are widely seen by Western diplomats here as a decisive test of whether a truce in Bosnia is possible.


Japanese Rightist Fires Near Ex-Premier
A suspected right-wing militant fired a shot near former Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa tonight in apparent anger over Mr.
Hosokawa's apologies for Japan's behavior in World War II.
Mr.
Hosokawa, who resigned last month amid questions over his financial dealings, was unharmed.
The bullet hit the ceiling of the Tokyo hotel lobby as the former Prime Minister was leaving a party held there.


F.C.C. Is Revising Rules for Wireless Auction
Worried by the prospect of holding a $10 billion auction that no one will attend, the Federal Communications Commission is about to overhaul its plan for selling off radio frequencies covering a new generation of wireless telephone and data "personal communication services."
The heart of the new plan, which is scheduled for a commission vote on June 9, is an attempt to consolidate the number of licenses to be sold from about 2,500 to about 2,000.
The purpose is to make the licenses more attractive to aspiring bidders and their backers on Wall Street when the auctions begin late this year, a senior F.C.C. official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said.


Vast Areas of Rain Forest Are Being Destroyed in Chile
AT the port of this seaside community, a mountain of wood chips, shredded from tens of thousands of native hardwood trees, stands ready to be loaded onto giant vessels and shipped to Japan to be made into paper.
One hundred miles north, a Swiss company was accused by the Government in April of illegally cutting thousands of acres of rare hardwoods.


The Reformer Vanishes
Instead of fighting to dismantle Washington's big money system, President Clinton has helped his party become its biggest beneficiary.
Pledges to clean up the nation's campaign financing procedures notwithstanding, Mr.
Clinton has expended more time and energy courting well-to-do donors at fancy private receptions than prodding Congress to enact serious political reform.
Since Mr.
Clinton accepted his party's Presidential nomination in July 1992, and took control of the party apparatus, the Democratic National Committee has raised an astonishing $40 million in "soft money." The $20 million in soft money collected by the Democrats during the first 15 months of the Clinton Presidency is $7 million more than the Republican Party reported collecting during the first 15 months of George Bush's term.


Knicks' D, Like Team, Is Looking 2d Best
And to think Market Square Arena used to be such a cozy place for the Knicks to visit.
Before this Memorial Day weekend, the Indiana Pacers had wilted in New York's presence -- on the road and at home.
They had lost seven consecutive games to New York -- none of them were closely contested -- and had allowed themselves to be pushed around like rag dolls in a windstorm.


Getting to Know Judge Breyer
By choosing the centrist judge Stephen Breyer for the Supreme Court, President Clinton has probably insured that the mid-July confirmation hearings will be quiet and peaceful.
The nominee has drawn warm praise from senators of both parties and criticism only from Senator Howard Metzenbaum.
Like Ruth Bader Ginsburg last year, Judge Breyer seems to be headed for overwhelming Senate approval.
Does that mean the proceedings must again be tedious?
That too seems ordained, unless the Judiciary Committee takes the opportunity to energize its traditional format.


Togs for Working Out, or Maybe Just for Going Out
Doesn't anybody dress up anymore?
Look around on the street, in shopping malls and restaurants, at the airport, and what do you see?
Men in jogging suits.
Women in leggings and sweatshirts.
On everyone's feet, sneakers.
It seems more important to be comfortable than to be chic.
The phenomenon has been growing, for highly practical reasons.
Many offices have dress-down Fridays.
A lot of people work at home, and who needs to wear a business suit sitting alone in front of a computer?
Busy people who joined the fitness craze started throwing jackets over their workout gear to go to the gym.
And travelers decided loose-fitting jogging clothes were better for sitting in cramped airplanes.
And on and on.


Correction
A picture caption on Saturday with an article about the condition of beaches in the metropolitan area misidentified the New Jersey beach where a jogger was running on the boardwalk.
It was Belmar Beach, not Point Pleasant Beach.


Observer; The Danger Stage
In the first place everybody has always known that smoking is unhealthy and addictive.
I already knew it could kill you when I took my first drag under the bandstand at a Sunday-school picnic in or about the year 1933.
Even then the lethal danger was so widely known that American youth in the 8-to-10-year-old bloc I inhabited referred to cigarettes as "coffin nails." It was widely stated and generally believed that cigarettes would kill you and also "stunt your growth" once you were "hooked" on them.


AIDS Research Chief Takes Conciliatory Stance
AFTER a year of arguments and counterarguments about how to reform AIDS research, Dr.
William E. Paul was appointed director of AIDS research and given a mandate to oversee and remake the Federal program, a $1.3 billion enterprise this year.
But three months after he took office, Dr.
Paul is getting a decidedly mixed reception.
Dr.
Paul became the director of the Office of AIDS Research at the National Institutes of Health after a year of lobbying by scientists and by advocates for people with AIDS for the revamping of the post to make it much more powerful.
They said the nation's AIDS effort was fraught with wasted efforts and redundancies and lacked direction.
What was needed, they argued, was strong central leadership by a de facto AIDS czar.


School Desegregation Had Wide Support
To the Editor:
Your 40-year chronology of events since Brown v.
Board of Education, the landmark school-desegregation decision, includes this: "1974 In Boston, rioting and burning of school buses over court-ordered busing illustrates the nationwide unpopularity of busing as a means to desegregation" (Education page, May 18).


Spanish Factions Are Squabbling Over Barcelona Opera-House Plans
On Jan. 31, the Gran Teatre del Liceu, the largest and most prestigious opera house in Spain, was devastated by a fire that left the auditorium and stage a smoking shell.
Now, after a nasty fight involving private seat-owners and public authorities, squabbling politicians, Spanish-Catalan tensions, aggrieved artists, dueling prima donnas and even intimations of the beyond, plans are about to be announced to rebuild and modernize the theater and to reopen it in 1997.
But there are those within the theater administration, including Albin Hanseroth, the artistic director, who are doubtful that the target date can be met.


Books of The Times; Choosing Leaders Wisely and Not
The Confirmation Mess Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process By Stephen L. Carter 252 pages.
Basic Books. $21.
Robert Bork.
Clarence Thomas.
Lani Guinier.
As the scholar Stephen L. Carter points out in his compelling new book, "The Confirmation Mess," all of these Presidential nominees created a political uproar when they were announced.
In each case, ideological battle lines were quickly drawn, and as the left and right escalated their rhetoric to capture the attention of the news media and the public, the nominees became the subject of highly personalized -- and often highly reductive -- attacks.


Marinovich Signs With C.F.L.
TODD MARINOVICH, the former Southern California quarterback who failed in the National Football League with the Los Angeles Raiders, is getting another chance in the Canadian Football League.
Marinovich, who had off-the-field problems in college and with the Raiders (the troubles included an arrest on charges of cocaine and marijuana possession, but the charges were dropped after he completed a program for first-time offenders), last week convinced the Winnipeg Blue Bombers that his problems were behind him.


Knicks Can't Triumph Playing on Starks Lite
The Knicks' last chance yesterday to salvage Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals -- to prove they have some playoff road character -- only epitomized their monumental struggle to win a championship with a game but struggling John Starks, with a backcourt held together by glue and paper clips.
It's a group that stirs no memories of the most recent championship guards, of Jordan, Isiah, Cheeks and D. J. No backcourt this starless and weak has won a championship in 16 years, and those who remember Washington's Kevin Grevey and Thomas Henderson also know they would have been an improvement here for the Knicks.


Krzyzewski Answer Today; Report Says He'll Stay at Duke
Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI has scheduled a news conference for this morning that should settle rumors about whether he plans to leave the Blue Devils for the National Basketball Association.
In its Tuesday editions, The Herald-Sun of Durham reported two sources at the school said Krzyzewski would be staying at Duke.
Krzyzewski met yesterday with athletic director Tom Butters and school president Nan Keohane.


Clinton Recalls Nation's Debt to Veterans
Preparing for his trip to Europe and the 50th anniversary of D-Day, President Clinton today urged Americans to remember "the high cost of freedom" won by the veterans of World War II.
But for the second straight year, his Memorial Day address was interrupted by a protest, this time from a lone heckler, who called attention to Mr.
Clinton's avoidance of military service during the Vietnam War.
"Go back to Oxford, you traitor, draft-dodger," the man shouted from the rear of an amphitheater at Arlington National Cemetery, where Mr.
Clinton was addressing about 5,000 people.
The President, who was a Rhodes Scholar in England when he took steps to avoid the Vietnam-era draft, appeared somewhat rattled but did not acknowledge the insult.


Clinton Official Defends Plan for Vaccines
Trying to allay concerns expressed by members of Congress and by drug company executives, a Clinton Administration official said today that the Government would not waste money or vaccine in a new program to inoculate millions of children from low-income families.
The official, Avis LaVelle, an Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services, also affirmed plans to use a Federal warehouse to store vaccine for distribution throughout the country.


Segarra: A Democratic Enigma in a Republican City Hall
Ninfa Segarra has always defied expectations.
Appointed to the Board of Education in 1990 as a liberal champion for the children of the Bronx, she joined the board's conservative majority during the convulsing debates on condoms, AIDS and gay parents.


Defaults Rise, Posing Peril For Housing
As the Giuliani administration tries to rid the city of the expensive task of managing thousands of homes and apartment buildings taken for nonpayment of taxes, a new wave of defaults is threatening to burden the city with thousands of additional units.
The number of buildings in which owners have fallen seriously behind in their taxes has risen sharply in the last five years, from 13,737 in 1989, to 18,003 in 1993.


No Women as Priests
Pope John Paul II, in a strong statement, said Catholics must abandon hope that women could be ordained as priests.
Page A8.


Welcome Back, Lenin; As Capitalist Vagaries Rattle East Europe, Voters Reinstall Some Familiar Politicians
Soon after the Berlin Wall tumbled nearly five years ago and new governments rose in the old Soviet bloc, the talk in diplomatic salons was that Eastern Europe would join the European Community within a few years.
The chatter on the streets was that salaries would rise so fast that buying a new Western-made car would require just a few weeks' work.
These expectations were not met, of course, and as suspicion and dissatisfaction with the first tastes of capitalism took hold, the new leaders soon started to be replaced by old faces, regroomed and reschooled.


Edisto Journal; A Big-City Editor Learns A Small Town's Etiquette
It was the sight of a half-dozen newspaper boxes outside his office that first gave Porter Anderson the sinking sensation that he had a problem on his hands.
They were lined up neatly and neither scuffed nor damaged in any way.
But they weren't supposed to be there.


Hotel Victim Was Banker
A man who was found shot to death in the Roosevelt Hotel on Sunday was identified by the authorities yesterday as a banker from Spain, Francisco Javier Munsuri Barona, 40.


Genetic Attacks On AIDS Readied
THE AIDS virus continues to elude all conventional attacks.
Find an effective drug and the virus quickly mutates to sidestep the obstacle.
Make a vaccine and the virus changes its coat to become invisible to the immune system's antibodies.
In search of fresh approaches, some molecular biologists say it is a mistake to treat AIDS as if it were caused by an ordinary virus like those of influenza or polio.
Instead, they say, AIDS should be seen as a disease of DNA.
Since H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, integrates itself into the DNA of the chromosomes, they argue, the methods of gene therapy and molecular biology should be used to attack the virus as it subverts the cell's genetic machinery, almost as if it were a mutant human gene.


CHRONICLE
Today is the 96th anniversary of the birth of Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale, author of "The Power of Positive Thinking," which was published in October 1952 and stayed and stayed and stayed on the New York Times best-seller list for 186 weeks, 48 in the No. 1 nonfiction spot.
RUTH STAFFORD PEALE, the author's widow (he died last Christmas Eve) feels that the book is as viable today as it was 20 million copies ago.
"The principles of positive thinking work as well now as ever," her husband of 63 years wrote in an a previously unpublished article.


By Design; Glaring Hairdos
Silver, patent leather and gleaming vinyl are must-haves for the I'll-do-anything-to-be-in-fashion set.
Now the shine is going to their heads.
The latest look for hair is a wet-looking shimmer.
"It's not really wet, though, and not flat or greasy, but shiny and bouncy," said Vartan Geudelekian, owner of the Vartali salon.
"The shine is the finishing touch to any hair style."


We Should Do More About Brain Tumors
To the Editor:
Since you published a May 4 Associated Press article reporting that Energy Department officials acknowledged at a Senate hearing that they had hampered use of idle nuclear reactors in treatment of a usually fatal brain tumor, we have received numerous calls from those who have been, and are, affected by brain tumors.
The callers have been angry at the agency's seeming delay in development of Boron-Neutron Capture Therapy, which has saved many lives in Japan.


A Debate Over Bulimia and Abuse
WHILE an earlier generation of therapists was criticized for minimizing the lasting psychological impact of their patients' childhood traumas, a current crop of therapists is coming under attack for telling patients that their symptoms indicate they must have suffered a childhood trauma, which they have buried.
If the patient cannot come up with such a memory, these therapists help them out with methods that include hypnosis, visualization and even sodium amytal, the so-called "truth serum," actually a short-acting barbiturate that induces an intoxication during which people talk with fewer inhibitions.
While no on can say how common these practices are, such methods are "a sure-fire way to implant false memories," said Dr.
Elizabeth Loftus, an expert on memory at the University of Washington.


Panel Urges U.S. to Join Europe's Collider Project
SEEKING to set a new direction for high-energy physics after the cancellation of the superconducting supercollider, a committee of physicists has proposed that the United States join with the Europeans in building the next big particle accelerator.
If Congress is willing to pay the membership fee, American physicists will gain access to a cutting-edge machine at a fraction of what the supercollider would have cost.
The committee's recommendations were outlined to Congress last week by its chairman, Dr.
Sidney D. Drell of the Stanford University Linear Accelerator in California.
Dr.
Drell, a leading advocate of the supercollider, was presenting his new ideas to the Science Subcommittee of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee.


Vietnamese Scientists Struggle To Survive in a Market Economy
SIX years after Vietnam's leaders began converting the country's economy from a rigidly controlled form of state socialism to a market economy, scientists have had to find a new way to carry on their work.
Although the country has modestly prospered since the 1988 decision, the change brought a collapse of government subsidies for research, and the beginning of a desperate struggle by Vietnamese scientists to feed their families.


Despite Attack, Group Seems to be Close-Knit
For months before he was shot and wounded on Sunday in California, Khallid Abdul Muhammad had been making inside and outside the Nation of Islam angry.
At a time when the group's leader, Louis Farrakhan, appeared to be moving slowly toward the Islamic mainstream, Mr.
Muhammad, its national spokesman, was pulling in the opposite and racist direction.
Indeed, his list of enemies was growing as fast as the lines of young, disaffected blacks who would turn out to see him as though he were a touring rap star.


INSIDE
A Deliberate AIDS Official
Some scientists hoped that Dr.
William E. Paul, director of the Office of AIDS Research, would forcefully set priorities, but he is taking a cautious approach.
Science Times, page C3.
Vaccine Program Defended
Responding to criticism by drug companies and members of Congress, a Clinton Administration official said a new child health program would not waste money or vaccine.
Page A10.
Mormon Leader Dies
Ezra Taft Benson, the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since 1985, and Secretary of Agriculture in the Eisenhower Administration, was 94.
Page D9.
Knicks Drop the Ball
The Knicks fumbled a last-minute chance against the Indiana Pacers, who defeated New York, 83-77, to tie their Eastern Conference final series at two games apiece.
Page B7.


Searching Its Soul: The American Catholic Church -- Third of four articles.; Cardinal Leads by Doctrine, and Example
Draped in his red robes, waving and shaking hands with dignitaries, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York appears many times each year on the steps of St.
Patrick's Cathedral reviewing the marching bands, the ethnic dancers, the units of police officers, firefighters, veterans and trade unionists that come parading up Fifth Avenue.
It is a classic New York image, a colorful mixture of religion, ethnicity, politics and civic pride that symbolizes the traditional power of the church here and in other cities of the East and Midwest that were heavily populated with Catholic immigrants.


PROPOSAL OF DEAL SHARPLY REJECTED BY ROSTENKOWSKI
Breaking months of silence about the Federal investigation that has tarnished his 42-year career as an elected official, a defiant Dan Rostenkowski said today that "truth is on my side" and vowed to fight an imminent Federal indictment on corruption charges and remain in the House of Representatives until his vindication.
Rejecting a proposed plea agreement that had been reached last week between Federal prosecutors and his lawyers, the 66-year-old chairman of the Ways and Means Committee insisted once again that he was innocent and that he was prepared to be tried on a large number of allegations of political graft.


Woman, 40, Dies in a Fire Set in Her Car
A 40-year-old woman was fatally burned early Sunday after being doused with gasoline and set afire as she sat in her car on a Brooklyn street.
The police said yesterday that the motive for the attack was unclear, but that they were searching for an acquaintance of the victim for questioning.
Investigators said the woman, Maria Borges, of 2 Adler Place in East New York, suffered second- and third-degree burns over most of her body when her gasoline-soaked clothing and the interior of her maroon Dodge Daytona exploded in flames about 5 A.M. on Crescent Street between Jamaica Avenue and Wharton Place, a deserted block of warehouses just south of the Cypress Hills Cemetery.
Trying to Get Home
Mrs.
Borges, the mother of three children, staggered two blocks to Etna Avenue and Crescent Street, apparently trying to reach her home nearby, and collapsed.
She was found by the police, taken to Jamaica Hospital and later transferred by helicopter to the burn unit at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, where she died about 6 P.M.
Sunday.


Boy, 4, Is Shot in the Bronx; Father Is Held
Jose Perez saw his neighbor running toward him along a Bronx street, carrying his 4-year-old son, who was bleeding from a wound to the head.
Mr.
Perez drove the father, George Pineiro, 31, to Lincoln Hospital.
Mr.
Pineiro told the police that his son, Alex, had been wounded by a stray bullet while walking on the street.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Craig Grebeck, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 21.
Purchased the contract of Olmedo Saenz, infielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
Sent Jeff Schwarz, pitcher, to Nashville.
Recalled Dane Johnson, pitcher, from Nashville.


Saluting Those Who Held the Flag High


Thomas Is Changing Name of the Game
Forget the labor negotiations and the likelihood of a season-shortening strike.
Forget Marge Schott and her view of gays, blacks, Jews and one-armed paperhangers.
Forget pitchers throwing at hitters and hitters charging the mound.
The most pressing, most immediate problem Bud Selig and his executive council have to confront is Frank Thomas.
The man is a menace, a threat to the game.
Singlehandedly, he is capable of destroying people, pitchers especially.
Selig, the acting commissioner, may have to ban Thomas from baseball because of the danger he poses.
The Players Association most likely wouldn't challenge a ban.
If Thomas is allowed to continue playing, the union could lose more members than it would if Thomas were banished.


One Show Honors For Martin Agency
The Martin Agency of Richmond won the most honors last week at the One Show awards for creative excellence in advertising, presented by the One Club for Art and Copy.
At the organization's 18th annual ceremony, held in New York, Martin won 10 medals -- 2 gold, 4 silver and 4 bronze -- for its work for clients like Stuart Circle Pharmacy and the Edgar Allan Poe Museum.


Ivanisevic Keeps on Sunny Side and Wins
The congenitally stormy Goran Ivanisevic made like the weather today as the sunshine returned to the French Open after a week's absence.
The fifth-seeded Croat left the histrionics to his petulant Italian challenger, 20-year-old Andrea Gaudenzi, and calmly went about the business of achieving his third visit to the quarterfinals here with a 6-2, 5-7, 6-4, 6-3 victory.
Ivanisevic, the lone seeded player in the lower half of the draw, barely batted an eye as Gaudenzi, the 1990 junior champion at the French and United States Opens, let himself become unraveled on center court.


Claiming Miss Liberty As a Jersey City Resident
RICHARD BOGGIANO knows all too well that some people would put him in the same orbit as the flat earthers and the moon-landing conspiracy theorists.
If it comes with the territories, so be it.
Mr.
Boggiano, a Jersey City police officer, Jersey City Historic Commission member and all-round Jersey City buff, will not be budged from his conviction that Jersey City is the territorial home of Ellis Island.
Liberty Island, too.


Sports of The Times; Befuddled Knicks Need Home Court
WHAT hath Michael Jordan wrought?
Sure, he goes on an interesting little sabbatical, but what about the rest of us?
He's having fun trying to hit a curveball.
He doesn't have to watch the Knicks committing something akin to basketball.
He doesn't have to listen to race cars screaming in his ears.
If Michael had stayed around and done his duty, the National Basketball Association and the National Broadcasting Company would not be faced with a final round of uglyball.
Ugly sights.
Ugly sounds.
Ugly.


After College, a Search for a Job and for Health Coverage
As college seniors leave their dorm rooms, many will be leaving something else behind as well: health insurance.
Of the estimated one million students receiving college diplomas this spring, the American College Health Association says 20 percent will lose their health insurance when their college health plans expire or when they no longer qualify as dependents on their parents' policies.


A Mixed and Light Day on World Markets
International financial markets were mixed yesterday in light trading, as exchanges were closed for holidays in the United States and Britain.
In Tokyo, the dollar ended at 104.40 yen, down 0.13 yen from Friday.
It closed in New York on Friday at 104.28 yen.


Brooklyn in Step With Manhattan
Bishop Thomas V. Daily, the leader of the Brooklyn Diocese, still recalls glancing out the window during his first courtesy call on John Cardinal O'Connor, taking in a sweeping vista of skyscrapers that loomed over the East River.
"I'm living in your shadow," he joked to the Cardinal.
"But I'd like to come over and speak to you from time to time."


When it comes to marketing, why ask why? Madison Avenue often moves in mysterious ways.
TIME again to ask 20 questions inspired and provoked by advertising and marketing.
*Why do auto dealers believe so fervently that commercials in which announcers scream their sales spiels will persuade consumers to part with tens of thousands of dollars for a car?


Reviews/Dance; Hepcats Reunite To Dance The Lindy
The dancing began on Friday night and went on until late afternoon yesterday in "Can't Top the Lindy Hop!," a marathon celebration by the New York Swing Dance Society at the Roosevelt Hotel.
There were classes, lectures, demonstrations, films and performances on the Lindy Hop, also called swing dancing and the Jitterbug, which was born in the 1930's at the Savoy Ballroom in Harlem.
Present at the birth was Frankie Manning, a genial star practitioner of the acrobatic, abandoned-looking rhythmic dance who won a Tony Award for choreography in 1989 for "Black and Blue." Mr.
Manning created the first air step and the first ensemble Lindy routine and was chief choreographer for Whitey's Lindy Hoppers, a famed Savoy group that is credited with popularizing the dance.
And the society celebrated Mr.
Manning's 80th birthday -- as well as its own 10th anniversary -- on Sunday night with a dance party, performances and a video celebrating Lindy Hopping around the city. (Tributes to Mr. Manning will be held across the nation this summer, one of them on June 25 in the Midsummer Night Swing series at Lincoln Center.)


Accounts
*
R.
J.
Reynolds Tobacco Co., Winston-Salem, N.C., to Doig, Elliott, Schur, New York, as the first agency to handle an advertising, direct response and public relations campaign defending smoking and smokers and rebutting attacks against tobacco companies.
Two print advertisements in the campaign have already appeared.
Billings have not been determined. *
Planned Parenthood Federation of America, New York, to Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for a new health care campaign.
Billings were not disclosed.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.


Helping Image Makers Neither Novice nor Pro
GRAPHICS professionals work with the most expensive, versatile and difficult programs because they have to and probably want to.
Quarkxpress is an example.
Amateurs who occasionally need to turn out flyers or banners work with programs designed for them.
The Print Shop is a good example.
But there are plenty of in-between people with in-between needs.
Freezeframe 2 for Windows is for the in-between crowd, leaning toward the novice in some respects, the more professional in others.
It is a product of Deltapoint of Monterey, Calif., the publisher of the higher-level Deltagraph Pro 3 for Macintosh and Deltagraph Pro 2 for Windows.


One Show Honors For Martin Agency
The Martin Agency of Richmond won the most honors last week at the One Show awards for creative excellence in advertising, presented by the One Club for Art and Copy.
At the organization's 18th annual ceremony, held in New York, Martin won 10 medals -- 2 gold, 4 silver and 4 bronze -- for its work for clients like Stuart Circle Pharmacy and the Edgar Allan Poe Museum.


METRO DIGEST
HOSPITALS FACE INCREASE IN EMPTY BEDS
The number of empty hospital beds in the New York City area is growing steadily, only a few years after patients faced a critical shortage of space.
The reduced demand has already shut entire wings and caused layoffs of almost 2,000 workers over the last two years, hospital officials say.
The decrease in demand comes after a similar trend emerged nationwide, driven in part by a turn to health maintenance organizations that emphasize preventive and outpatient care.
And the decline is expected to continue.
A1.
HIGH PROFILE FOR A PILLAR OF THE CITY
Draped in his red robes, waving and shaking hands with dignitaries, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York appears many times each year on the steps of St.
Patrick's Cathedral reviewing the marching bands, the ethnic dancers, the units of police officers, firefighters, veterans and trade unionists that come parading up Fifth Avenue.
It is a classic New York image.
Since John Cardinal O'Connor became Archbishop a decade ago, that image has also taken on a sharper, often more partisan edge.
A1.


SOCCER
Ireland
After victories over the Netherlands and Bolivia, the Irish sent more strong signals to Italy, Mexico and Norway, their first-round opponents, with Sunday's 2-0 victory over Germany, which lost at home for the first time in six years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.N.
PRESSING NORTH KOREA  The United Nations Security Council unanimously issued what amounts to a final warning to North Korea for monitoring of its nuclear fuel, and the United States asked China to use its influence in the matter.
A1  IN EAST EUROPE, REACTION  News analysis: When the Soviet Union fell, many predicted that Eastern Europe would quickly become prosperous, but with expectations unmet, country after country is returning old leaders to power.
A1


20 Are Arrested in a Melee at Tompkins Square
A heavy metal concert yesterday in Tompkins Square Park, site of bloody clashes between the police and demonstrators in recent years, turned into a bottle-throwing melee and a confrontation with the police, in which 20 people were arrested.
No serious injuries were reported.
The police remained in the neighborhood in force through the evening, preventing anyone from returning to the park and hoping to head off the sort of serious disturbances that have occurred there in the past.


Don't Wait for the Solstice -- Summer Has Already Started!


U.N. Council Urges North Korea To Preserve Atom-Fuel Evidence
In a last-ditch effort to avert a political crisis, the United Nations Security Council urged North Korea today to preserve evidence of how much nuclear fuel it may have diverted to its weapons program.
Adopting a position worked out earlier today among the five countries with veto power -- the United States, China, Russia, Britain and France -- the Security Council issued what amounted to a final warning that the North Koreans not cross an important threshold.


Slow Gains by Minority Broadcasters
After 12 years of perceived neglect by Republican-dominated Federal Communications Commissions, the role of minorities in broadcasting has moved up on the agenda as the commission tries to increase minority ownership and employment.
In February, the agency decided to increase greatly the fines it may impose on stations that do not meet its standards for employment of women and minorities.
Under its new rules, fines of up to $250,000 may be imposed on a station owner, compared with a previous maximum of $20,000.


Sonny Sharrock, 53, Guitarist In Avant-Garde and Free Jazz
Sonny Sharrock, a major figure in free-jazz guitar, died on Thursday at his home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 53.
The cause was a heart attack, said his manager, Mary McGuire.


First Settlers Domesticated Pigs Before Crops
DIGGING at the ruins of a village in southeastern Turkey, where people lived more than 10,000 years ago, archeologists expected to turn up the usual traces of a society on the verge of the agriculture revolution.
There should be leftover grains of wild wheat and barley and perhaps the bones of butchered sheep and goats in some early stage of domestication.
The archeologists found nothing of the kind.
Instead, to their complete surprise, they dug up the ample remains of pig bones.


Misguided Dominican Policy Bears Bitter Fruit
To the Editor:
"Mr. Balaguer's Dubious Victory" (editorial, May 20) states: "America should use its influence to insure a fair outcome" to the Dominican Republic's May 16 election in light of reports that President Joaquin Balaguer "rigged" the vote to assure his re-election.


Unser Ride Worth a Million
Al Unser Jr. was awarded $1,373,813 tonight for winning the 78th Indianapolis 500.
The prize money was presented at the race's annual awards dinner.
That raised Unser's career earnings at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway to $4,262,690, second only to Rick Mears, a retired four-time Indy winner who collected $4,299,392 at the track.
Emerson Fittipaldi, Unser's Penske Racing teammate, is now third on that list with $4,042,767.
Like Unser, Fittipaldi is a two-time Indy winner.
He led 145 of the 200 laps on Sunday but crashed with 15 laps to go.
He won $298,163 for finishing 17th.
Jacques Villeneuve, the Canadian who finished second, was named rookie of the year and won $622,713.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Price Comes From 7 Behind  Nick Price beat Scott Simpson in a sudden-death playoff yesterday at the Southwestern Bell Colonial in Fort Worth, a tournament that finished a day late because of thunderstorms.
Price's 8-foot birdie putt on the first extra hole at the Colonial Country club capped a comeback from a seven-shot deficit in the final round and made him the PGA Tour's first double winner of the year.
He earlier won the Honda Classic.
When play was halted on Sunday, Simpson led at 14 under par with seven holes left.
He finished off a no-birdie round of 71 for a 266 total.
Price birdied the first two holes he played en route to a 64-266.
In the playoff, Simpson hit his approach to about 20 feet, then left his birdie putt short.
Price boldly went at the flag with an 8-iron from 153 yards out and later made the 8-foot birdie. (AP) Olazabal Makes Up Ground: Jose Maria Olazabal made up a three-stroke, final-round deficit with five birdies on the last eight holes to win the European PGA Championship in Virginia Water, England.
The Masters champion shot a seven-under-par 65 to finish at 271. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Hines Makes a Comeback  Greg Hines of Walt Whitman High in Huntington Station, L.I., sidelined most of his senior year by injuries, looked impressive yesterday in winning the 400-meter intermediate hurdles in 53.6 seconds at the boys Eastern States Interscholastic Outdoor Championships at St.
John's University.
Simeon Sacey of St.
Benedict's Prep, Newark, was the only double winner, taking the long jump at 21 feet 10 inches and the triple jump at 44-5 3/4.
HORSE RACING  Outsider Wins 'Match Race'  Grand Flotilla, a nonwinner in three starts in this country since being imported from France, spoiled an anticipated match race between Arcangues and Bien Bien by posting an upset victory yesterday in the $500,000 Hollywood Turf Cup at Hollywood Park in California.
Gary Stevens rode Grand Flotilla, a 14-1 shot, to victory and a payoff of $30.60 for $2 to win.
He was timed in 1:591/5 for a mile and one-quarter on firm turf.
Grand Flotilla, a 7-year-old son of Caro, was fourth on the final turn but found room along the rail when thepacesetter, Blues Traveller, drifted out.
Grand Flotilla caught Bien Bien with a furlong left, then drew off in the final 150 yards.


Misguided Dominican Policy Bears Bitter Fruit; Supports Embargo
To the Editor:
In your oddly titled "Lean on the Dominican Republic" (editorial, May 24), you claim that our country is allowing contraband gasoline to flow freely across our border into Haiti.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
That's almost as ludicrous as suggesting that the Clinton Administration is allowing the free flow of illegal immigrants across the United States border with Mexico.


Reporter's Notebook; Selling Books, Seeing People
At a convention where people like Nicholson Baker, John Irving, E. Annie Proulx and Pat Conroy are wandering around, it's understandable that many writers might feel overwhelmed, even humble.
"The first thought that any author must have is not, 'How can they sell my book?' but 'How can they even find my book?' " said Paul Levine, an author from Miami who was standing in the booth of William Morrow, his publisher, on Saturday, the first day at the annual American Booksellers Association convention here.


Horoshi Hatanaka, Neurosurgeon, 62; Led Tumor Studies
Dr.
Hiroshi Hatanaka, a Japanese neurosurgeon who persevered with research on a new treatment for brain tumors when most of his peers had given up on it, died on May 14 in a Tokyo hospital.
He was 62 and lived in Tokyo.
He died of a stroke, said Prof.
Rolf F. Barth, a friend and colleague at Ohio State University in Columbus.


After a Long Day Of Hard Work, A Moment of Glory
The magic of ballet is that impossible-looking feats are enacted with grace and daring by impossibly beautiful bodies that just happen to be human.
Dancers make it all look easy but undoable.
But a long day's preparation -- filled with prosaic chores and, for the lucky, a few brief moments of exaltation -- goes into the weaving of each night's spell.
"Welcome to the factory," someone calls out breezily as a visitor makes her way down a long, red-carpeted hall backstage at the Metropolitan Opera House, where American Ballet Theater is ensconced through June 4.
It is a factory, but one where dreams are manufactured.
11 A.M.
The day's 12 hours begin at 11 with a 90-minute company class, held in each of the two large studios on the C level, three stories below the stage, that Ballet Theater also uses for rehearsals.
Attendance is voluntary.
Some dancers prefer their own teachers; others use the class as their warm-up for the day's rehearsals and performance.


Ad Council to Push Women's Education
The importance of women's education will be stressed in a campaign supported by the Advertising Council, the advertising industry organization whose causes have included preventing forest fires and fighting drug abuse.
The council has made a 15-year commitment to a campaign supporting women's education, compared with the usual 3-year run of campaigns it supports.


Abbott's Line: No Victory, No Save
Jim Abbott is not Mike Richter.
Leg saves are not supposed to be a requirement for pitching in the major leagues.
But Abbott probably felt like a frightened goalie when Frank Thomas crushed a liner that made an ugly sound as it smashed into his left thigh and caromed toward the Yankee dugout in the fourth inning yesterday.
Then the inning grew more painful for Abbott.
Maybe he was still bewildered by the sight, sound and sting of a baseball rocketing off Thomas's bat or maybe he was trying to be too precise with runners on first and second, but Abbott was left with an even bigger bruise three pitches later when Darrin Jackson hit a three-run homer into the fans sitting 348 feet away in the right-field corner.


The Colonel Is Back In KFC Commercials
After 15 years, the KFC restaurant chain is again using commercials that invoke its founder, Col.
Harland Sanders.
"The Colonel's way is still the best way" is the theme of new television commercials created by the longtime KFC agency, Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
The spots, scheduled to begin running nationally on Monday, will encourage customers to buy complete meals at the chain's restaurants rather than single items from the menu.


A.T.M.'s to Dispense American Express Travelers Checks
Forget Karl Malden.
Soon, if you leave home without them, you can just stop at an A.T.M.
American Express travelers checks will be available nationwide in selected automated teller machines, the company announced yesterday.
Responding to a growing consumer demand for convenient banking services, American Express, Diebold Incorporated and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation have jointly developed a technology that lets banks sell travelers checks through automated teller machines.


Global Plan On Nuclear Liability
A draft proposal for a new international nuclear liability treaty sought by the Clinton Administration could shift responsibility from private companies to the Federal Government for millions of dollars in damages from certain types of nuclear accidents outside the United States.
The proposal was intended in part as an incentive for American companies to improve safety at Soviet-designed reactors in Russia and Ukraine, according to Administration officials involved in developing the draft.


D-Day to Celebrate, and Britain's in the Mood
Onstage at the Royal Albert Hall on Sunday night, the orchestra swung into "In the Mood," and the floor began to fill with dancers, mostly gray-haired English men and women, many wearing the crisply tailored World War II tunics of British and even United States military officers.
Above the arena, over-age soldiers in the white helmets, brown boots and white puttees of United States Army M.P.'s stood stiffly at the doors while women wearing pillbox hats circled the dance floor, carrying trays piled high with sugared doughnuts.


Canucks Are at Ease On the Rangers' Turf, In Land of Elephants
When the Rangers and Canucks begin the Stanley Cup finals tonight at Madison Square Garden, the New York team and the Vancouver team will feature few participants with any crossover experience in both these distant, different cities with their contrasting hockey cultures.
One of them is Ron Smith, the assistant coach of the Canucks, who served in the same role with the Rangers last season and also worked as interim head coach after Roger Neilson was fired.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:  Arel Communications and Software Ltd., Israel, 500,000 units.
Each unit represents two ordinary shares and an ordinary share warrant.
Oscar Gruss &amp; Son Inc.
CD Radio Inc., Washington, an initial public offering of 4.5 million shares.
Seidler Amdec Securities Inc.
Kenneth Cole Productions Inc., New York, an initial public offering of 1.86 million shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Cygne Designs Inc., New York, 3.5 million shares. Paine Webber Inc.
Empresa Nacional de Electricidad S.A., Spain, 12,887,235 American depository shares.
Each A.D.S. represents one share.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Essex Property Trust Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., an initial public offering of six million shares.
Merrill Lynch.
Fresnius U.S.A.
Inc., Walnut Creek, Calif., 3.434 million shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Golden West Homes, Santa Ana, Calif., an initial public offering of 1.7 million shares.
Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc.
Intelcom Group Inc., Denver, five million shares. Paine Webber.
Interstate National Dealer Services Inc., Great Neck, L.I., an initial public offering of one million units.
Each unit represents one share and one warrant.
Toluca Pacific Securities Corp.
IT Network Inc., Dallas, an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
La Jolla Pharmaceutical Co., San Diego, an initial public offering of 2.8 million shares.
D.
Blech &amp; Co.
Nexus Telecommunications Systems Ltd., Israel, an initial public offering of 750,000 units.
Each unit represents two shares, one series A warrant and one series B warrant.
Brenner Securities Corp.
Pediatric Services Corp. of America, Norcross, Ga., an initial public offering of 1.7 million shares.
Furman Selz Inc.
Recovery Engineering Inc., Minneapolis, 1.05 million shares. Dain Bosworth Inc.
Sigma Circuits Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., an initial public offering of one million shares.
Cruttenden &amp; Co.
TII Industries, Copiague, L.I., 2.8 million shares. Furman Selz.
Wavefront Technologies Inc., Santa Barbara, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
Lehman Brothers .
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Dutch Star Gullit Quits Team
The Dutch soccer star RUUD GULLIT walked out of the national squad's training camp in the Netherlands yesterday and said he was quitting less than three weeks before the start of the World Cup finals.
The unexpected exit came just three days after Gullit, 31, a former European soccer player of the year, made a comeback against Scotland that lasted just 45 minutes following 13 months of self-imposed exile.


Smile or Scowl! You're on Digital Camera!
THE subject looked at the new camera, and the photographer, suspiciously.
"Did you remember to put film in the camera this time?" she asked, needlessly rubbing in the memory of the last family vacation.
"No, I didn't bring any film this time, either," the photographer said. "Big smile."


Farm Equipment Sales Make Surprising Gains
After more than a decade of drastic cost-cutting, losses and consolidation, farm equipment makers have been repeatedly surprising Wall Street lately with sharp earnings increases, thanks to stronger-than-expected sales of tractors, combines and other equipment.
The latest sign of revival came last week when Deere &amp; Company, the venerable market leader, reported earning $189.3 million, a big gain over last year's performance, in its fiscal second quarter and far more than Wall Street stock analysts had expected.
Its worldwide agricultural equipment sales for the quarter jumped 19 percent from a year ago, to more than $1.3 billion.
Restructuring Praised
"Deere and the entire industry have done a fantastic job of restructuring," said John McGinty, who follows the equipment makers from Boston for CS First Boston.
"When volume goes up, earnings take off."


New York Hospitals Are Facing A Sharp Increase in Empty Beds
The number of empty hospital beds in the New York City area is growing steadily, only a few years after patients faced a critical shortage of space.
The reduced demand has already shut down entire wings and caused layoffs of almost 2,000 workers over the last two years, hospital officials say.
The decrease in demand comes after a similar trend emerged nationwide, driven in part by a turn to health maintenance organizations that emphasize preventive and outpatient care.
And the decline is expected to continue.


Review/Music; The Very Improbability
The beauty of Oregon's music owes a lot to its sheer improbability.
Since 1970, Oregon has blended styles and instruments that rarely intersected elsewhere.
Celtic-tinged melodies abut Minimalist permutations and jazzy chromaticism; Paul McCandless's oboe improvisations over Glen Moore's jazz bass and Ralph Towner's classical guitar.
Oregon's disparate elements share a peaceable realm of thoughtful, playful inquiry.
At Symphony Space on Sunday night, Oregon was a trio, minus the Indian rhythms of its original percussionist, the late Colin Walcott, or his successor, Trilok Gurtu.
Glen Velez, who opened the concert, joined the band on percussion for part of the set.


