UNC Inc.(UNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


James W. Moore, 89, Legal Scholar and Teacher
James William Moore, a legal scholar, teacher and authority on Federal Court practice and procedure, died on Wednesday at his home in Hamden, Conn.
He was 89.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Baseball Files Charges Over Bonilla and Franco Threat
Less than a week after Bobby Bonilla and John Franco made threatening comments about the fate other players faced if they became strikebreakers next spring, the owners' labor relations committee yesterday filed an unfair labor practice charge against the two Mets' players and their union.
In taking the action, the owners matched the Players Association in charges to the National Labor Relations Board.
The union filed an unfair labor practice charge on Sept. 6 over the owners' failure to make a $7.8 million payment to the players' pension and benefit plan on Aug. 1.


New Help Planned for Homeless Veterans
Recognizing that thousands of homeless, mentally ill veterans were missing out on Federal benefits and services, city, state and Federal officials are planning a new effort to find and assist veterans with housing and psychiatric needs.
The program, to be announced today, will assist up to 300 veterans with mental illnesses in its first year, said a spokesman for New York State's Office of Mental Health.
The state will spend $3.7 million in the first year of the program, and the Federal Department of Veterans Affairs will send workers into the streets and to city shelters to help identify eligible veterans.


Biogen Gives Up on a Drug And Takes Sizable Charge
In the fifth major setback for a biotechnology company in a month, Biogen Inc. said yesterday that it would not seek marketing approval for one of its most important drugs, Hirulog, because clinical trials had failed to show the drug to be more effective than an existing drug.
Biogen also said it took a $25 million charge against its third-quarter financial results to account for discontinuing Hirulog, an anti-clotting drug designed to be used in conjunction with angioplasty.
The charge contributed to most of the company's $26.4 million quarterly loss, which was also reported yesterday.


Baltimore Orioles Hire Syd Thrift
SYD THRIFT, let go earlier this month by the Chicago Cubs, was hired yesterday by the Baltimore Orioles as the team's director of player development.
Thrift will be in charge of the Orioles' minor league operations.
He replaces DOUG MELVIN, who left Baltimore to become general manager of the Texas Rangers.
Thrift, 65, has been general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, director of player personnel for the Oakland Athletics and senior vice president of the Yankees.
He had been assistant general manager of the Cubs, but was let go after ANDY MacPHAIL was hired as team president.


AIDS Drugs Fail to Curb Dementia and Nerve Damage
DESPITE widespread use of drugs to combat the AIDS virus, which earlier studies had shown to protect against infections that affect the brain and central nervous system, the incidence of such damage is increasing among those with the disease, a new study from a large Federal AIDS project has found.
The study looked at six AIDS-related neurological conditions among 2,641 H.I.V.-infected gay men in Baltimore, Washington, Chicago, Pittsburgh and Los Angeles who have participated in a long-term project directed by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.
The study was conducted by a team of researchers headed by Dr.
Justin S. McArthur, a neurologist at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore.


METRO DIGEST
MISCONDUCT INQUIRY AT WEST POINT
Five members of the United States Military Academy's football team are to face an inquiry at West Point after being accused of groping female cadets who were part of a pep rally crowd that ran past a cordon of football players at the Academy's game-week festivities.
A1.
CON EDISON ADMITS COVER-UP CONSPIRACY
After five years of denials, Con Edison admitted in court that for four crucial days in 1989 it failed to tell Federal authorities that asbestos had been released when a steam pipe exploded near Gramercy Park in Manhattan.
A1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
RJR Nabisco plans to sell 19 percent of its Nabisco foods business, in an effort to free the growing food business from the taint of tobacco that has held down the value of its stock.  [ Page D1. ]


Supreme Court Roundup SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP; Justices Agree to Consider if University Should Finance a Student Religious Magazine
Accepting a case at the intersection of free speech and religion, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a state university must subsidize student-run religious publications if it gives other student publications financial support.
The case is an appeal by a Christian student group at the University of Virginia, where more than 100 student organizations and a dozen publications get subsidies.
Under guidelines that bar financing for religious organizations, the student council in 1991 turned down the Christian students' request for $5,900 to publish a magazine founded to discuss "biblical Christianity" at the university.


Central Park Joggers Need Better Lighting
To the Editor:
An arrest has been made in the rape of a woman jogger two weeks ago in Central Park (news article, Oct. 28), but the question of lighting in the park remains.
The assault occurred at the Reservoir, where hundreds of people run every day, trying to get their mileage in before nightfall.


Gunman Arraigned
A former Army medic accused of raking the White House with rifle fire on Saturday was charged with four felonies yesterday, and a Federal magistrate ordered him to undergo a psychiatric evaluation.


Quebecor Inc.(PQB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Con Ed Admits to Conspiracy To Cover Up Asbestos in Blast
After five years of denials, Con Edison admitted in court yesterday that for four crucial days in 1989 it failed to tell Federal authorities that asbestos had been released into the air when a steam pipe exploded near Gramercy Park in Manhattan.
The utility pleaded guilty to conspiracy and environmental-law violations in Federal District Court in Manhattan, abruptly ending a trial that began last month.
A former Con Edison steam-operations executive, who retired in 1991 but was indicted with the company last year, also pleaded guilty to a similar charge.


Southland Corp.(SLCMC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IVAX Corp.(IVX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Forget About the Polls! Hurricanes Are No. 1, A Losing Coach Says
Forget Nebraska and Penn State.
Syracuse will be playing the No. 1 team, Miami, on Saturday in the Carrier Dome according to one authority, Coach Frank Beamer of Virginia Tech.
"They are a great football team, the best in the country in my opinion," Beamer said yesterday after watching the Hurricanes flatten his team, 24-3, live on Saturday and again on tape Sunday.


Food Stake To Be Sold By Nabisco
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation took a big step yesterday that some analysts predicted would lead to an eventual separation of its food operations and its tobacco business.
In a long-anticipated move to free its fast-growing food business from the taint of tobacco that has held down the company's stock price, RJR Nabisco announced a plan to sell 19 percent of its Nabisco foods unit.
Proceeds from the initial public offering, expected to be as much as $1 billion, would be used to pay off debt.


Rain Men: Packers Take Battle of Soldier Swamp


Liberty Corp.(LC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Data Give Tangled Picture of World Climate Between Glaciers
COULD a small push nudge the relatively benign and stable world climate of the last 10,000 years into abrupt and frequent cycles of warmth and extreme cold?
The question is far from academic, some scientists say, given the possibility that heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide could destabilize today's climate system.
The climate of the last interglacial period, which at least in its early stages was somewhat warmer than the present interglacial period, fluctuated widely in spans of decades or even less, scientists reported 15 months ago on the basis of climatic changes recorded in corings taken from the Greenland ice cap.
But six months later, another group of scientists analyzing another Greenland ice sample suggested that the last interglacial period, which began around 130,000 years ago and lasted 10,000 years by most reckonings, appeared stable after all.
They said the first ice sample apparently had been distorted when the bottom of the flowing glacier from which it was taken passed over uneven ground.


Were Asteroids Falling? Few Viewers Cared
A CBS television movie that tried to emulate the spooky verisimilitude of Orson Welles's "War of the Worlds," while avoiding the mass panic that radio drama engendered, left some viewers confused on Sunday night, others irritated and many more totally unmoved.
"Without Warning," a movie about asteroids striking Earth, was presented in the form of live news coverage.
It prompted several hundred calls to CBS's main offices in New York.


Market Place; A brokerage house makes bridge loans without losing its shirt.
REMEMBER bridge loans?
They almost destroyed some big brokerage houses a few years ago when it turned out the bridges had no foundations.
But one firm kept making bridge loans all along, and this year is making more than ever before.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, which has a $1.25 billion fund for bridge loans, boasts that it has never lost money since the fund was started in 1987, although in one case it ended up taking stock in a company that ran into problems.


It's a Lovely Place, With Space to Die For
EVERYONE agreed it was a lovely day for a tour.
The sun bounced off the stained glass windows along mausoleum row.
The sycamores and weeping willows swayed sweetly above the old tombstones.
But then, the weather always seems to hold when Kensico Cemetery schedules its annual meeting of lot owners.
"We've been very lucky," said Ronald Vaughn, the sales manager.
"It makes for a very nice time."


Mexican Drops Plan to Buy Most Westin Hotels
An ambitious young Mexican entrepreneur has abandoned his plan to purchase most of the Westin hotel chain for $708 million.
The entrepreneur, Bernardo Dominguez Cereceres, said today that he and his group of investors were pulling out of the deal because of rising interest rates, volatility of high-yield bond markets and Westin's inability to achieve the rates of return they had projected when the purchase was announced in February.


Republican Comptroller Candidate Denounced as Racist
In some of the harshest language of the campaign, nearly 50 leading Democrats yesterday denounced the Republican candidate for comptroller, Herbert London, for what they said were racist and divisive attacks against H. Carl McCall, the Democratic candidate.
"Herb London is a contagious racist disease that is sweeping, unfortunately, our nation," said Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Harlem, at a gathering of several dozen McCall supporters on the steps of City Hall.


Foundation Head Resigns
Art Becofsky has resigned as executive director of the Merce Cunningham Dance Foundation, the organization has announced.
Mr.
Becofsky was with the foundation for more than two decades.
Michael Bloom, the company's director of education and media, is to serve as interim general manager until a new director is found.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street-cleaning regulations will be suspended today for the religious holiday of All Saints' Day.


New League Plans Partnership for Clubs and Players
Learning a lesson from Major League Baseball, the United Baseball League, which will be unveiled today, plans to begin with a "true partnership" between clubs and players.
The league, according to its confidential proposal, will offer players 35 percent of a team's pretax profits and a 10 percent equity share in all teams collectively.
Founders of the league, which would be the first new major baseball league in 80 years, will announce its creation at a news conference in Manhattan today.
The proposal, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, lists the co-founders as Bob Mrazek, a former five-term Congressman from Long Island; John Bryant, a Congressman from Dallas; Richard Moss, a player agent, and Andrew Zimbalist, an economist at Smith College.


CHRONICLE
"It's very hard to be the President," the comedian PAUL REISER told the audience at the Presidential Gala at Ford's Theater in Washington on Sunday evening, "but you get a lot of perks that no other job has. For example, your own theme song. That's very cool, the whole 'Hail to the Chief' thing."
"Every profession should have a theme song," the star of the NBC comedy "Mad About You" said.
"You never hear, 'I am the dentist, I'm gonna pull your teeth.' "


Poles Review Postwar Treatment of Germans
For nearly 50 years, the fate of the millions of ethnic Germans rounded up and expelled by the victorious Communists from the eastern provinces of the Reich and western Poland at the end of World War II has been passed over in silence by most of the rest of the world.
Little distinction was drawn between members of Hitler's armed SS legions and ordinary Germans whose families had lived for centuries in places like Silesia, West Prussia and Pomerania that were wrested from German control by the wartime Allies in 1945.


Bergen Brunswig Corp.  (BBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russians Struggle to Clean Up Spill
"More Usinsk oil for the Motherland!" urges a slogan written in red across the rooftop of the tallest building on Construction Workers' Boulevard in this remote Russian city.
But as they work to clean up a huge oil spill, residents of this bleak industrial town 1,000 miles north of Moscow are furtively admitting what oil officials in the region have not: the pressure for "more" has led to too much hurry, too much spillage and too much waste.


American Barrick Resources Corp.(ABX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco
A ruling clearing the way for a wide-ranging class-action suit against the tobacco industry had different effects on the shares of Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco.
A planned stock sale helped lift RJR.


Coast Savings Financial Inc.(CSA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Swaran Singh, 87, Spokesman For India During War in 1971
Swaran Singh, Foreign Minister of India when it backed East Pakistan's breaking away from West Pakistan to form Bangladesh, died on Sunday in New Delhi, where he lived.
He was 87.
The cause was not immediately made public.


U.S. Sex Survey Had Flawed Methodology
To the Editor:
Re "What That Survey Didn't Say" (Op-Ed, Oct. 25): M. G. Lord wisely questions the results from the University of Chicago's National Health and Social Life Survey on Americans' sexual habits.
But the article may be too generous in saying the researchers "made every effort to glean the truth from its 3,432 participants." There are methodological flaws in the survey.


Changing ABM Treaty Reverses Arms Effort
To the Editor:
Re "Back to the Arms Race?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 25): John D. Holum's article, "Don't Put Allies at Risk," reveals much of the wishful but flawed thinking behind Administration plans to change the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.


Wackenhut Corp.(WAK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


It's the Economy Again, as Democrats Attack the 'Contract With America'
In their advertisements and campaign speeches, many Democrats assert that the Republicans' "Contract With America" would entail massive cuts in Government programs ranging from Social Security and Medicare to student loans and border security.
Republicans counter that their promises of tax breaks would be paid for by specific, itemized, relatively painless spending cuts.
And they maintain that a memorandum written this month by Alice M. Rivlin, the budget director, shows how the Clinton Administration is contemplating large tax increases and deep reductions in Social Security.


Fleet Financial Group (FLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Questions Are Raised In Phone-Video Venture
The chairmen of three regional telephone companies said today that they planned to spend at least $300 million starting a video programming venture with the Creative Artists Agency, raising questions about the agency's growing power in Hollywood.
The venture would mark the largest effort by the Baby Bells to compete against cable systems by using phone lines into homes to allow subscribers to call up entertaiment.
The venture hopes to reach nearly 20 million customers over the next five years.
Today's announcement also solidified the powerful standing in Hollywood of Michael Ovitz, chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, who was hired by the Baby Bells to shape the enterprise.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about efforts to shut a mine in Cortlandt, N.Y., misidentified the neighborhood resident who led opposition to the mine.
He was Ralph G. Mastromonaco, not Mark Weiss.


Chess; Boris Gulko, at 47 the oldest entrant, pours on the combinations to win the U.S. Championship.
Boris Gulko, a Fair Lawn, N.J., grandmaster, won the 1994 United States Championship last week in Key West, Fla., and along with it a place in the next stage of the International Chess Federation's world championship series.
A former Soviet champion, Gulko was a dissident who survived several hunger strikes before he was allowed to leave the Soviet Union in 1986.
In Key West, he scored 9 1/2-3 1/2 to capture the $8,000 first prize, given by Interplay Productions, makers of the Battle Chess CD-Rom and main sponsor of the event.
The grandmasters Larry Christiansen of Boston and Yasser Seirawan of Seattle ended in a tie for second and third places.
Each scored 8-5 and each was awarded $3,000.
Fourth, fifth and sixth places were shared by the grandmasters Joel Benjamin of Manhattan, Alexander Shabalov of Pittsburgh and Alexander Yermolinsky of Edison, N. J., who scored 7 1/2-5 1/2.


MINORITIES JOIN CALIFORNIA FIGHT
No state is more racially and ethnically diverse than California, and now California's minority communities are beginning to rally against Proposition 187, the immigration-control proposal that has become the hottest campaign issue in the state this fall.
Hispanic-Americans are distributing literature and holding demonstrations, with students staging protest walkouts at some high schools almost daily.


Corestates Financial Corp.(CFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(HBAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Large Newspapers Report New Falloffs in Circulation
Nine of the 10 largest metropolitan newspapers in the country lost weekday circulation for the six months ending Sept. 30, compared with the period a year earlier, according to industry figures released yesterday.
But newspaper executives and industry analysts said they felt relieved because a circulation plunge reported by many newspapers six months ago had slowed to a gradual slide.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll that showed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo edging ahead of State Senator George E. Pataki in the New York State campaign for governor misstated the support that the poll showed Mr.
Cuomo receiving upstate.
It was 27 percent, not 21.


The Wizard of Eyes: Evolution Creates Novelty by Varying the Same Old Tricks
ONE of the most fascinating yet awkward problems that have challenged biologists since Charles Darwin is how to explain the evolution of complex structures like the eye and the wing.
How does a blind force like natural selection sculpture from almost nothing a supremely delicate mechanism like the inner structure of the ear?
The trick, so hard to understand, is one that apparently gives evolution no bother.
The eye, for instance, is an organ that has evolved not once but perhaps dozens of times, since insects, octopuses, mammals and other groups all have eyes of quite different structure.


U.S. to Spend $80 Million To Restore a Barrier Island
Ending 20 years of litigation, the Federal Government has agreed to spend $80 million to help restore a barrier island in the Hamptons where more than 200 homes were swept away in a 1992 storm.
The agreement, which was filed this afternoon in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, settles a lawsuit brought by residents of West Hampton Dunes, which was nearly washed into the Atlantic during the storm, in December 1992.


More Catalogues Clogging Mailboxes This Year
Thought you got a lot of mail-order catalogues last year?
Just wait.
Catalogue retailers say the 1994 holiday season is breaking all records for mailbox clutter.
Mail-order companies, anticipating an increase in third-class postal rates that will raise their mailing costs by about 10 percent early next year, are sending out more catalogues than usual in hopes of finding new customers at a lower cost.


Williams Tastes Victory at Prime-Time Debut
At least Venus Williams didn't have to worry about choosing a Halloween costume for tonight's festivities: A player making her professional tennis debut on the WTA Tour usually settles for tennis whites and a familiar pair of sneakers.
True to her promise not to tie herself to any sponsors too soon, the 14-year-old Williams wore a home-concocted outfit tonight at the Oakland Coliseum Arena.
As a Jehovah's Witness, she doesn't celebrate Halloween anyway.
Instead, she celebrated her first-ever professional match with a 6-3, 6-4 straight-set victory against 59th-ranked Shaun Stafford.


Whitman Approves Stringent Restrictions on Sex Criminals
Convicted sex offenders in New Jersey will now be subject to lifetime supervision under a package of laws signed today by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
Critics, particularly civil libertarians, say that the bills, among the nation's toughest, contain more symbolism than substance and are heading for a certain constitutional challenge.
Even as she signed the nine-bill package, known as Megan's Law, Mrs.
Whitman acknowledged that keeping a tight rein on sex offenders after they have completed their sentences presents legal problems.
But she added: "It would be hollow justice if we wrote laws to protect families and communities only to have those laws struck down in the courts. I am confident this package will pass constitutional muster."


Oakley Nears Pact Extension
The Knicks and Charles Oakley are close to agreeing on a contract extension, and the deal may be signed as early as tomorrow.
Two people familiar with the negotiations confirmed last night that an agreement is near, although neither would disclose exact numbers.
It is believed that Oakley will agree to a one-year balloon payment in the neighborhood of $9 million, to be paid during the 1998-99 season, after his current contract expires.


Long Island Lighting Co.(LIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Atlas of Information Services
ASTRONOMERS now conclude that the universe is expanding more rapidly than previously thought.
If they would turn their attention to the electronic universe, they would see some really high-speed expansion.
Compuserve, Prodigy, America Online and dozens of other commercial information companies are racing at warp speed to provide new services and win new customers.


Howell Corp.(HWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Female Sailors Just Want to Compete
It was an ill-conceived question that was ambiguous at best.
It came across as a poison dart in a jungle where men and big boats have hunted for 143 years.
A reporter asked if the women on America
thought their second-place finish in a race Friday against five all-male teams had validated the women's ability to compete against men in the America's Cup.


Time Warner's Move Raises Hopes and Hackles
To hear Richard D. Parsons tell it, Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, made him an offer too good to refuse.
Several weeks ago Mr.
Levin proposed that Mr.
Parsons, the 46-year-old chairman and chief executive of Dime Bancorp and a Time Warner board member, become president of Time Warner.


West Point Cadets Face Investigation In Sex Harassment
Five members of the United States Military Academy's football team are to face an official inquiry this week at West Point after being accused of groping female cadets who were part of a pep rally crowd that ran past a cordon of football players at the Academy's game-week festivities.
A West Point inquiry, ordered after three women initially complained, has elicited reports from 18 female cadets who said they were brushed across the breasts during the "spirit run" on Oct. 20.
In the event, 600 cadets, including 51 women, raced and rallied past the team cordon two days before the game with The Citadel.


Tommy Hilfiger Corp.(TOM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Turning to Einstein
New findings on the universe's age have thrown cosmologists a curve.
So some are reconsidering an idea that Einstein once called his biggest blunder.
Science Times, page C1.
A Deluge of Catalogues
Mail-order retailers, trying to beat a 10 percent increase in their postal rates next year, say the 1994 holiday season is breaking all records of mailbox clutter.
Page D1.
Haiti's Capital Bustles Again
In Port-au-Prince, people no longer fear they will be kidnapped and killed by the gunmen the army used as enforcers, and restaurants, bars and music clubs are full.
Page A16.
Gunmen Kill Boy, 15s
Two men wearing Halloween masks pistol-whipped a Queens nanny and then fatally shot a 15-year-old boy in her charge as he rushed to help her, the police said.
Page B3.


Quaker Chemcial Corp.(QCHM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Red Sox Don't Exercise Berryhill Option
The Boston Red Sox declined yesterday to exercise their $1.2 million option on DAMON BERRYHILL, and the catcher immediately filed for free agency.
Berryhill, 30, hit .263 in 82 games this past season with 6 homers and 34 runs batted in.


Sports of The Times; The Gospel According To Shaq
WHILE in Toronto last summer as a member of Dream Team II, Shaquille O'Neal was approached by people telling him they had seen his father on television talk shows.
O'Neal called the man he considers his father.
"Daddy," he said, "I heard you were on TV." His father said, "No, I wasn't."
The man appearing on those shows was in fact someone Shaquille knows but wants nothing to do with.
"And that's when I got the idea to write that rap song," said O'Neal yesterday.
This was just before practice in Orlando where the 7-foot-1-inch, 300-pound center was preparing to lead the Magic into the N.B.A. season.


CUNY Trustees Vow a Fight Against Mayor's Budget Cut
The chancellor and trustees of the City University of New York vowed yesterday to fight the Mayor's proposed midyear budget cut of $7 million, which officials said would turn away 7,000 prospective students in January, require staff and faculty layoffs and curtail adult literacy programs.
Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds told trustees at their regular monthly meeting that the proposed cut of $7 million this academic year was "a blinking red light." In an interview immediately after the meeting, her language was more fiery.
She referred to the cut as "Bikini atoll," and said, "This is Draconian."


JAZZ
Jazzmobile Celebrates Itself and Black Heroes  Avery Fisher Hall


No Headline
"I'm not going to change my life dramatically. I don't go for fancy restaurants. I'm not a suit-and-tie man." -- FRED JACOBS, lottery winner.  [ B1:2. ]


Unocal Corp. (UCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new survey finds that for some brands and companies, logos can be image breakers.
THOUGH logos play a significant role in determining consumers' perceptions about brands and the companies marketing them, often it appears they can be more hindrance than help.
In the fourth annual Logo Value survey by the Schechter Group, almost twice as many logos elicited less positive responses about a brand or company in terms of attributes like quality and modernity than were elicited by the brand or company name alone.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Frenchmen Advance in Paris Open  Cedric Pioline and Arnaud Boetsch, the top players in France, had opening-round victories yesterday at the Paris Open.
Boetsch rallied to beat Jaime Yzaga of Peru, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1, while Pioline defeated Patrick Rafter of Australia, 6-4, 6-2.
Among the other matches, Petr Korda of The Czech Republic beat Aaron Krickstein, 6-3, 6-1, and Renzo Furlan of Italy beat Chuck Adams, 6-7 (5-7), 7-6 (7-4), 6-4.
The 16 seeded players received first-round byes.
Pete Sampras is top-seeded while the defending champion, Goran Ivanisevic, is seeded second. (AP)


Man Held in Robberies of 50 Lottery Stores
After a month of stake-outs at dozens of all-night groceries and newsstands in South Brooklyn, the police have arrested a 21-year-old man who they believe has robbed at least 50 lottery stores at gunpoint since March.
The man, identified through fingerprints as Emmanuel Pierre, of 2011 Newkirk Avenue in Brooklyn, was arrested by two officers just before midnight Sunday outside a store at the intersection of Ocean and Brighton Beach Avenues in Brighton Beach, the police said yesterday, after he stepped into a livery cab and the officers saw a pistol in his waistband.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Rachmaninoff, The Voice as Instrument  Merkin Concert Hall


Commercial Federal (CFCN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GP Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cleveland Agency Gets Rally's Account
Rally's Inc. in Louisville, Ky., the fast-food chain specializing in hamburgers sold at drive-through restaurants, has ended its relationship with McCabe &amp; Company in New York after three years.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $10 million, has been moved to Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith in Cleveland.
Chris Perry, chairman, chief executive and executive creative director of Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith, confirmed a report of the move this week in Adweek.
He said his agency, which had handled test-market projects for Rally's, was awarded the account without a review.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about discontent among black voters referred incorrectly in some editions to a Philadelphia resident who said she would not vote this year.
She is Bernadette Smith, not Bernadette Handyman.


Don't Look For Esiason To Cry Ouch!
The question has dogged Boomer Esiason since his Super Bowl days: Does anything hurt?
The question was asked again today, in the wake of the Jets' erratic and soft passing game in their 28-25 loss to the Colts in Indianapolis on Sunday.
Esiason banged his left (throwing) elbow on a helmet as he released a pass against the Colts.
He iced the elbow afterward, "just for precaution," he said.
"It's fine today."


Fort Wayne National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Lines Of Modems By Motorola
Motorola Inc., trying to broaden its industry-leading market share in modems, will introduce today its first modems to be sold through retail outlets.
The Lifestyle series is aimed at the growing home market for personal computers, while the Power series includes technology to improve their operation with cellular telephones.
Motorola, which had $132.8 million in revenue from modems last year, previously sold only to corporate accounts through distributors and its own direct sales force.
Motorola's new modems have suggested retail prices of $279 for the Lifestyle series and $339 for the Power series, and will be available immediately.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 8 about the reopening of public access to the 3.2-acre gravesite of President John F. Kennedy and his widow, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and two of their children, referred imprecisely to the grave markers.
The markers are fashioned from black slate quarried in Monson, Me., not from granite, according to a letter from the monument maker; irregular stones situated around the graves are Cape Cod granite.


Letko Hopes Patience Will Pay Off; A Torrid Start in '93 Marathon, but Nothing Left for a Finish
Overheated and dehydrated, Anne Marie Letko finished the 1993 New York City Marathon not in Central Park but in the hospital, not with a medal around her neck but with an intravenous tube in her arm.
The next day, she went for a short run, and her legs were so sore that she found it necessary to walk down the driveway backward.
She may yet become the next great American female distance runner, but to win a marathon she must first complete one.
So Letko, 25, will return to New York for Sunday's race, a year older and wiser.
She has a confident new racing strategy, one that involves patience and the latest techniques for holding water and preventing her internal radiator from boiling over.


CUOMO AND PATAKI GO TO LONG ISLAND IN HUNT FOR VOTES
The two candidates for governor campaigned today in vote-rich and voter-angry Long Island, a traditional Republican stronghold where Mario M. Cuomo sees new opportunity in the closing days of the race and where Republican infighting has weakened his rival, State Senator George E. Pataki.
Nassau and Suffolk Counties, which have cast just over 16 percent of the vote in the last three gubernatorial elections, are always critical in statewide elections.
Their importance has grown in recent days as new polls have shown Mr.
Cuomo with surprising strength in the New York City suburbs.


Observer; The Big Hog Wallow
Money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money, money --
Man here bids twenty-five for a Senate seat.
Million, that is.
Million dollars.
Twenty-five million is bid by Mr.
Huffington.
Do I hear twenty-six, twenty-six, twenty-six -- ?


Wisconsin Central Transportation Corp.(WCLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bolstered Clinton Campaigns for Allies
No longer seen by some beleaguered Democrats as a political liability, President Clinton today began an eight-day swing around the country to campaign for candidates in tight races that will help determine who controls Congress next year.
With most recent polls indicating that Senator Harris Wofford, the Democratic incumbent, and Lieut.
Gov.
Mark S. Singel, the party's candidate for governor, are locked in dead heats, Pennsylvania has become a crucial swing state in the midterm elections.


California Federal Bank (CAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Refused Track Star's Appeal in Defamation Case
The sweet but fleeting $27.3 million victory that Butch Reynolds won against the International Amateur Athletic Federation will remain only a memory for the Olympic runner, whose disputed drug test led to a two-year suspension that kept him out of the 1992 Games.
The United States Supreme Court today refused to consider Mr.
Reynolds's appeal of a ruling last May by a Federal appeals court that overturned his 1992 judgment against the international governing body of track and field.


Animals Too Pay Cost of Pain
To the Editor:
In "New Kind of Memory Found to Preserve Moments of Emotion" (Science Times, Oct. 25) you report the results of an experiment suggesting that hormonal secretions from the adrenal glands elicited by stressful experiences stimulate the brain and strengthen the memory of those experiences in humans.


Harsh Report on Iran Opposition Group Draws Ire in Congress
The State Department upset many members of Congress today by issuing a scathing report about a prominent Iranian opposition group without meeting with officials from the group, as more than 100 lawmakers had asked it to do.
Brushing aside Congressional pleas to get the views of the People's Mujahedeen, the State Department concluded that the armed resistance group engages in terrorism inside and outside Iran and is closely allied with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


American Power Conversion Corp.(APCC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooks Bros. Chief Resigns
William J. Roberti, the president and chief executive of Brooks Brothers, resigned yesterday to pursue other opportunities, according to Christopher Littmoden, director of Marks &amp; Spencer P.L.C., the parent company of Brooks Brothers.
No replacement has been named, though Mr.
Littmoden said in a statement that he intended to recruit someone familiar with the retailing industry in the United States.


Patterns
Genesis of a Buzz
A fashion buzz during collections week starts with the low pitch of one bee pollinating a honeysuckle flower.
Then, suddenly, there's a swarm.


Mexican Candidate's Assassin Is Sentenced to 42 Years
The 23-year-old factory worker who admitted that he shot and killed Mexico's leading presidential candidate in March was convicted of murder today and sentenced to 42 years in prison.
In issuing the verdict a federal judge, Alejandro Sosa Ortiz, said that based on evidence provided by the federal prosecutor, the assassin, Mario Aburto Martinez, was fully responsible for the premeditated murder of the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio.


Amoco Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nine Years of Resolve; Trial to Begin in a Daughter's Death
Libby Zion's death in 1984 at New York Hospital was not going to be just another unexplained tragedy, soon forgotten by almost everyone.
Her father, Sidney Zion, would see to that.
For more than a decade, Mr.
Zion, a writer, has been possessed by a desire for retribution, a need to put on trial the hospital, a few doctors and a decades-old medical culture that routinely put patients in the hands of doctors with little experience, supervision or sleep.


Rivers's Healing Status May Ease Knicks Logjam
Doc Rivers said today that he expects to begin the season on the injured list, temporarily helping the Knicks' overcrowded-roster problem.
The Knicks have 14 players with guaranteed contracts, but if Rivers joins Doug Christie, who is recovering from ankle surgery, on the injured list, New York could easily reach the 12-man limit by Wednesday's deadline.
Greg Butler, a free agent, is expected to be released.
The Knicks will also be forced to release Ron Grandison, a free-agent forward who has enjoyed an impressive preseason, unless another injury develops.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.94
4.76
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
4.99
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.42
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.78
5.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.97
7.95
6.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.78
7.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.85
6.84
5.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Dinosaur Jr.'s Clinic In Anesthesia Rock
There are a few things one should know about Dinosaur Jr., which played on Friday night at Roseland.
First of all, though it performs as a trio, the 10-year-old band currently exists only as a vehicle for the songs, solos and obsessions of its front man, the anti-hero of alternative rock guitar, J Mascis.
Mr.
Mascis is the crown prince of slackers: he functions at the lowest energy level possible in interviews, on the stage and in life.
Life, if one is to believe Mr.
Mascis' songs of dashed hopes and heartbreak, is an ever-widening wound that is best borne under heavy anesthesia.
On Friday, Mr.
Mascis summed up this philosophy best in "Feel the Pain," from his new album "Without a Sound" (Sire).
"I feel the pain of everyone," he sang in a cracking, sleepy voice.
"Then I feel nothing." The juxtaposition between these two extreme states seemed to be a guiding principle for Mr.
Mascis throughout the show.
Swift, dramatic shifts from noise to tunefulness, from fast tempos to slow ones, from simple guitar strumming to big drum bashing made for a show guided more by dynamics than by melody.


Green Point Savings Settles Depositor Suits
The Green Point Savings Bank of Flushing, Queens, said yesterday that it had settled a series of lawsuits by depositors challenging the bank's conversion to public stock ownership.
Under the settlement, the bank will send depositors a coupon for $500 off the closing costs of a mortgage and offer them the right to invest in a five-and-a-half-year certificate of deposit with an interest rate that is 65/100 of a percentage point higher than the bank is providing on its five-year account.


First Commercial Corp.(FCLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Almost Perfect Marathon Presence
The blue line that marks the 26.2- mile course will be interspersed with silver, and the sky will be full of red, white and blue tributes, but for all the embellishments of the 25th New York City Marathon on Sunday, to Arturo Montero it will just be more of the same.
No one has run all 24 races, but Montero, one of the 55 original finishers in 1970, comes close.
The 58-year-old Clairol mechanic from Stamford, Conn., has missed only one, he said yesterday, because of a hernia operation in 1982.


CHRONICLE
The word "righteous" does not often arise these days in connection with the British royal family.
But it was the key to an honor that PRINCE PHILIP, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II, received in Jerusalem yesterday in the name of his mother, the late Princess Alice of Greece.
Princess Alice, a British noblewoman who married Prince Andrew of Greece early in the century, was designated a "Righteous Gentile" by Yad Vashem, the Holocaust memorial organization in Jerusalem, for saving a Greek Jewish family from the Nazis during World War II.
The princess, who died in 1969, at 84, helped several family members escape and hid others for more than a year at one of her residences in Athens.


COMPANY NEWS
MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Washington, said it would be the exclusive provider of pay telephone services for Washington National and Dulles International airports in a five-year, $20 million agreement with Harris Corp., Melbourne, Fla., an electronic systems, semiconductor and communications company.


S.E.C. Study Backs Head Of Presstek
Robert Howard, chairman of Presstek Inc., and Howard Finkelstein are "definitely" not the same person, the Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday.
The S.E.C. rendered its judgment after Mr.
Howard voluntarily agreed to be fingerprinted in New York yesterday.
His fingerprints were then compared by the Federal Bureau of Investigation with those of Mr.
Finkelstein, who in the 1970's had used the name Robert Howard as an alias.


Long Island Bancorp (LISB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants Waiting for the Hard Times to Go
Embarrassed by the team's five-game losing streak, one Giants player said he was hesitant about calling his mother this week because every time he does she gives him an earful about what the team needs to do to win.
Another Giant gets almost three messages a week from friends around the league making fun of the team: "Beep. Nice squad, dude. Beep."
The losing is taking its toll, personally and professionally.
And while no one has given up on the season, the immediate future looks bleak.
Not only is confidence sagging and frustration growing, but the Giants have some key players who are banged up, and the Super Bowl champion Cowboys are waiting for a Monday night matchup in Dallas.


Rooney Faces Intoxication Charge
A former trainer for MIKE TYSON and LARRY HOLMES now working with VINNIE PAZIENZA was charged over the weekend with driving while intoxicated and assaulting a police officer.
KEVIN ROONEY, 38, of Catskill, N.Y., was pulled over in North Stonington, Conn., early Sunday morning for erratic driving, the state police said.
Rooney refused to take a sobriety field test.
As he was being handcuffed, Rooney forced Trooper JOHN PATTERSON to the ground and kicked him, the police said.


Brooklyn Banorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Witnesses Testify About Shooting at Clinic
Facing the death penalty if convicted of the shooting deaths of an abortion clinic doctor and an escort here, Paul J. Hill had nothing to say to the jury today as he acted as his own lawyer on the opening day of his state trial.
"I don't have any opening statement, sir," Mr.
Hill told the judge after the prosecution laid out its case to the jurors, who were empaneled today.


Jersey City School Voucher Plan Is Weak
To the Editor:
A few observations on the proposal to establish an experimental school voucher system in Jersey City:


Magna Group (MAGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Big East  The strength of the conference had gone from Connecticut to Seton Hall to St.
John's.
Now it appears to be Georgetown's turn.
The Hoyas, whose sports centerpiece has been basketball for years, captured their first regular-season title in soccer with a 2-1 overtime triumph over St.
John's on Saturday.


New York State Election Choices; State Legislative Races
Few incumbents face serious challenge this year, which reflects more on the state's closed political process than voter happiness with the State Legislature.
Here are our choices in some of the more interesting races in New York City and the surrounding suburbs.
SENATE -- 23d District, Brooklyn and Staten Island: Robert DiCarlo, a Republican who took this seat in a special election in 1993, now seeks a full two-year term.
He stresses that he is a valuable advocate for New York City during closed-door meetings of the Republican Senate majority.
But that value is diminished by his tendency to be a divisive force even within his own party.
We favor his Democratic challenger, Vincent Gentile, an Assistant District Attorney long involved in community and civic activities.


Pollution-Control Efforts Zero In on Pleasure Boats
Car exhaust has gotten cleaner and cleaner over the years, with catalytic converters and other refinements, but motorboat engines still have all the pollution controls of a '57 Chevy.
That would change under an accord announced yesterday by the Environmental Protection Agency.
The E.P.A. said it had reached agreement with marine-engine manufacturers to cut smog-producing hydrocarbon emissions by three-quarters, a step that would help reduce the blue haze that sometimes hangs over lakes and harbors on summer days.
Nitrogen oxides, the other major ingredient of smog, would also be cut sharply.


Richard Cohen, 71, an Adviser To Major Jewish Organizations
Richard Cohen, a public relations adviser to several of the nation's largest national Jewish organizations, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dr. Aphrodite Clamar-Cohen.


Anchor Bancorp Inc.(ABKR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Blocks Repatriation of Cuban Detainees
A Federal judge today issued a temporary restraining order to block the repatriation of Cuban refugees detained in camps at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay and in Panama.
The Government said it would appeal the decision.
"We plan to appeal the judge's ruling to assure that Cubans wishing to return home can do so at the earliest possible moment," said a spokeswoman for the Department of Justice, Julie Bender.


Dublin Journal; Women's Movement in Ireland Slows to a Crawl
When a prominent leader of the women's movement, Frances Fitzgerald, was elected to Parliament two years ago, both her own career and the movement itself seemed on the rise in a conservative society where gains for women have been slower than elsewhere in Western Europe.
Ms.
Fitzgerald, a 44-year-old social worker who had been chairwoman of the Council for the Status of Women, an umbrella group, was touted even by some of the male politicians as someone who had the potential to become Prime Minister, a job no woman has had.


Cigna Corp. (CI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italy Finds A Fugitive, One of Many
In the end, the bulky overcoat and floppy hat were not enough to hide the movie-star looks of Ferdinando Mach di Palmstein as his pursuers moved in.
"Good morning, Signor Mach," one of them said as the fugitive Italian financier ventured from an apartment on the Boulevard St.-Germain in Paris on Sunday to buy the Italian newspapers from a corner kiosk, only to find himself arrested by the Italian plainclothes policeman who had just bid him good day.


Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.(ABBY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Iranian Writers Ask for an End To Censorship
A group of dissident Iranian writers has called for the abolition of censorship in Iran in an open letter sent to news organizations, saying, "Writers must be free to create their work and express themselves."
The letter was signed by 134 novelists, publishers and translators, who said again today that they would continue their campaign against censorship in any form.
The letter was sent last week to foreign news organizations and the state-run press.


Getting Ready for the Big Day


A Voice for the Voiceless That Still Thunders
"Frederick Douglass: When the Lion Wrote History" confirms its subject's crucial place in the struggle of America's blacks of his time even as it demonstrates his relevance more than a century after the end of slavery.
Tomorrow night's 90-minute appreciation draws on Douglass's own ringing words -- notably from his masterpiece, "Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, Written by Himself" -- to tell the famous story of a young man who escaped to freedom and became a lifelong champion of his people and a hero for whites as well as blacks.
He was not only self-educated, with a love of language that should still be an inspiration to children of any race (he took his surname from Walter Scott's "Lady of the Lake"); he was also self-created.


Facing Social Problems: Proposals by Cuomo and Pataki Often Are Vague
In a gubernatorial campaign heavy with talk about crime and taxes, debate about the social problems that cost New Yorkers billions of dollars each year has been light.
Events like the recent visit of President Clinton focused attention momentarily on the issue.
Campaigning for his fellow Democrat, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Clinton said he would allow New York to begin experimental welfare programs and would press for improving Medicaid payments to the state.
But the welfare waiver would involve only 21,000 of the more than one million New Yorkers receiving welfare grants, and the Medicaid help would require Congressional approval that would be difficult to win.


Review/Fashion; The Incredible Lightness of Beene
In a season when many designers are so confused about what women want to wear in the 90's that they're looking backward for inspiration, Geoffrey Beene is, as always, looking ahead.
His mantra is "modern." His quest is for effortless, weightless clothes that allow freedom of movement.
To demonstrate his point, he's taken to having his shows choreographed on ballet dancers who leap around the stage.
He said he believed the spring collection he showed yesterday was the lightest he had ever designed.
With gossamer fabrics like paper taffeta, silk gazar, horsehair and chiffon, the clothes often appeared to float on air.


Coors (Adolph) Co.  (ACCOB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Canadian Showman Takes On Broadway With a Swagger
Garth Drabinsky, the producer of "Kiss of the Spider Woman" and "Show Boat," has written his autobiography.


Treasury Prices Mixed In Slow Day
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in subdued trading yesterday, with no follow-through buying from Friday's rally.
The market is again in the grip of the bearish tone that has held it for months, traders said.
The market was weighed down yesterday by a weak dollar and a coming supply of new Treasury securities, which offset the good news from sharp declines in precious metals and the Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commoditites.


OHM Corp.(OHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Over 100 Inmates Escape From Haiti's Main Prison
More than 100 prisoners at Haiti's national penitentiary, including some former police officers being held on charges of human rights abuses, escaped here Sunday, according to Haitian news reports.
International police monitors confirmed the jail break.
Only eight of those who escaped were reported to have been recaptured as of this afternoon.


Sir John Pope-Hennessy, 80, Art Expert, Dies
Sir John Pope-Hennessy, a former museum director, an authority on the Italian Renaissance and the head of European painting at the Metropolitan Museum of Art from 1977 to 1986, died yesterday at his home in Florence.
He was 80.
The cause was complications from a liver ailment, said Alton Peters, Sir John's lawyer in New York City.


For Hunts, a Reckoning Is at Hand
Eight years ago, the Hunt brothers, Nelson Bunker and William Herbert, pitched their corporations into bankruptcy.
Six years ago, they declared personal bankruptcy.
But only late on Friday did the family of Herbert Hunt finally agree in a court filing to hand over the bulk of his property -- more than $40 million in real estate, with back interest, that creditors say he had fraudulently transferred shortly before filing for personal bankruptcy.
In August, Nelson Bunker Hunt's relatives quietly agreed to a similar settlement, worth about $14 million.


Homestake Mining Co.(HM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israelis and Arabs Talking Business
Two thousand business executives from 60 countries and scores of senior American, Israeli and Arab officials began a two-day conference here today to explore ways of cementing peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors through regional economic projects.
Half the Israeli Cabinet, led by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and several dozen businessmen armed with nearly 150 proposals for joint ventures with Arabs, arrived for the gathering, underlining Israel's keen interest in exploring the economic horizons of the Arab world.


Loewen Group (LWNGF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Nicotine Problems
Q.
Leaving aside the matter of tobacco addiction, does nicotine have any harmful effects itself?


Ohio University Fires Head Coach
Ohio University's football coach, TOM LICHTENBERG, was fired yesterday, two days after his team dropped to 0-8 on the season.
Lichtenberg, in his fifth year at the university, will be reassigned in the athletic department after completing this season.
The team has three games left.
Ohio's president, ROBERT GLIDDEN, said Lichtenberg was not fired, but had asked for reassignment.
But at his weekly news media luncheon after the university's news conference, Lichtenberg said: "They don't want to say I got fired. And that's probably not the right word for it, but I didn't ask to give up the football job. In the press conference this morning, they said I asked to be reassigned. I did not ask to be reassigned."


New York State Election Choices; Karen Burstein for Attorney General
Both candidates in the race for state attorney general boast acceptable credentials.
The Republican, Dennis Vacco, is a former U.S.
Attorney in Buffalo.
The Democrat, Karen Burstein, has served as a state legislator, commissioner and judge.
Who would do the better job?
The clear answer is Ms.
Burstein, and we are pleased to endorse her.
Mr.
Vacco has an alarming vision of how he would use the office of attorney general.
He plans to emphasize fighting street crime, which is the job of local district attorneys.
In the process, he would necessarily slight the heavy responsibilities of the attorney general in administrative law and other unglamorous but essential kinds of legal work.
Mr.
Vacco also wants to use the office as a statewide platform to campaign for the death penalty.


Gag Rule Isn't Part Of G.O.P. 'Contract'
To the Editor:
"The Gag Rule, Revisited" (editorial, Oct. 24) leaves the wrong impression that the welfare reform bill of the House Republican "Contract With America" restores the Title X gag rule prohibiting doctors in federally financed clinics from advising women about abortion.
It does not.


Psychiatric Exam Ordered In White House Shooting
The dishonorably discharged Army medic who opened fire on the White House on Saturday with a semiautomatic rifle was today charged with four felony offenses, and a magistrate ordered him to undergo a one-day psychiatric examination.
At a hearing in Federal District Court, prosecutors charged the man, Francisco Martin Duran, with possession of a firearm as a convicted felon, destruction of Federal property at the White House, assaulting a Federal officer during his arrest and using a firearm in the commission of violent crime.
If convicted of all four charges, he faces a maximum term of 35 years in prison.


Safeguard Scientifics Inc.(SFE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shapiro, Shapiro, Shapiro &amp; Shapiro


Showboat Inc.(SBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AIDS Risk Held Twice As High In Women
WOMEN are more than twice as likely as men to become infected with the virus that causes AIDS during heterosexual sex, a study by an Italian research group reports.
The study, published in the November issue of the journal Epidemiology, provides further evidence that anatomical and physiological differences between the sexes make women more susceptible than men to contracting the virus, H.I.V.


Moynihan Foe Says Giuliani Pressured Her
Bernadette Castro, the Republican candidate for United States Senate, said yesterday that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani tried to persuade her during a private meeting at Gracie Mansion on Sunday night to "consider distancing" herself from her party's gubernatorial candidate, George E. Pataki.
Ms.
Castro, a long-time friend and financial contributor to the Mayor, told reporters at an impromptu news conference on Fifth Avenue that she refused.
"I'm a member of the Republican ticket," she said.
"George Pataki is the head of the ticket. If I didn't think he would be a good governor, I wouldn't have joined the ticket in the first place."


Questions Seen on Tests For Growth Mutations
NONE of the new studies of growth factor receptors are likely to lead to treatments for skeletal disorders any time soon.
Yet, because the mutations are unusually specific, designing genetic tests based on them should be quite easy.
Who should be allowed to use the tests is far less obvious.
In the case of achondroplasia, the main symptom of the mutation is short stature, though a minority may suffer from hunchback and compressed spinal column, which can lead to health problems.
Dr.
John J. Wasmuth of the department of biological chemistry at the University of California at Irvine said the only legitimate use he could see for the screening test was in those rare cases where there was a risk that a fetus might inherit not just one, but two copies of the dwarfism gene, an event that would be extremely deforming and eventually lethal.


Seiko Consolidates 2 Brands at Martin
The Seiko Corporation of America said yesterday that it had dismissed DDB Needham New York after less than a year handling its Seiko and Lassale watch brands by consolidating those brands, with billings estimated at $10 million, at the Martin Agency in Richmond, which handles Seiko's Pulsar brand.
Cheri McKenzie, Seiko's advertising director in Mahwah, N.J., said the consolidation was made when the company decided "that a single marketing partner would best support our new overall corporate strategy."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Premiere of Rorem Songs Turns Out to Be Chamber Music  Alice Tully Hall


Panel's Sex Abuse Report
A Board of Education commission yesterday recommended varied strategies, including screening of all employees and fingerprinting of volunteers, to prevent sexual abuse in the city's public schools.
In its final report to the Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, and to the Special Commissioner of Investigation, Edward F. Stancik, the 50-member commission proposed, in addition to screening prospective employees and volunteers, training all school employees in the appropriate response to abuse allegations.


By Design; Wardrobes Full of Satin
The bias-cut satin dress was last spring's surprise hit, crossing over from evening into day when worn under a jacket or sweater.
But satin is not just for dresses.
It was also used for jackets, pants, skirts, vests and shirts in the fall and resort collections.
It showed up in the spring '95 shows in Europe and is being seen in the New York spring shows that started over the weekend.
Henri Bendel has a wide selection of satin clothing and accessories.
Its private-label offerings include a long black bias-cut skirt, $88; a halter vest, $98; jeans in black, silver, brown or bronze, $160, and a shirt in black, magenta, red, yellow, purple, orange or royal, $98.


Cavaliers Sign the Ex-Knick Campbell
The Cleveland Cavaliers yesterday signed TONY CAMPBELL, an unrestricted free agent guard-forward.
The 10-year National Basketball Association veteran started last season with the Knicks.
Campbell fills a vacancy created by the loss of shooting guard GERALD WILKINS to a torn Achilles' tendon.
Wilkins, who averaged 14.3 points a game last season, ruptured the tendon in an exhibition game and will be out all season.


DANCE
Choreography That's New, But With Baroque Touches  Gould Hall


Boy, 15, Is Shot to Death As 2 Gunmen Beat Nanny
Two men wearing Halloween masks pistol-whipped a nanny outside a home in Flushing, Queens, and then fatally shot a 15-year-old boy in her charge yesterday as he rushed to help her, the police said.
Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman, said the men were apparently robbers trying to force their way into the home at 63-23 136th Street, near Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, on a quiet street where children had been trick-or-treating just a few hours earlier.


McCall Seeks a Balance Of His Resume and Race
"I am very delighted to be here, because this is where it all started," H. Carl McCall, the state's comptroller, said the other day to a small crowd in the heart of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
"My very first job in New York was just a few blocks away from here on Bedford Avenue, at the Bedford Y.M.C.A. I came here as a social worker. Major Owens knows this. He was working in the library."
Mr.
McCall, 58, a Democrat locked in a tight race to hold onto his job, nodded from the platform to Mr.
Owens, now the five-term Representative from Brooklyn.
As Mr.
McCall ticked off the names of other local officials at the rally who are black, he told his audience something he normally does not: New York has never elected a state official who is black.


Reality's Chaos, Translated Into Art
UNDER MY SKIN Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949 By Doris Lessing 419 pages.
HarperCollins. $25.


Coastal Healthcare Group Inc.(CGRP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Croatian Serbs Send Troops to Counter Bosnian Offensive
The leader of the Serbs in Croatia said today that he had dispatched a special police and military unit to assist the Bosnian Serbs in recapturing territory lost in recent days to resurgent Bosnian Government forces from the northwestern town of Bihac.
Milan Martic, the president of the self-styled Serbian Krajina Republic that surrounds much of the Bihac pocket, said in an interview that the Serbian forces now massing would be sufficient to defeat the Muslim-led Bosnian Army, adding, "We will see if the Bihac pocket ends up smaller than it was before this offensive started."


First, the Workers Do Their Ballet


A Woman With an Eye For Talent and Revolt
"Mother of All the Behans" is one of those celebrations of Irish lore, song and dance that often tend to leave the uninitiated feeling a bit left out.
Fortunately, the one celebrating is Rosaleen Linehan, who weaves the tale with such enchantment that she converts Kathleen Behan's rather ordinary life story into a one-woman music hall.
Ms.
Linehan, warmly remembered for her brilliant performance as Kate, the eldest sister, in Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa," has brought the show to the Irish Repertory Theater with such a twinkle of eye and toe that she makes the audience wish it had personally known her subject, if only better to appreciate her portrayal.


Haiti's Capital Throbs With New Life
Haiti's capital is bustling again.
At night, with people no longer fearful they will be kidnapped and killed by the gunmen the army used as enforcers, restaurants are full.
People are flocking to bars and music clubs to dance to their favorite songs in the syncopated Haitian compas style.
And on streets that were eerily vacant once darkness fell even two months ago, families take late-night walks to buy ice cream at parlors that have been able to reopen because they now have a regular supply of electricity.


Advanta Corp.(ADVNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russian Tied to Stock Scheme Gains Election to Parliament
In thin voting after a bizarre campaign, the head of the MMM pyramid scheme, Sergei I. Mavrodi, won a seat in Parliament, along with its immunity against prosecution, in a special election Sunday, local officials announced today.
Mr.
Mavrodi, 39, was arrested during a police raid on his apartment and spent 70 days in jail, without having been charged, on suspicion of tax evasion.
A court released him on Oct. 12 after his workers collected enough signatures for him to qualify as a candidate in the 109th electoral district, centered in Mytishchi, just north of Moscow.


Biogen Inc.(BGEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York State Election Choices; Carl McCall for Comptroller
In this ugliest of statewide contests, we enthusiastically endorse the Democratic incumbent, H. Carl McCall, for a four-year term as New York State Comptroller -- the state's chief fiscal officer.
Mr.
McCall, a former State Senator, bank executive and city Board of Education president, was installed as Comptroller by the Legislature last year after the resignation of Edward Regan.
He has had a productive year, working to reform Albany's dubious debt practices and successfully challenging the Governor and the Legislature on the misuse of pension funds for budget balancing.
In his oversight of city and state finances, Mr.
McCall has been responsible and constructive.


Ziff Is Selling Its Show Unit
The Ziff family agreed yesterday to sell its technology trade shows and conferences to the Softbank Corporation for $202 million.
The conferences include Interop, an operator of computer trade shows.
Interop employs about 250 people and had 1994 revenue of about $90 million.
Softbank, based in Tokyo, is Japan's largest distributor of computer software and peripherals.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Oct. 21 about Edwin Cossitt, the director and producer of the "Angels on Ice" benefit for Gay Men's Health Crisis, included an erroneous reference, supplied by the group and Mr.
Cossitt, to the national Canadian men's skating champion for 1964.
The Senior Men's Canadian champion for that year was Charles Snell ing, not Mr.
Cossitt.


Associated Banc-Corp (ASBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plane Waiting to Land at O'Hare Crashes in Indiana, Killing 68
A twin-engine commuter airplane owned by a subsidiary of American Airlines, fighting a gusty rainstorm on the way to O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, crashed yesterday in a cold Indiana soybean field.
All 68 people on board were killed, officials said.
The American Eagle flight from Indianapolis, nearly an hour behind schedule on the 164-mile trip to O'Hare, went down near Roselawn, Ind., four miles west of Interstate 65 and 30 miles south of Gary, Ind.
Leroy Prohosky, who lives on an adjacent farm, said he heard the plane's engines whining overhead like a dirt bike, then silence.


Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones S.A. (BLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G.O.P. Defections Bare Party's Rift
A string of defections by prominent Republicans who endorsed Democratic candidates, the biggest in decades, has exposed an ideological rupture in the Republican Party and demonstrated how difficult it has become for the major parties to enforce discipline.
While it is not clear how much effect the endorsements will have on this year's state and Federal races, the fissure exposed by the desertions points to trouble ahead for Republicans as they first try to set legislative priorities for the next Congress and then field a nominee to oppose President Clinton in 1996.


DONNA KARAN GETS NEW $125 MILLION CREDIT LINE
The Donna Karan Company, the New York-based designer apparel and cosmetics company, said yesterday that it had received a new $125 million credit line from a group of five banks led by Citibank.
The new line replaces a $110 million credit line, which was originally set up as short-term financing to provide the company with funds during an initial public stock offering the company planned a year ago.
The offering was canceled when its business slowed, and the company has struggled to find new financing since.
The new credit agreement extends through 1998, which should alleviate the pressure on the company to find additional financing.


Loyola Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Shutout in the Progress League
Another Monday, another secret meeting, another report of no progress.
That's where the National Hockey League stood yesterday as it reached the end of the first month of the lockout of its players.
Negotiators for the league and the players' union met in Washington for about five hours and left no closer to an agreement than when they began.


Grace &amp; Rothschild Wins Mobil Account
The Mobil Corporation has expanded its agency roster again by selecting Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York to handle its Mobil 1 motor oil account, which had been at DDB Needham New York for more than 30 years.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.
John McCalla, a spokesman for Mobil in Fairfax, Va., confirmed yesterday a report of the selection this week in Adweek, adding that Grace &amp; Rothschild was awarded the account after a three-month review that was narrowed to that agency and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.
A campaign is expected to begin early next year, he added.


Pfizer Obtains Namic and Its Chief
As a young computer programmer working on contract at the Namic U.S.A.
Corporation, Cynthia L. Morris became quite knowledgeable about the company, a maker of specialty medical products.
Indeed, in a dazzling ascent, she was hired to help develop new products at age 25, promoted to president at 29 and became chief executive at 31.
Yesterday, Pfizer Inc., the giant New York-based health care company, announced that it had agreed to buy Namic for about $155 million in Pfizer stock, or about $18 a share.


Leader Financial Corp.(LFCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants' G.M. Is a Firm Believer: It's Better Not to Play It Again, Ref
The Giants have been victimized by several incorrect calls or no calls by officials in crucial situations in the last two weeks.
But that hasn't swayed George Young, the Giants' general manager, to change his stance against using instant replay as a means to reverse incorrect calls.
He's still against it.
"It doesn't solve the problem," Young said.
"You're just adding another layer of officials. You're trying to eliminate human error by adding more humans."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article yesterday about a potential rift between the United States and its allies over Bosnia misstated the cause.
It is a threat by Congress to order an end to the arms embargo that has left Bosnian Government forces at a disadvantage, not the Administration's strategy on the issue.


Rifts Shake and Rattle Warner Music
As a virtual civil war rages within Time Warner Inc.'s music operation, record executives at many rival labels are eyeing a rare opportunity to lure talent from what has long been the industry's most stable, desirable and powerful place to work.
"This is a shocking turn of events," said a high-level executive at a competing company, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"We are all saying to new young acts that we want to sign: 'Look, it's not a stable environment over there. You won't get the attention you need.' "


FirstFed MichiganCorp.(FFOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Bang's Defenders Weigh Fudge Factor, A Blunder of Einstein's, As Fix for New Crisis
EVEN though the universe has infinite ways of humbling them, cosmologists are nothing if not resilient and endlessly creative.
They have to be, given their daunting task of standing on the shore of a small world and looking beyond the harbor lights of nearby stars to the arching waves of clustered galaxies, seeking on far horizons glimpses of the entire cosmic history, from beginning to probable end.
For more than three decades, their most satisfying reconstructions of that history have rested squarely on the "Big Bang" theory.
In the beginning, according to this model, mass was compressed into a state of infinite density, an initial singularity.
Then there was a kind of explosion.
Everything -- space itself -- expanded, thinned out and cooled.
At first, all was smooth and virtually uniform.
But around some faint wrinkles, called density fluctuations, matter began clumping into stars, galaxies of stars and clusters of gravitationally bound galaxies stretching across the sky.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Thursday about the expansion plans of Stein Mart Inc. misidentified the company's headquarters city.
It is Jacksonville, Fla., not Baltimore.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Syd Thrift director of player development.


Status of Humphries Is Uncertain
The San Diego Chargers might not know until just before kickoff in Atlanta Sunday whether STAN HUMPHRIES will be the starter, the backup or the inactive third-string quarterback.
Humphries dislocated his left (non-throwing) elbow early in the third quarter of Sunday's 35-15 home victory over the Seattle Seahawks.
His left arm was in a sling yesterday and there was quite a bit of swelling, Coach BOBBY ROSS said.


POP
Pews Are Moved for Dancing To Music of Cajun Masters  Landmark on the Park


Midlantic Corp.(MDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Classic Hears the Thunder of the European Herd
It is a race deserted by Holy Bull, deep-sixed by Colonial Affair and won last year by the 133-1 long shot Arcangues.
So, here they come, six horses from Europe with credentials and with hopes of catching the eight from America in their richest race, the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic.
"It's a lot of runners," said Alistair Donald, executive director of the International Racing Bureau.
"There's the Arcangues factor. And when we knew that Holy Bull was out, we developed the feeling that Americans are not unbeatable. I think they've got a shot."


Holding Hands, Halloween Style


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Music and Flourishes From a Keyboard Engineer  Carnegie Hall


Lottery's New Millionaire Says He's Keeping His Old Tastes
A $45,000-a-year toolmaker from an upstate village -- who bowls every Sunday night, has 130,000 miles on his truck and just borrowed money to finish a house he's worked on for ages -- gulped like a Frank Capra character at the television cameras and microphones yesterday and said aw, shucks, to the $18,125,000 New York Lottery jackpot he won over the weekend.
"I'm not going to change my life dramatically," the new millionaire, Fred Jacobs, 42, of Galway, N.Y., said at a crowded news conference at State Lottery headquarters in Schenectady.
"I don't go for fancy restaurants. I'm not a suit-and-tie man."


Ruling Backs D'Amato Kin In Fraud Case
In a strong rebuke to Federal prosecutors, a Federal appeals court yesterday reversed the mail-fraud conviction of Armand P. D'Amato, the brother of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, saying there was insufficient evidence for a jury to reach a guilty verdict.
The unanimous 37-page decision is likely to end the five-year legal travails of Mr.
D'Amato, 50, a Long Island lawyer whom the Government had accused of joining in an illegal scheme to conceal his lobbying for a military contractor, the Unisys Corporation.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family of Errant Genes Is Found to Be Related To Variety of Skeletal Ills
FORGET the great human heart and brain, the eyes that see sweeping vistas, the lips that declare "I am"; the real thing standing between us and primordial ooze is the human skeleton.
Built of 206 bones, 29 in the skull alone, the skeleton is a living cathedral of ivory vaults, ribs and buttresses -- a structure at once light and strong, flexible and firm.
Yet like those toy kits requiring self-assembly, the skeleton is also so complicated that many things can and do go wrong with it during development.
Disorders that affect the growth of the body's bones are among the most common of all birth defects.
For example, at least one in 3,000 babies suffers from any of 100 different syndromes that cause the sutures of the skull plates to fuse prematurely.


Excesses With Medicaid: Hair Transplants?
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, thinks it is terrible that Medicaid, the health-care program for the poor, would pay for hair transplants.
But would it?
"I think, personally, it's absurd that somebody can get a hair transplant paid for by Medicaid," Mr.
Pataki said recently in an interview with The New York Times.
He raised the example in an effort to underscore the excesses of Medicaid, which is expected to cost the state $5.9 billion this year, a cost that is debilitating the budgets of local governments that share state expenses for the federally mandated program.


Wilmington Coach Reinstates Players
Wilmington (Ohio) College's football coach, MIKE WALLACE, has reinstated most of the 40 players he suspended Friday for violating the team's ban on alcohol consumption.
Wallace said yesterday that he admired the players for admitting their violations of the drinking ban when the coach asked the team about it at a meeting Friday. (AP)


Move to Ban Giant Bulls Splits Spain
From prehistoric cave paintings to Picasso murals, bulls have always been associated with Spain's national imagery.
Or so almost everyone in Spain is now passionately affirming since the Ministry of Public Works has condemned dozens of huge metal cutouts of bulls that dot the countryside.
Weighing more than four tons, they stand about 40 feet square and have loomed on hills, plains, cliffs, farmlands and vineyards since 1957 as advertisements for a brandy called Veterano.


Cadets See Aberration, Not Tailhook Scandal
For years, the United States Military Academy has conducted a half-dozen classes a semester on relations between men and women, including frank discussions of sexual harassment and incidents like the Tailhook scandal.
So both male and female cadets interviewed today were embarrassed by the announcement that several football players had been accused of groping female cadets at an Oct. 20 rally intended to muster school spirit for a game two days later against The Citadel.
The incident, a half-dozen cadets said, should not be compared with the Tailhook scandal, which tarnished the image of the Navy's officers corps.


After Crackdown, Smugglers Of Chinese Find New Routes
More than a year after the tramp steamer Golden Venture went aground off Queens with a cargo of 300 illegal Chinese immigrants, a Government crackdown on the ship-borne smuggling of Chinese to this country has apparently led smugglers to open a new route through the Caribbean.
So far this year, only two large ships, together carrying just over 300 Chinese immigrants, have been intercepted on the high seas, a sign of the waning success of ship-borne smuggling.
More than a dozen ships were intercepted in the year before, yielding 2,533 arrests.


West Bank Legal Status Is Based on U.N.
To the Editor:
Re "Palestine's Boundaries" (letter, Oct. 27): Paul S. Riebenfeld's selective history omits both context and some key facts.
Britain did not assume administration of Palestine pursuant to the League of Nations' July 1922 Mandate until September 1923.


Czechs Celebrate Traditions Of the Other Classical Crucible
A disproportionately large fraction of the classical repertory stems from small Central European countries that have cultivated great music over the centuries in an intense greenhouse atmosphere.
Austria possesses the most illustrious of these everlasting traditions, but Czech musical history is nearly as remarkable.
The whole panorama of Czech music was celebrated in an absorbing daylong festival in the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center on Sunday.
The festival's title was "400 Years of Music in Prague"; Petr Kotik, director of the S.E.M.
Ensemble, chose the programs in collaboration with Petr Danek, the director of the annual Prague Spring Festival.
There has been at times a national sound in Czech music, but more important there has been an extraordinary diversity of accomplishment rooted in a single place.
As with the Austrian-Viennese tradition, it is really the tale of one city, a cultural colossus with music in its veins.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.(OGE,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Digital Wine Steward Caters to Individuals
THE subject prefers poundcake or fresh fruit to a hot fudge sundae.
Also, he likes Bartlett pears; cola; coffee and tea, both without cream and sugar; baked fish with sauce, and grilled chicken.
Having learned that, Steve Olson suggests: "You might enjoy semi-dry, rich wines aged in oak, such as big Bordeaux, Rhone, or Australian wines. Try some of the white wines in Category 4, or any of the reds in Category 4. A specific wine in the program that you might want to try is the Chateau Bages 1988."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  HAITI'S CAPITAL IS BUSTLING
With the lifting of the American-led embargo that crippled the Haitian economy and with cargo arriving again, Port-au-Prince is coming back to life.
A16


Rowland Police File Is Ordered Released
The State Freedom of Information Commission today ordered the release of a police report on a domestic dispute in April between John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, and his ex-wife.
But it may be months before the report is made public, if ever, because the police chief of Middlebury, where the incident occurred, is likely to appeal the ruling.
The police have said that a verbal dispute was involved, that no violence was reported and that no arrest was made.


Beating the Clock
Daylight is a gift of nature, but humans have successively taken it on themselves to measure, subdivide, standardize and even politicize nature's schedule.
Once the motive was to help ancient Egyptian farmers predict the annual Nile flood.
In modern times it is to synchronize everything from train schedules and prime-time television to working hours and private appointments.
Standardization has disconnected our clocks and our lives from strict local solar time as a sundial might measure it.
It has also increasingly put governments in charge of the clock.
That, along with increasing urbanization, made possible the 20th century's great leap forward in artificial time measurement -- daylight savings time.


Ralcorp Holdings Inc.(RAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mikasa Inc.(MKS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Geneva Steel Co.(GNV,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Free Spirit


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Halloween Clash Ends in Death in Brooklyn
The incident started, the police said, as Halloween harassment on Monday evening: a crowd of teen-agers throwing eggs at a man walking down Knickerbocker Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, with a tricycle he had just bought for his 4-year-old son.
The man, identified by the police as Angel Lopez Almodovar, retaliated, throwing a broken bottle and hitting someone in the crowd who "became enraged and went a short distance away and came back with a handgun," said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Timothy Clifford.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  ARABS BALK ON MIDEAST BANK  Saudi Arabia and other countries objected to an American proposal for a regional bank to aid peace between Israel and Arab countries, saying they could not afford to provide the financing.
A1  MILITARY SCANDALS IN RUSSIA  A series of scandals has hit the Russian military, which was sacrosanct during the Soviet era, and the Defense Minister's job has been threatened as a result.
A3


Off the Menu
A Home for Saltimbanco
The marathon lease negotiations have been concluded, and work is now starting on Saltimbanco, the long-awaited restaurant of Mario, Marco and Mauro Maccioni, whose father, Sirio, owns Le Cirque.
The restaurant, which will open next year, will be in Fisher Park, a mid block oasis behind 1345 Avenue of the Americas, near 54th Street.


TENNIS: Tennis Life Begins Gloriously at 14; A Straight-Set Victory for Williams in Her Pro Debut
She is the most unorthodox tennis prodigy her sport has ever seen: a 14-year-old African-American girl with a ghetto in her past, a total absence of junior competition in her present and a plan to spend no more than a decade pursuing Grand Slam titles and six-digit purses so she can put a college degree in her future.
Venus Williams says she wants to be a paleontologist someday, and why not?


Healthsource (HS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boy Is Slain Trying to Aid His Nanny
Joseph Mestey was not known to back down from a challenge.
A 15-year-old of average height, he was able to run circles around the bigger boys on the basketball courts and soccer fields of his neighborhood in Queens.
He once whispered to a jittery friend that he would protect him as they passed a group of troublemakers in a school corridor.
"One time we were together, and I told him that I was scared to walk by this group of kids," said Ronnie Simmons, 15, who attended Holy Cross High School in Flushing with Joseph.
"He said, 'Don't worry, I got your back.' And I knew he meant it. He was like that."


Investment Adviser Settles Suit by S.E.C.
Galleon Capital Management of San Diego, until recently one of the largest minority-owned investment advisory firms, has settled a suit by the Securities and Exchange Commission accusing it of misappropriating clients' money through a complex arrangement of rebates from brokers who handled the firm's stock trades.
The settlement, announced yesterday, comes after most of the firm's largest clients had pulled their money from Galleon.
Those clients included the Archdiocese of Los Angeles, the New York City Employees' Retirement Systems, and the Los Angeles Fire and Police Pension Fund.
Some clients said they had moved their accounts because of poor investment results, but people familiar with the firm's operations said most defections came after clients became aware of the pending S.E.C. investigation.


Little Movement Expected On Divisional Realignment
Although discussions on divisional realignment continued here today, as National Football League owners pondered whether to "make a leap of faith" in a game already flourishing, no action on that issue is likely to occur at this meeting, said Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
However, N.F.L. owners will decide before concluding this meeting Wednesday on which divisions to place the two new expansion teams, the Carolina Panthers and the Jacksonville Jaguars.
And if the owners cannot agree, Tagliabue will decide for them.


Eljer Industries Inc.(ELJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Stock Offer Is Postponed At Flushing
The Flushing Savings Bank said yesterday that it had indefinitely postponed its initial stock offering because of an investigation by the Federal Government into apparent voting irregularities by depositors and what the bank called "uncertain market conditions."
Flushing is a mutual savings bank, meaning that it is not owned by shareholders.
Several other recent attempts by mutual banks to convert to public ownership have foundered.


Idaho Power Co. (IDA,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Contractors For Albany Contribute To Both Parties
Election Day is approaching, and engineering consultants for the New York State Department of Transportation are already picking sides.
Steinman, Boynton, Gronquist &amp; Birdsall, a firm with $84 million in state contracts, including major design and inspection work on East River bridges, is so far sticking with the incumbent, Mario M. Cuomo, and has made $16,000 in contributions to the Democratic State Committee.


Panthers' Fitzpatrick in Court Program
Florida Panthers goalie MARK FITZPATRICK, accused of battery against his pregnant wife, was placed yesterday in a program in Plantation City, Fla., that could result in the charge being dropped.
The pretrial intervention program is the equivalent of probation.
Attorneys in the case declined to discuss what the former Islander goalie will be required to do, but the program typically involves counseling and community service.
The case would return to court if Fitzpatrick violates terms of the program.
If he completes it, the charge will be dropped.


The Well-Heeled in Full Cry; In New Jersey, the Season of Hunters and Hounds Begins
First went the 40 hounds, then the 65 men, women and children on horseback and finally a dozen automobiles -- the spectators, many of them old fox hunters themselves.
By mid-morning on this opening meet of the Essex Fox Hounds hunt, conditions seemed splendid for most any human pursuit -- sunny and dry, leaves falling in a shimmering shower of gold and magenta.
But the aficionados here in Somerset County were not so sure.
"I'm afraid it's a no-scent day," William Read murmured at 10:24 as he squinted into a sun that was lifting higher in the cloudless sky.
"Too warm."


DSG International Ltd.  (DSGIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lillian Hayman, 72, Actress and Singer
Lillian Hayman, a Tony Award-winning actress and singer, died on Oct. 25 at her home in Hollis, N.Y.
She was 72.
The cause was a heart attack, said her sister, Coreania Carter.


Balancing the Books


Valentine, in a 'First,' to Manage in Japan
BOBBY VALENTINE became the first former major league manager to be hired to manage in Japan with the announcement yesterday that he signed with the Chiba Lotte Marines.
Valentine, who was dismissed by the Texas Rangers during the 1992 season after more than six years in the job, reportedly signed with the Marines for $1 million over three years.


Doig, Elliott Gets Mercedes Dealers Job
The Mercedes-Benz Dealers Association of Southern California has selected Doig, Elliott, Schur in New York as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated to exceed $5 million.
Ed McDonald, president of the 27-member dealer association in Ventura, Calif., confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek.
He said the agency was awarded the account after a monthlong review that also included Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., LCF&amp; L in New York and Stranger &amp; Associates in Los Angeles.
A campaign is expected to begin in January, he added.


Microsoft Organizes Its Interactive TV Team
While ambitious interactive television trials around the country are suffering delays, the Microsoft Corporation plans to announce eight new partners today in its pursuit of a strategy for deploying a set of interactive software technologies that extend from the local cable operator's offices to the consumer's living room, company executives said.
Microsoft's new partners are the Hewlett Packard Company, the network operators U S West Inc., the Telstra Corporation in Australia and Deutsche Telekom, the world's largest cable company, and systems integration companies including NTT Data, Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, Anderson Consulting and Alcatel Cable.
Hewlett Packard officials said yesterday that they would announce today a plan to make set-top boxes compatible with Microsoft's interactive television software.


Show Must Go On, Even in New Jersey
The 111th National Horse Show, the show that almost wasn't, will start on schedule today at the Meadowlands, the home it has finally accepted if not embraced four years after limping away from Manhattan with the greatest of debts and regrets.
"We've had a tentative situation since leaving New York, and it will never feel quite the same at the Meadowlands, but it would be terrible to just let the show go," said George Morris, the horseman who is a perennial director of the National.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Eastern European Traditions With a Fresh Look  Fashion Institute of Technology
Tumultuous cheers erupted at the close of a performance by the Tamburitzans on Saturday night at Haft Auditorium, a response that one might expect at a rock concert, but not at an evening of Eastern European folk dance and music.
But to spend time with this young group is to fall in love with it.


Jets' Backfield Reduced To the Young and the Lame
There are question marks galore about the Jets in just about every area, but none more than at running back.
A right hamstring injury to Johnny Johnson, the all-purpose back, and a slightly separated left shoulder to Anthony Johnson, his backup, limited the Jets to just 57 yards rushing, only 16 in the second half of the loss to Indianapolis on Sunday.


It's a Glitzy Goodbye to Jordan's No. 23
Michael Jordan didn't want to say goodbye because he's hoping to meet this city's sports fans again.
At Comiskey Park.
"In basketball, I fulfilled my dream," Jordan said after the Chicago Bulls retired his uniform jersey No. 23 here tonight at the new United Center.
"My dream now is to play in the major leagues."


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI REVERSES STAND ON DEBATES
Reversing his position that he would debate Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in a one-on-one session only, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, said he had agreed to a three-way debate with Mr.
Cuomo and B. Thomas Golisano, the Independence Fusion candidate.
A1.
A CUT-AND-SPEND DEMOCRAT STRUGGLES
Like President Clinton, William E. Curry Jr., the State Comptroller who is running for governor of Connecticut, is offering himself as a different sort of Democrat, a compassionate technocrat who will reshape government and expand services.
And Mr.
Curry appears to be having the same trouble the President has in convincing voters that government can take on new challenges.
A1.


Quorum Health Group Inc.(QHGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Bihac Area, Serbs Now Taste War, and It's Bitter
Serbian refugees huddling on the floor of an elementary school here today described scenes of arson, looting and terror during the advance by Bosnian Government forces out of the northwestern Bihac area last week in their most successful offensive of the war.
Nikola Zigic, who escaped on foot through the woods from the town of Ripac, southeast of Bihac, said the Bosnian Serb forces around Ripac abruptly turned and ran last Wednesday, leaving Serbian civilians to fend for themselves against the rampaging V Corps of the Muslim-led Bosnian Army.


Reliance Group Holdings Inc.(REL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an $80 million plan to restore a barrier island in the Hamptons referred incorrectly to two jetties to be shortened to allow a more natural flow of sand.
They are the westernmost of 15 jetties built by the Army Corps of Engineers, not the easternmost.


Oxford Health Plans Inc.(OXHP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scandals Put Russian Defense Chief on the Defensive
A series of corruption scandals has engulfed and disrupted Russia's previously sacrosanct military establishment, threatening the job of the Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev.
Tonight, President Boris N. Yeltsin dismissed a deputy defense minister, Gen.
Matvei P. Burlakov, who had commanded the Western Army Group, the ex-Soviet troops based in East Germany, and had been accused in the Russian press along with other Russian officers of the illegal sale of millions of dollars of Government property intended to be brought back to Russia.


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


America Can't Afford More Huddled Masses
To the Editor:
"Indecent Proposition in California" (editorial, Oct. 25) would have had a shred of credibility if you had any record in recognizing the negative impact immigration is having on cities and states.
In an era of sharp cutbacks in government services, and when entitlement programs soak up ever greater portions of government budgets, the net burden of high levels of immigration can no longer be supported.
The sentiments of Emma Lazarus's anthem -- to send us your huddled masses -- are simply no longer economically possible or desirable.
American incomes have been stagnant for the last 20 years.
The taxpaying population is in revolt and any new taxes to support transfer payments and new social programs are not politically feasible.
The impact of population growth on cities and states is demonstrable.
California estimates that the net cost of illegal immigration to the state's taxpayers is more than $3.5 billion.
In New York City, the school population has grown by more than 20 percent in the last three years, a phenomenon that is almost entirely immigration-driven.
While immigrants do contribute to the economy, their net impact is negative, especially if they cannot enter the more skilled professions.
As welfare reform becomes more urgent, the competition and friction between illegal immigrants and citizens who must integrate into the work force at lower skill levels will become more intense.
The country can no longer support the present legal immigration of 700,000 people annually, let alone illegal immigration levels that push total annual immigration into the millions.
Quality of life and environmental and economic realities dictate that even our current population of 260 million consumes too much of the earth's limited resources.
A halt to illegal immigration and a reduction of legal immigration are urgently needed.
If both can be accomplished, the natural birth rate of the United States will eventually reverse our population to more sustainable levels.
You place misty-eyed ideology before hard reality in attacking California's Proposition 187.
Some of its provisions may be unconstitutional, but its real import is that it is placing the question of out-of-control immigration policy squarely in the center of public discourse where it belongs.
JOHN V. HUMMER  New York, Oct. 26, 1994


Bond Prices Continuing To Retreat
Prices continued falling in the credit markets yesterday, as investors reacted to economic reports that showed rapid growth, portending future inflation.
Although analysts say that the probability that the Federal Reserve will move to raise short-term rates again before the Nov. 15 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee is fading, traders are still worried about how aggressive the central bank will be in raising rates to fight inflation this year.


Burnett Adds To Reebok Account
Reebok International Ltd. in Stoughton, Mass., said yesterday that it had consolidated the worldwide media services on its Reebok brand account at the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago by naming Burnett to handle the media planning and buying portions of the account in the United States.
Those duties on the account, with $80 million in billings, had been handled by DeWitt Media in New York for the last three years.
Burnett was awarded the creative portion of the account, as well as media duties outside the United States, in September 1993.


Old Republic International Corp.(ORI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crews Search a Muddy Field For Causes as Well as Bodies
After a night of cold rain and unanswered questions and prayers, the search for the dead and the reasons they died resumed today at first light across the muddy bean field where American Eagle Flight 4184 crashed on Monday.
Gov.
Evan Bayh flew over the field by helicopter and came back visibly shaken by the sight of the wreckage, some of it strewn a quarter of a mile from the point of impact, now a crater amid the tractor-wheel ruts.


Bernard Jolis; Refugee Worker, 79
Bernard Jolis, who helped find work for hundreds of political refugees in New York City as a volunteer over the last decade, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Don't Slash Budget for Mentally Retarded
To the Editor:
The sweeping reductions in New York City municipal services proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani may win praise from fiscal monitors, but in some cases are curious and in one case catastrophically imprudent.


CHRONICLE
The end of another movie star marriage: KELLY LEBROCK, the actress and model, filed for divorce from her husband of seven years, STEVEN SEAGAL, the martial-arts actor, on Monday in Superior Court in Los Angeles, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The couple, who separated on Oct. 1, have two daughters, Annalisa, 7, and Arissa, 1, and a son, Dominic, 7.
Ms.
LeBrock is seeking custody of the children.


Aon Corp.(AOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Art of the Rainy Day


America Can't Afford More Huddled Masses; Unworkable Proposal
To the Editor:
"Indecent Proposition in California" (editorial, Oct. 25) cites many good reasons for opposing the drive to bar illegal aliens from public services.
But your critique, focused like most others on policy issues, ignores the basic point that this whole discriminatory proposal is unrealistic, and should be rejected as unworkable.


Croats Appear Ready to Join Offensive by Bosnian Army
Commanders of Bosnian Croat militias appear to be readying troops and heavy artillery to join an advance by the Bosnian Army against a Serbian-held town in west central Bosnia, a United Nations official said.
The joint operation to capture the town, Kupres, would mark a new high point in the military alliance between the Muslim-led Bosnian Army and the Bosnian Croat militia just as Bosnian forces have made their most significant advances ever against the Serbs.
Bosnian Serbs still control about 70 percent of the country.


Class Notes
Very little is more in tune with popular fashion these days than the notion that private companies can provide public services -- from picking up garbage to educating children -- at higher quality and lower cost than public institutions.
Take the Edison Project, the high-profile, high-risk attempt of the media entrepreneur Christopher Whittle to revamp the nation's schools.
But if Edison's struggle to survive the collapse or sale of the rest of Mr.
Whittle's empire tells anything, it is that the prevailing "government bad, private enterprise good" formulation driving the nation's send-them-a-message politics can speak more to slogans than to solutions.


Trade Commission Is Investigating How Designers Set Fees for Models
WHEN the Council of Fashion Designers of America first consolidated the runway shows a year ago under the name Seventh on Six, they did so to generate publicity.
As the adage goes, Watch out for what you ask for, because you just might receive it.
A year after the council held discussions about trying to put a cap on model fees, the Federal Trade Commission has sent out letters to many designers to try to determine whether the meetings represented "unfair methods of competition," according to a letter sent to one house.


British Petroleum Co. (BP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Calvin S. Fuller, 92, Chemist; Was Co-inventor of Solar Cell
Calvin S. Fuller, a chemist who was a co-inventor of a device to convert solar energy into electricity, died on Friday at his home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 92.
He had been in poor health for several years, said Robert B. Ford, a media relations manager at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., where Dr.
Fuller worked for 37 years before retiring in 1967.


Chiquita Brands International (CQB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Talks Are Quiet, But Skates Are Sharp
No new talks were held or scheduled yesterday in the National Hockey League as the owner-ordered shutdown began its second month.
But several kettles continued to boil on the hot stove of an increasingly fragmented business.
In Toronto, the players' association announced rosters for a union-sponsored tournament, to be held next week, and prepared for a major membership meeting to be held there today.
Participants in the union games will include Glenn Healy of the Rangers; Ray Ferraro and Benoit Hogue of the Islanders, and Stephane Richer and Claude Lemieux of the Devils.


PATAKI REVERSES STAND ON DEBATE AS CUOMO DEMURS
Reversing his position that he would debate Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in a one-on-one session only, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, said yesterday that he had agreed to a three-way debate with Mr.
Cuomo and B. Thomas Golisano, the Independence Fusion candidate.
Mr.
Cuomo promptly declined to attend the Sunday afternoon debate on WNBC-TV, citing his longstanding insistence that he would attend debates only if all six gubernatorial candidates were invited.
Mr.
Golisano said he would attend if invited.


Nipsco Industries(NI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Killer Job Not Enough? Add a 2d, With Sweat
WHERE were you when the sun came up this morning?
Warm and cozy under the covers, happily oblivious to the bright orange streak rising on the eastern horizon?
To Nina L. Kurtz, such laziness is unthinkable.
Before dawn she was already at the New York Sports Club in the Cobble Hill section of Brooklyn, standing before a group of men and women who were huffing, puffing and sweating up a storm, eager to bend and jump and kick at her every command.


Out of State, Giuliani Shows Party Loyalty
A week after his dramatic stretch across party lines to support Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani bolstered his Republican credentials today by campaigning for the party's candidates in predominantly Italian neighborhoods of Boston and Rhode Island.
But everywhere he went, it was his endorsement of Mr.
Cuomo that lingered on people's minds.
At Joe Tecce's Ristorante in Boston, a longtime political haunt, the elderly Joe Tecce himself watched Mr.
Giuliani enter to stump for Ralph C. Martin 2d, the Suffolk County District Attorney.
"Best job you ever did to endorse Cuomo," said Mr.
Tecce, who went on to mangle the Mayor's name as Giuliano, as he predicted he would be New York's governor some day.


Flight Recorder Recovered From Debris of Crash


MBIA Inc.(MBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Wisconsin Services Inc.(UWZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Look at Jail Unit Housing Sex Offenders
A state legislative task force took an unusual tour here today, going behind the razor wire fences and thick concrete walls to view some of the most despised men in New Jersey's penal system, inmates being treated for sexual aberrations that they have not been able to control and that many will never be able to change.
They are the violent rapists and child molesters with compulsive disorders who are often driven to commit more crimes once in the outside world unless their behavior can be modified before their prison time runs out.


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Passes Test  Andre Agassi, who recalled his last appearance at the Paris Open as a "very painful" experience, made a successful return yesterday with a 6-4, 3-6, 6-2 victory over Jason Stoltenberg.
Faring far worse than the United States Open champion were No. 3-seeded Michael Stich and No. 5 Stefan Edberg, both second-round losers in the $2.25 million tournament.
Lionel Roux, a wild-card entry from France, upset Stich, 6-3, 6-4, and Petr Korda of the Czech Republic surprised Edberg, rallying for a 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 victory.
Agassi's only other appearance at the Paris Open was in 1992 when he lost to Brad Gilbert, now his coach. (AP)


Erstwhile Sitting Duck Nowadays Sitting Pretty
According to the anti-Washington gospel of the 1994 elections, Senator Conrad Burns ought to be a sitting duck.
Among the Republican incumbents, his seat once looked most vulnerable to a Democratic gain that could balance a loss somewhere else.
But so far, his hard work and rich campaign treasury seem to be carrying Mr.
Burns despite weaknesses that might cripple another candidate.


Smart &amp; Final Inc.(SMF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Corrections
A music review on Monday about a performance of "Cavalleria Rusticana" at the Metropolitan Opera on Friday misstated the relationship of two characters.
Turiddu is Santuzza's former lover, not her husband.


Mtolo Runs to Bring People Together
This is how Willie Mtolo's life has changed since he won the 1992 New York City Marathon: He was voted South Africa's sportsman of the year.
Six months ago, he was one of two athletes invited to the inauguration of President Nelson Mandela.
On Sunday, he will run New York again for victory, but at home he runs often for peace and unity.
He organizes charity runs for peace in the townships where blacks were restricted under the racial policies of apartheid, running with a white flag, encouraging whites to enter black neighborhoods, urging people to come together now that law no longer keeps them apart.


Up-and-Down Night Opens Fall Auctions
Neither low estimates nor heavy pre-sale marketing swayed the international group of buyers who packed Sotheby's salesroom in Manhattan last night.
Buyers did their homework before the contemporary-art auction, the first in a two-week round of important fall sales.
When price and quality found common ground, artworks sold, often with competitive bidding.
But when either of those ingredients was missing, the room went dead.
Of the 71 works up for sale, 43 found buyers.
The sale totaled $12.1 million, less than the low estimate of $14 million to $19 million.


Settlement Reached in Schools' Asbestos Case
Nearly all remaining litigation between school districts and building materials manufacturers over damage to school property from asbestos can be concluded if a Federal court in Philadelphia approves a $200 million settlement announced yesterday.
The agreement between lawyers representing thousands of school districts in the class action and the manufacturers, including the United States Gypsum Company, W. R. Grace &amp; Company and several smaller defendants, would leave just three defendants from more than 50 companies sued when the legal battle began in the early 1980's: Pfizer Inc., the United States Mineral Products Company and the Asbestos Products Manufacturing Corporation.


Questar Corp.(STR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.90
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
5.07
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.51
3.27
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.90
7.80
5.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.06
7.97
6.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.78
7.19
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.85
5.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
In Honor of Peter Warlock, Or Rather Philip Heseltine
Miller Theater
Gustav Mahler said his day would come, and it did; perhaps fate will be as kind to the English composer Peter Warlock, whose centenary was celebrated in a concert of songs and chamber pieces on Sunday evening.


Yanks Sign Bankhead to One-Year Pact
As the most active major league team during a dormant period, the Yankees yesterday signed the right-handed reliever SCOTT BANKHEAD to a one-year $500,000 contract that includes incentives that could double his salary.
Although there have been no games played since Aug. 11, the Yankees have methodically molded their roster since Sept. 22 by signing PAUL O'NEILL and Bankhead and exercising contract options on MIKE STANLEY, STEVE HOWE and KEVIN ELSTER.


Offer Is Made To Buy Mickelberry
Mickelberry Communications Inc., which owns three agencies including Partners &amp; Shevack in New York, said yesterday that James C. Marlas, its chairman, president and chief executive, had proposed to acquire, through a merger transaction, all the shares of its common stock that he does not already own for $3.25 a share.
Based on the number of shares outstanding, the deal would be worth about $9.94 million.


Merck and Swedish Concern Join
Astra A.B. of Sweden paid $820 million to Merck &amp; Company yesterday for a half-interest in a joint venture that will build on the explosive sales growth of Prilosec, the Swedish company's anti-ulcer drug.
The venture, called Astra Merck Inc., will sell Prilosec and other Astra products in the United States.
Astra Merck, based in Wayne, Pa., already has 500 salespeople marketing Astra products.
Analysts said the new company would have 1995 sales of $1.5 billion, including Prilosec and two Astra cardiovascular drugs, Plendil and Tonocard.


Flyers' Assistant Coach to Play in Minors
The Philadelphia Flyers' assistant coach, KEITH ACTON, has signed a 25-game tryout contract to play for the club's American Hockey League affiliate.
Acton, who retired last season after a 14-year National Hockey League career to join the Flyers' coaching staff, was to join the Hershey Bears yesterday and be available to play Friday at Adirondack.


When the Investors Came Second
Why is your pay so high, an elderly investor angrily asked Leonard G. Levine recently, when your real estate trust's misfortunes have cost so many people their life savings?
Mr.
Levine replied that the problems leading to the huge losses were caused not by his management but rather by the previous managers, according to people who witnessed the exchange at the trust's annual meeting last June.
Mr.
Levine added that his team at the Banyan Management Corporation was merely trying to salvage the investment.


Yankees Asking Fans To Pay Now, Pray Later
Successfully marketing a major league baseball team whose coming season is in limbo because of a strike is a difficult and delicate chore.
Trying to hawk tickets to games that might not be played or that might be contested with replacement players is a ticklish task.
The Yankees are attempting to accomplish this, though, by acting as if 1995 is just another season instead of one cloaked in uncertainty because of labor problems.


Dixie Yarns Inc.(DXYN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Excerpts From Candidates' Speeches in the Gingrich-Jones Race in Georgia
Following are excerpts from speeches by Representative Newt Gingrich, the House minority leader, who is seeking re-election in Georgia, and his Democratic challenger, Ben Jones, a former Representative.
They provide examples of the messages each candidate is delivering in his standard campaign speech.
Mr.
Gingrich spoke on Oct. 24 to a Kiwanis Club in Duluth, Ga., and Mr.
Jones spoke on Oct. 25 at Kennesaw State College in Cobb County, Ga.
The speeches were recorded for C-Span and transcribed by The New York Times.
NEWT GINGRICH
Now, let me be quite direct about this.
We have, I think, a crisis of the system at two levels.
One level is that we can't afford the current structure of Government unless we were to massively raise taxes and crush the private sector.
The other problem you have is the current structure of Government doesn't work.
So, you are paying too much for a system that's destructive.
The problem in Washington -- and those of you who might have seen Tim Russert go at me on "Meet the Press" will appreciate where we're at -- the problem in Washington is that they start with an assumption: this Government can't be changed.
Therefore, how do we get more out of the American people?
And they either get more out of the American people by not sending them back their own money -- cutting entitlements, cutting Social Security -- or we get more out of them by raising taxes.


Emerson Electric Co.  (EMR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heart Ills and High Cholesterol May Not Be Linked in Old Age
CHOLESTEROL levels, which so accurately predict risk of heart disease in middle-aged people, appear to have no such predictive value in the elderly, a new study has found.
The study, by investigators at Yale University, included 997 men and women 70 years old or older who were followed from 1988 until the end of 1992.
It is one of the very few studies of cholesterol to focus on people over 65, and in fact the average age of the study participants was 79.
The researchers report that although a third of the women and a sixth of the men had high cholesterol levels, these people did not have any more heart attacks during the study period than those whose cholesterol levels were normal or even low, nor were they more likely to die from heart disease or from any cause.


Indian Police Free 3 Britons Held Hostage
Indian police officers freed three British tourists today when they stormed the hideout of Kashmiri militants in a remote village in northern India.
An American was freed in a separate police raid on Monday.
The four tourists, held for two weeks, suffered no injuries in the police raids, but two policemen and a militant were killed in the pre-dawn shootout that freed the Britons.
The three Britons and Bela Joseph Nuss, the 43-year-old American freed in the earlier raid, had been threatened with beheading by the militants if the Indian Government refused the kidnappers' demands for the release of 10 Kashmiri militants held in Indian jails.


Insteel Industries (III,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Newsday Publisher Departs; Management Dispute Cited
The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that the publisher of Newsday had resigned "as a result of differences in business philosophy" with the company's senior management.
The move was surprising because it was evident that the publisher, Robert M. Johnson, 49, had not planned to leave the Long Island and New York City newspaper, and there had been no public signs of differences over business approach.


Eating Well
FAT-FREE Fig Newtons were one of the earliest entries in the healthy sweets segment of the cookie market.
From one perspective it is easy to understand why the Fig Newton was chosen for defatting: it holds a special place in the hearts of many Americans.
It is also easier to remove the fat from a product that contains a lot of fruit than from, say, a shortbread cookie that relies in great part on fat for its flavor.


Home Oil Co. (HO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mexican President Opposed at Speech


C-Cor Electronics
Shares of C-Cor Electronics, a maker of electronics equipment, showed a sharp gain last month after the company's first-quarter earnings almost doubled.
With a record backlog, C-Cor also expects to have a strong second quarter.


First Colony Corp.(FCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Playing 'Good Ol' Girl' Card Against Son of Ex-President
On this Sunday afternoon, the Cowboys are playing Cincinnati, and there's hardly a man in sight.
So Ann Richards gets down to some serious girl talk.
At a lunch with a couple of hundred black women, the Governor spots a friend who is wearing a bandage over a torn ligament and red high heels.


G.M. Asks U.S. to Drop Hearing on Truck Safety
In an unusual move, the General Motors Corporation has asked the Department of Transportation to call off a scheduled public hearing over the safety of millions of older pickup trucks made by G.M. and seek an immediate recall, a move that will cause a court confrontation.
The move is apparently an effort by General Motors, the nation's largest auto maker, to avoid more bad publicity about the trucks, which the department recently ruled were defective and fire prone, as well as to force the Government's recall effort into court, where some lawyers and consumer advocates believe the company may well prevail.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Battle of Women In a Yiddish Classic  Folksbiene Playhouse
Women rule the roost and battle one another over control of the men around them in Jacob Gordin's play "Mirele Efros," and the women in the cast absolutely dominate the stage in the performance of this Yiddish classic.


Impact of Court Ruling on Black Scholarships
Ten years ago Nicole West was exactly the kind of student for whom the Benjamin Banneker scholarship program at the University of Maryland was intended: black, bright, talented, and not even remotely interested in the university.
"I hadn't even thought about Maryland," said Ms.
West, who grew up in Silver Springs, Md., and wanted to study education.


Trimas Corp.(TMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kenetech Corp.(KWND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Cheap and Chic in Los Angeles
RIOTS, fires, earthquakes, recession.
This city has been pretty badly battered in the last couple of years.
Faced with the end of the halcyon 1980's, local restaurateurs went around moaning, lamenting the big-money days and wondering if the good times would ever come back.
But as catastrophe followed catastrophe something remarkable happened here: The most successful restaurateurs stopped looking backward and started facing reality.
If people were reluctant to spend money, they would simply charge less.
And do it with style.
This change of attitude has created a virtual restaurant revolution.
Many of the old favorites march on, but some have closed to be replaced by new and less expensive places.


AT THE GUGGENHEIM WITH: Doris Lessing; A Portrait Unwinds, As in Life
AS Doris Lessing strolls through the Guggenheim, she is drawn not so much to the modern Italian art, gadgets, furniture and fashions on exhibit as to the sleek railing that coils around the museum, the angles pointed just off the spiral's breaks.
She studies the circles and semicircles of the floor tiles.
"Everything's a little off center, so you feel sick," she says.
"There's something vertiginous about it."
With her own years winding down, Mrs.
Lessing has turned to perhaps the most dizzying perspective of all, the look back over the people, places, loves and sorrows that make up a life.
Her book, "Under My Skin: Volume 1 of My Autobiography, to 1949" (HarperCollins, $25), has just been released to coincide with her 75th birthday.
It takes her from a childhood in Persia and a hardscrabble farm in southern Rhodesia, through her romance with the Communist Party in the 1940's, three children and two failed marriages.
It ends with her arriving in London at age 30, carrying the son from her last marriage and her first book, "The Grass Is Singing," along with the expectation that real life would finally begin.


The Pop Life
Snoop Doggy Dogg
Snoop Doggy Dogg, the platinum-selling gangster rapper and defendant in a murder case, can now add film industry pariah to his list of accomplishments.
His record label, Death Row/Interscope, has been having a hard time finding a theater that will allow it to lease a screen for a public showing of "Murder Was the Case," an 18-minute film based on the Snoop Doggy Dogg song of the same name and directed by the music producer and rapper Dr.
Dre.
Snoop Doggy Dogg, whose real name is Calvin Broadus, says "Murder Was the Case" is not about the August 1993 shooting death of Philip Waldemariam in Los Angeles, for which he, McKinley Lee and Sean Smith are to be tried on Jan. 13.
Though the soundtrack for the short film went to No. 1 on the pop charts last week -- once again proving rap's appeal to audiences of all races and classes -- theater owners are worried about a repeat of the violence in some movie houses when "Boyz N the Hood" and "New Jack City" had their premieres, said an executive who is helping to distribute "Murder Was the Case" for Death Row/Interscope.


Companies Rush to Set Up Shop in Cyberspace
For thousands of businesses these days, the home page is where the heart is.
Each day, scores of new businesses, ranging from garage-based start-ups to multinational giants, are setting up shop on the global Internet computer network by creating a "home page" in the vast, interconnected electronic publishing medium known as the World Wide Web.


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.(MRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Is Suspected of Harassing Columbia University Professors
A man described as a brilliant student, who graduated from Dartmouth College 12 years ago with honors in philosophy, is undergoing psychiatric evaluation at Rikers Island after menacing and threatening professors at Columbia University and finally smashing two glass doors there on Oct. 12.
Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office, said the man, Daniel L. Price, 34, shattered the doors with a baseball bat a day after he had sent a threatening letter to the Palestinian scholar Edward Said, a professor at Columbia.
He had accused Professor Said and other prominent professors and writers of the "attempted soul murder of Daniel L. Price."


She's Got a Ticket to Brag, He's Got a 'Ticket to Ride'
ISAAC MIZRAHI'S mother was gushing.
"Excuse me for bragging, but he's such a genius!" said Sarah Mizrahi after her son's show on Tuesday afternoon, as editors like Paul Cavaco of Harper's Bazaar and retailers like Kal Ruttenstein of Bloomingdale's congratulated her.


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc.(CTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Report Faults C.I.A. For Ineptitude in Spy Case
The Central Intelligence Agency's nine-year hunt for Aldrich H. Ames, the convicted spy for Moscow, was led astray by the false scents of Soviet deception as well as the C.I.A.'s own ineptitude, a Senate committee said today.
In a damning 116-page report, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence offered a wealth of new details on the most devastating case of treachery in the intelligence agency's history.
It described a series of wrong turns, blind alleys and dead ends the investigation followed from 1985, when Mr.
Ames first sold secrets to the Soviet Union, until this February, when the C.I.A. career officer was arrested.


National Fuel Gas (NFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CNN Found in Contempt for Use of Noriega Tapes
A Federal district judge ruled today that CNN was in contempt of court four years ago when it broadcast taped telephone calls made from jail by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama.
In his decision, Judge William M. Hoeveler said that while he did not wish to interfere with the press and its First Amendment rights, "I must also be mindful of the vital importance of compliance with orders of the court."


Bringing the Voting Place to Students on 2 Rutgers Campuses
In the past, if Rutgers University students here wanted to vote, they had to leave campus to do it.
That could mean walking at least two miles to the nearest polling place, crossing busy highways and venturing into some of New Brunswick's grittier neighborhoods to cast a ballot.
But this year, for the first time, most students who live on the College Avenue and Douglass campuses will be able to vote there.
Students at the third Rutgers campus here, Cook College, will have to continue to make their way to off-campus polling places.


Cabot Corp.(CBT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marsalis Is Leaving 'Tonight' Show
Branford Marsalis, the band leader on NBC's "Tonight" show, will begin an indefinite leave of absence after Jan. 1, a spokeswoman for the show said yesterday.
The spokeswoman, Jennifer Barnett, said that the reasons were "personal and family related" and that Mr.
Marsalis would return to the show, though there was no timetable for him to do so.


CHRONICLE
When LUCIANO PAVAROTTI received a five-minute ovation on Monday night after the third-act aria in "Tosca" at the Metropolitan Opera, JAMES LEVINE, the conductor and artistic director, was struck with inspiration: why not do an encore?
Never mind that encores are never done at the Met.
Mr.
Levine signaled the orchestra to repeat "E lucevan le stelle."


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


More Than 70 Concerns Seek Wireless Licenses
More than 70 companies, from giants like AT&amp;T and Sprint to a new venture formed by the cellular-phone pioneer Craig O. McCaw, have announced their intention to bid next month in auctions for radio licenses to provide wireless telephone service.
The intensity of interest in new licenses became clear today when the Federal Communications Commission released a list of every company intending to bid in the first round, starting on Dec. 5.
Each potential bidder had to disclose its intentions by last Friday, though the details were not known until today.


America Can't Afford More Huddled Masses; Enforce Current Laws
To the Editor:
What you said in "Indecent Proposition in California" (editorial, Oct. 25) is one of the reasons there is such a proposition and that it's going to pass overwhelmingly.


Ruth Fizdale, 86, Leader in Social Work, Is Dead
Ruth Fizdale, who helped to make modern social work a profession, died on Sunday at the Jewish Home and Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 86 and a resident of Patterson, N.Y.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, according to the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, where she was an adjunct professor emeritus in community medicine.


Plight of Squatters Merits No Sympathy
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 26 front-page article on New York City's decision to reclaim buildings taken over by squatters calls for comment.
As a community activist and longtime resident of the East Village, I cannot accept your sympathetic portrayal of the squatters.


Market Place; New contenders for greatness in the world of solid-waste disposal.
THE two titans of trash have been displaced.
Although the expanding economy means more trash and more business for those companies that collect, haul, dispose of and, increasingly, recycle it, analysts are now favoring the second tier of solid-waste companies.


Legal Maybe, but Wrong
The Federal appeals court decision reversing the mail-fraud conviction of Armand D'Amato, the brother of Senator Alfonse D'Amato, shows that not all ethics breaches constitute a crime.
But the ruling should not be accepted as an endorsement of sneering at the public trust.
Armand D'Amato, a Long Island lawyer, admittedly persuaded the Senator's office to send letters lobbying the Navy on behalf of a military contractor and D'Amato client, the Unisys Corporation.
Mailed out over the Senator's signature, the letters were actually written by Unisys employees.


Olsten Corp.(OLS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Russian Rightist Granted U.S. Visa
The State Department granted a visa today to Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the leader of Russian ultranationalists, who is scheduled to speak in San Francisco next Monday to several hundred foreign policy specialists.
"Our decision to issue Mr. Zhirinovsky a visa neither endorses his views nor supports his ambitions," said David Johnson, a State Department spokesman.
"The United States Government finds his views anathema."


Ornda Healthcorp (ORND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Governor and a Bush Offer Sharp Contrasts
In their last debate before an election for governor that polls showed was a virtual deadlock, Gov.
Lawton Chiles, the incumbent Democrat, and his Republican challenger, Jeb Bush, said tonight that they were offering voters a choice between experience and change, and "powerful ideas."
Though the sparring began with the personal attacks that characterized the last weeks of the campaign, both candidates also offered contrasting approaches to issues like crime and education.
Mr.
Bush said he stood for "powerful" ideas, like making prisoners serve a minimum of 85 percent of their sentences and limiting the appeals that death row inmates can make.


Arnold Industries Inc.(AIND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; The None's Story
There are many riveting things about traveling around this great nation of ours on the cusp of a major election.
Not the least of them is the ability to see political advertising designed chiefly to appeal to the stupid and mean-spirited in state after state, interchangeable and unimaginative as the decor of the hotel rooms.
But it is also possible to hold your finger to the wind and discern the prevailing ethos.
And this year, in many places, that ethos has clearly been None of the Above.


Daka International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Shostakovich's 15 String Quartets Form a Thread
Perhaps it is only natural that classical music listeners regard certain works by certain composers through a bifocal lens, taking account of both the near and distant perspective.
Completists at heart, we apprehend individual pieces as interconnected parts of a larger whole.
But inherently suspicious of the mysticism that sustains such a view, we earnestly hold onto a real-world perspective: that the works are also snapshots of distinct emotional states.
Naturally, certain conditions are required before this split focus takes effect.
The composer must be heroic in the best Romantic sense, a warrior who battles inhuman powers and whose spirit survives blows that would crush lesser mortals.
And however else they might be interpreted, the works must seem to chronicle this lifelong war.
They must also make a reasonably concise set: Beethoven's nine symphonies work this way; Haydn's 104 (or so) do not.


Richards Draws Perot's Backing In Tough Texas Governor's Race
Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who entered national politics to unseat President George Bush two years ago, jumped into the Texas gubernatorial campaign today to endorse Gov.
Ann W. Richards over Mr.
Bush's son, George W. Bush.
Calling her "smart, tough and principled," Mr.
Perot sought to portray Ms.
Richards, a central figure in the Democratic Party and an ally of President Clinton's, as somehow independent of both and close to himself ideologically.


For Families, Night of Helpless Grief
Halloween was an evening of helpless grief for the families of those killed in the crash of American Eagle Flight 4184, mourning the sudden loss of loved ones while neighborhood children rang the doorbell over and over, cheerfully demanding trick-or-treats.
News of the crash came differently to each family, and for each it was a different kind of nightmare.
Many family members interviewed yesterday seemed dazed by the crash and the sudden onslaught of relatives, friends, media calls and television crews gathered both inside and outside their homes.
Several had chosen friends or relatives to handle all calls so that they could have a modicum of peace in which to come to terms with the loss.


Loews Corp.(LTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York State Fines Travelers Unit $500,000
An insurance subsidiary of Travelers has been fined $500,000 by the New York State Insurance Department for violating training and licensing rules for its agents and using misleading sales materials.
The fine against the subsidiary, the National Benefit Life Insurance Company, is expected to be formally announced this week.
It is the second largest penalty ever charged against a life insurance company by New York regulators.


Valhi Inc.(VHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kinetic Concepts Inc.(KNCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alfred Strasburger Jr., 75, Schenley Official
Alfred Strasburger Jr., a retired executive of Schenley Industries, the beverages company, died on Monday at California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 75 and had lived in San Francisco since 1974.
He had a blood ailment and had been in failing health, said his wife, Gloria.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Don Buford assistant director of player development.
Signed Gary Nickels, scouting director, to a four-year contract extension through 1998, and Fred Uhlman Jr., assistant scouting director, to a two-year contract.


The Flavors of Earlier Eras
MANY of this fall's best new cookbooks seek to recapture earlier eras.
To reinforce the memories, some have grainy black and white photos that look as if they were peeled from family albums.
BITTER ALMONDS -- RECOLLECTIONS AND RECIPES FROM A SICILIAN GIRLHOOD by Maria Grammatico and Mary Taylor Simeti (Morrow, $20) is the poignant story of a Sicilian woman.
As a child just after World War II, she was sent by her impoverished, widowed mother to live in San Carlo, a convent in the hill town of Erice, known for its confections.
Maria Grammatico's tale, captured in a lively conversational tone by Mary Taylor Simeti, is astonishing for its account of an often joyless, rigid existence -- of peeling almonds and beating sugar mixtures for six hours at a time, of awakening before dawn to prime the ovens and of eating gruel that Oliver Twist might have refused.
But the experience led Mrs.
Grammatico to open a pastry shop in Erice, where many of the historic almond and marzipan recipes of the region are still made.
The book includes 100 recipes.


Two Lottery Winners Keep Their Secret
How's this for a scenario?
There's a woman in Queens who works in a hospital and has one of those four winning tickets in last Saturday's $72.5 million Lotto jackpot.


Bio-Rad Labs (BIO.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Syracuse Can't Scare Miami's Star Tackle
The Syracuse option offense comes into Saturday's game at the Carrier Dome against Miami with a 32.7-point scoring average, 15th best among Division I-A teams.
But don't expect Hurricane defensive tackle Warren Sapp to be impressed on the eve of this contest for Big East Conference supremacy.
"The option is not something that strikes fear in us," Sapp said today.
"If you're going to run the ball, bring it on. That's what I say."


Court Rules That Conspiring About Drugs Can Be Crime
Issuing its first opinion of the term, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that conspiring to commit a narcotics crime can be a violation of Federal law even if the conspiracy is never carried out.
The decision, in an opinion by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, was not surprising since it reversed the one Federal appeals court that had differed on the issue from the 11 other Federal appellate circuits.


Review/Fashion; Cocktails, Anyone? Clothes That Strut
FOR anyone in the audience who didn't speak fashionese, Isaac Mizrahi graciously used supertitles, like those in opera houses, to project the libretto of this season.
Red letters chasing across an electronic sign above the runway proclaimed: SMOKING IS PERMITTED BUT FLATS AREN'T .


Computer Sciences Corp.(CSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Food Notes
The Marathon Meal . . .
Marathoners who compete in New York City's annual run traditionally fuel up with high-octane pasta the night before, many at the big pasta supper at Tavern on the Green in Central Park.
This year, Creamette Pasta, the official pasta of the event, is footing the bill for the party.
As for which pasta dishes to serve, that question was left to New York area consumers to answer in a pasta recipe contest this summer.


Trenton's Investigative Agency May Expire
This is shaping up as a bad year for independent investigative agencies.
The Pennsylvania Crime Commission went out of business at the end of June after 25 years of shining a spotlight on organized crime and racketeering.
Now the New Jersey State Commission of Investigation is nearing a Dec. 31 expiration date without a warm word from the Whitman administration.


Defense Blames Mental Trauma For a Shooting
The Lebanese immigrant charged with killing one Hasidic student and wounding three others in a shooting attack on the Brooklyn Bridge suffered from a post-traumatic shock shared by many Arab victims of Mideast warfare and was thus not mentally responsible, his lawyer contended yesterday at the opening of his murder trial.
"He had no more control than a fire knows why it's burning," Eric M. Sears, the lawyer for the defendant, Rashid Baz, said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
"Eighteen years in Beirut left scars on his personality."


Ghana I.M.F. Program Drains the Country
To the Editor:
"Once-Leftist Ghana Bets on a Free-Market Future" (news article, Oct. 23) portrays an "economic rebirth" of Ghana on the basis of a "tiny but booming" stock market, the impending arrival of the Coca-Cola Company, the return of expatriate Ghanaians, prosperity evident in new construction and shops filled with goods.
The appearance of prosperity is brought about by the International Monetary Fund's structural program at the expense of the well-being of Ghana and its people.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Race for Governor: Cuomo Labels Pataki as Radical
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo (paid for by the New York State Democratic Committee) PRODUCER Axelrod &amp; Associates, Chicago and Washington ON THE SCREEN Black-and-white scenes of State Senator George E. Pataki, Pat Robertson and a newspaper headline reading "George is 100 percent 'right' according to Pat Robertson," then of assault weapons laid out together, as white letters on black background come zooming into view to highlight parts of script over ominous music.
SCRIPT Announcer: "The more you learn about George Pataki's friends, the more you wonder. As a State Senator, Pataki won the top rating from Pat Robertson's radical coalition, which preaches a ban on abortion and wants creationism taught in our schools. And now, the National Rifle Association's endorsed Pataki, who's opposed tougher gun laws, like the ban on assault weapons. The N.R.A., Pat Robertson and the radical right. If George Pataki's their man, can he really be ours?" ACCURACY In 1993, Mr.
Pataki did receive a 100 percent rating from the Christian Coalition, based on four votes: Medicaid funding for abortions, a bill that finances the Medicaid program through aid to local governments, the section of the budget that provided for postponing scheduled tax cuts and a bill on child pornography.
This year, his rating was 83 percent.
Mr.
Pataki supports abortion rights, though he has voted consistently for restrictions.
He says he supports a ban on assault weapons, but in April he voted against an amendment to a gun-licensing bill that included sharp restrictions on a number of assault weapons.
At first, he denied the vote, then said it was procedural and now says it was a partisan vote with the Republican majority on a measure that did not go far enough.
SCORECARD This is one of the harshest ads of the race, produced and paid for by the State Democratic Committee in part because the Governor's media adviser, David Garth, has opposed making such attacks.
But for weeks now, Mr.
Cuomo has sought to define Mr.
Pataki as out of step with a state that retains a strong plurality of Democratic voters likely to reject a strongly conservative candidate, and polls suggest the Governor's attacks have been working.
The risk is that the imputed link between Mr.
Pataki and the Christian right is tenuous, and voters may be put off by the tough tone.
TODD S. PURDUM


American Management Systems (AMSY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nabisco Says a Food Unit Could Avoid Tobacco Woes
Executives of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation tried to reassure stock analysts yesterday that the company's $1 billion plan to begin separating its food operations and tobacco business, announced Monday, would provide new shareholders adequate protection from tobacco liability.
The company executives held a regularly scheduled meeting to discuss quarterly results with more than 100 tobacco and food analysts yesterday afternoon in Manhattan.
According to several people who attended, the executives said they were confident that the company could withstand any liability claims.
The meeting in the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan was barred to reporters.


Paul Revere Corp.(PRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Socks Can't Be Mistaken for a Dog Now
On the World Wide Web, everyone knows you're a cat.
At least they do if you're Socks the cat, and you have your photograph and your voice encoded into the White House's new data base on the World Wide Web, the fastest-growing publishing medium on the global Internet.


Variation on Hash: No Meat
WHEN you start to hear ads on the radio for vegetarian burgers, you know the worm has turned.
So a hash recipe without meat should not be such a shock.
Black beans have replaced the corned beef, ground beef and turkey, and many people will actually be delighted, especially after they have tasted the nicely browned onions and potatoes.
If you don't tell your meat eaters that this dish contains no meat, they probably won't notice.


In America; Mugging Carl McCall
They stood smiling on the steps of City Hall, 50 or 60 of them, men and women of myriad ethnic and religious persuasions, with the early afternoon sunlight spilling directly into their faces.
It could have been a group portrait of New York, loosely framed by the exit ramps of the Brooklyn Bridge on one side and the elegance of the old Woolworth Building on the other.
This was on Monday, Halloween.
The weather was unseasonably warm and the gathering had the flavor of a family reunion, with old slights and feuds put aside in favor of comments about thinning hair and expanding girth and funny stories about days and dreams gone by.


Wisdom at West Point
Two days before West Point's Oct. 22 football game with The Citadel, 600 West Point cadets rallied for a so-called "spirit run" past a line of Army team members.
Cheers were shouted, backs were slapped -- and the breasts of 18 of the 51 female cadets were groped.
Another Tailhook?
No, partly because the run involved a cordon of excited college students, not a gantlet of drunken adult louts, and mostly because West Point was very quick (within 24 hours of the "run") to investigate the incident and contemplate appropriate measures.
That is a lot more than the Navy has ever been able to boast about its response to Tailhook '91.


NWNL Cos.(NWN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soldiers at Raided Israeli Post in Lebanon Criticized by Rabin
In an unusual attack on his own armed forces, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon had shown themselves to be failures during a weekend battle against guerrillas from the pro-Iranian Party of God.
Mr.
Rabin's remarks were the harshest by a senior official in the acrid national debate that has followed fighting on Saturday in which an Israeli soldier was killed near the Lebanese village of Dabshe.


Giants' Davis Itching To Get a Starting Berth
If Lance Smith cannot play right guard for the Giants Monday night against the Dallas Cowboys, Scott Davis will replace him again.
Which is fine with Davis, who is tired of sitting.
"Not starting really stinks," he said the other day.
"There's nothing worse than busting your tail all week and not playing. For two years, that's probably my biggest complaint. Practice isn't fun. Sunday is a chance to get relief.


Rwandans Divided on War-Crimes Plan
Leaders of the Rwandan Government agree that an international tribunal to prosecute former leaders for genocide should have the authority to impose the death penalty, but they are divided over whether to reject a tribunal, under consideration by the United Nations, that lacks such power, Government officials say.
In a debate within the Cabinet, the Prime Minister and the Justice Minister say the Government should accept a tribunal even without this power.
Gen.
Paul Kagame, who commanded the victorious rebel army and who is now Vice President and Defense Minister, insists the death penalty is necessary.


PSI Resources (PIN,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Free-Throw Lessons for Milwaukee Bucks
Milwaukee Bucks Coach MIKE DUNLEAVY called in a foul-shooting consultant Monday to help his players work on a glaring deficiency.
ANDY ENFIELD, the leading free-throw shooter in N.C.A.A. history at 92.5 percent, worked with the Bucks on technique.
"The whole key that I teach is to shoot the ball correctly the same way every time," said Enfield, who made 431 of 466 free throws for N.C.A.A.
Division III Johns Hopkins from 1988 to 1991.
The Bucks made only 61.6 percent of their free throws in going 2-6 during the preseason.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Two economic reports revived fears of accelerating inflation.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said its index rose sharply, while the Commerce Department said construction spending surged 1.6 percent in September.  [ Page D1. ]


Southdown Inc.(SDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRIDGESTONE METALPHA CORP., Tokyo, a subsidiary of Bridgestone Corp., Tokyo, a tire manufacturing and sales concern, will build a steel cord plant in Clarkesville, Tenn., at an estimated cost of $130 million.
The plant will begin production in 1997.
MOTOROLA INC., Schaumburg, Ill., increased its quarterly dividend on common stock for the second time in 12 months, to 10 cents a share from 7 cents a share.
The dividend is payable on Jan. 16 to shareholders of record on Dec. 15.
PECO ENERGY CO., Philadelphia, signed a contract valued at $450 million for Integrated Systems Solutions Corp., a unit of I.B.M., to handle its information systems functions for 10 years.


Reds' Hanson Becomes a Free Agent
Pitcher ERIK HANSON, whose bid to become a free agent was rejected by owners last month, became a free agent anyway yesterday.
Hanson, who was short of the required six years of major league service in the view of the clubs, refused the Cincinnati Reds' outright assignment to Indianapolis of the Class AAA American Association and thereby gained the right to become a free agent.


Transatlantic Holdings Inc.(TRH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks Decline on Interest Rate Concerns
For a second day, the stock market fell on concerns over interest rates.
"Yesterday was a reality check and underscored the fact that inflation is strong and the economy is still building," said John H. Shaughnessy, senior vice president of Advest Inc.
"The Federal Reserve might have to be more aggressive in raising interest rates at its meeting on Nov. 15, maybe by more than a half of a percentage point."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $202.5 million of notes due in 1996 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are priced at par to yield 6.95 percent.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Orchestra in High Gear At Close Range on Small Stage  Kaye Playhouse
Shoehorning a full symphony orchestra onto the stage of the Kaye Playhouse is a difficult trick.
The players look uncomfortably crowded, and given the hall's capacity -- 664 seats, or about seven listeners for each player -- the exercise cannot be economically viable.
Still, the performance by the Slovak Philharmonic Orchestra on Monday night drew a nearly full house.
And there was something thrilling about listening at close range to an orchestra in high gear.


Open for Business Again


Wine Talk
CHAUFFE-EAU," said Hugh Johnson. Chauffe-Eau?
"Have to try it," Mr.
Johnson said, signaling a waiter at Aureole, a Manhattan restaurant.


Excel Industries Inc.(EXC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Personal Health; Sorrow's web: Depressed mother and difficult child.
THE 10-month-old boy was brought to Dr.
Morris Green because his mother thought he might be retarded.
He made very few baby noises and seemed apathetic and unresponsive.
But even before examining the baby, the pediatrician noticed something unusual about his mother.
"She looked very sad, sighed occasionally, did not interact playfully with her son and kept her gaze downward," Dr.
Green recalled in an article in Contemporary Pediatrics.
The baby, too, was very sober and ignored the doctor's friendly smile.
When the infant was offered a colorful cube, rather than grasping it as a child that age normally would, he touched it gingerly, as if it were very hot.


Maurice B. Stein, 58, Who Ran Camp Echo Lake for 30 Years
Maurice B. Stein, owner of a well-known summer camp in upstate New York, died on Monday in the crash of an American Eagle commuter plane near Roselawn, Ind.
He was 58.
For 30 years, Mr.
Stein and his wife, the former Amy Medine, operated Camp Echo Lake, five miles northwest of Lake George in Warrensburg, N.Y.
At his death, Mr.
Stein, known as Morry, was en route to his home in Hartsdale, N.Y., after working on a fund-raising program for underprivileged children at the headquarters of the American Camping Association in Martinsville, Ind., his son Tony said.
Mr.
Stein, a stalwart of the camping industry, was a former president of the American Camping Association and its New York section as well as a former president of the New York State Camp Directors Association.
He was 28 years old when he bought Camp Echo Lake from his wife's parents, who founded it in 1946.
Under Maurice and Amy Stein, the camp expanded to 150 acres and its enrollment grew from 80 campers to about 450, boys and girls ages 8 to 17.
Mr.
Stein also founded the Echo Lake Idea, a scholarship program that for 25 years has been bringing 40 or 50 underprivileged city children from around the state to the camp for a fully paid week's vacation at the end of August.
Mr.
Stein, a native of Bloomsburg, Pa., was a 1958 graduate of Brandeis University.
He received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago in 1960 and worked for several years in business before buying Camp Echo Lake in 1964.
In addition to his wife and son Tony, who lives in Manhattan, Mr.
Stein is survived by his sons George, of Manhattan, and Eric, of Hartsdale.


Political Choices in Connecticut; For the Senate and House
Senator Joseph Lieberman is a career politician.
Congress would be a better place if more of his veteran colleagues were as good.
In only one term he has influenced the course of Federal legislation for the benefit of Connecticut and the nation.
We support his re-election.
He offers a wealth of state and Federal experience -- nearly half his 52 years -- and an ample record of accomplishment.
His challenger, the Republican Gerald Labriola, is a 65-year-old physician who served one term in the State Senate and has run for statewide office before, a caring man but light on public policy.


Richard Charles Bollig; Musician, 51
Richard Charles Bollig, a dance accompanist and choral singer, died on Oct. 6 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 51.
The cause was AIDS, said Susan Paul, a friend.


Department 56 Inc.(DFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Time Takes Its Toll on Tolls


General Re Corp.(GRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L Lockout Adds a Chill To Fall in Western Canada
In conversations about hockey, the passion for the sport among Western Canadians doesn't stop with words.
David Maynard, an 18-year-old from Manitoba, recently introduced himself to a group of people in the club car of a westbound train by pulling up his shirt to reveal a red tattoo near his heart.
It was the logo of the Montreal Canadiens: C-H, for Club de Hockey Canadien.
"It's a thing in my family; we've all got one," said Maynard.
"My dad has one. My uncles have one. My brother has one. It's something we do on our 18th birthday."


Executive Changes
FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Cincinnati, named James E. Gray, president of Federated's business division, president and chief operating officer of Macy's East when the merger of Federated and R. H. Macy &amp; Co. takes effect.
SARA LEE CORP., Chicago, named Judith A. Sprieser senior vice president and chief financial officer.
She had been president and chief executive of the Sara Lee Bakery North America subsidiary.
She succeeds Michael E. Murphy, who will continue as vice chairman and chief administrative officer.
Steven P. Stanbrook was named to succeed Ms.
Sprieser.


In the Hearts and Minds of Men Who Love Men
The title of Terrence McNally's new play, "Love! Valour! Compassion!," is an accurate but incomplete description of its contents.
There's no mention of the abundant humor or the terrible sadness.
In this deeply affecting work, however, they are inextricably entwined: the love, the gallantry, the courage, the outrageous repartee and the abiding melancholy it wants to dispel.
Although the theatrical landscape has just begun to take shape this season, Mr.
McNally's drama, which opened last night at the Manhattan Theater Club, already qualifies as a high point.


Riley Says Oakley Deserves Big Pact
When he was told today that Charles Oakley was expected to sign his long-sought contract extension, perhaps as soon as Wednesday, Pat Riley had a quick response.
"He's very deserving," said the Knicks' coach.
"Oak is one of those guys who fits what I call the philosophy of deposits and returns. He has deposited so much in that he has the right to withdraw. That's the way it is. You know, and we know, the guys that have put it all in. When it comes their way, they're deserving."


An Ill Wind in Baltimore


Attention, Attention: Anyone There? Hello?
They have two All-Stars and more than 20 tattoos.
They may last only through one round of the playoffs, but they are always good for a few dozen off-season controversies.
The Nets crave your attention, they really do.
They will do almost anything to divert one millisecond of the time you spend thinking about the Knicks, because they know that is all you do.
This season, they are banking hard on the sympathy angle.


FFP Partners LP (FFP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Government Technology Services Inc.(GTSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles and the Children


INSIDE
Cholesterol and the Elderly
A Yale University study finds that high cholesterol is not an accurate predictor of heart disease among those over 70.
Health, page C12.
N.A.A.C.P. Is Out of Money
Its cash reserves depleted and contributions drying up, the civil rights organization stopped paying most of its professional staff.
Page A14.


Political Choices in Connecticut; Bill Curry for Governor
The personal income tax that Gov.
Lowell Weicker pounded through the Connecticut Legislature corrected a longstanding inequity in the state's revenue system.
Both John Rowland, the Republican candidate to succeed Mr.
Weicker, and Tom Scott, an independent, want to repeal it.
On that issue alone, both men disqualify themselves for the governorship.
The Democratic candidate, Comptroller Bill Curry, proposes an additional step toward tax fairness, a $1 billion cut in property taxes.
Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice Groark, the candidate of Mr.
Weicker's A Connecticut Party, is alone in not dangling tax-cut promises, one reason that she now places a weak third in the polls.


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italy Detains 2 in Highway Killing of U.S. Boy, 7
After a 34-day hunt, the police in southern Italy announced today that they had arrested two men in connection with the killing of Nicholas Green, a 7-year-old American boy who died when highway robbers opened fire on his family's rental car in September.
Police officials identified the men as Francesco Mesiano, 21, and Michele Iannello, 26.
The officials said they were thought to be petty criminals rather than members of the 'Ndrangheta organized crime syndicate that flourishes in the Calabria area where Nicholas was killed.


Pacific Enterprises (PET,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Papers Diagram Mob's Grip on a Union
There was the medical exam union members were urged to take that was supposedly a "result of the fantastic advances in the world of medical research," but was actually part of a fraud, costing many times what a normal physical exam would cost.
There were real-estate deals, one of which involved a building worth about $5 million that was sold to a union pension fund for $24 million.


Race for Governor: Pataki Says Cuomo Is Buying Election
CANDIDATE: George E. Pataki PRODUCER: Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Sacramento, Calif., and Alexandria, Va.
VISUAL: Photographs of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Shoreham nuclear plant, plus newspaper headlines and highlights of the script over ominous music.
Ends with photograph of Mr.
Cuomo scratching his head.
Politicians of many stripes and the financial markets greeted the idea skeptically.
Mr.
Cuomo contends a takeover would lead to lower electric rates, by eliminating shareholder dividends and Federal taxes the utility now pays.
Mayor Giuliani's proposed budget modification, announced a day after his endorsement of the Governor, does depend on $150 million in new aid from Albany, although he and Mr.
Cuomo insist they never discussed any deal, and no governor can deliver much in the way of state aid without the cooperation of the Legislature.
Mr.
Cuomo has proposed no tax increases.
SCORECARD: Mr.
Pataki is vulnerable to the charge -- by Mr.
Giuliani and other local officials -- that his proposed state income tax cuts would force higher local taxes.
This ad tries to turn that attack around, arguing that Mr.
Cuomo is the taxer who is pitting different parts of the state against each other.
In making that claim, of course, Mr.
Pataki seeks to divide the state further, and energize his base in the upstate areas that have provided a growing share of the electorate.
The ad's anti-tax message could hit home, as does its suggestion that the Lilco plan is an election-year gambit.
But its conspiracy theory may strike voters as hard to believe, and it does nothing to sketch in Mr.
Pataki's own personality or ideas.
TODD S. PURDUM


White House Needs More Bulletproof Windows
To the Editor:
Having been trained in dignitary protection by the United States Secret Service, I have the greatest respect for those men and women on the Presidential Protection Detail who place themselves in harm's way to keep the First Family safe.
But after the armed assault on the White House (front page, Oct. 30), there are unanswered questions about security at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.


Ply Gem Industries(PGI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


CHRONICLE
In Rio de Janeiro, crowds of people are paying tribute to Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis by going to see an exhibition of her clothes -- or at least copies of her clothes.
The show, at the Palace of the City, opened last month and continues through Nov. 20.
It was organized by HILDEGARD ANGEL, a fashion promoter and society columnist for O Globo, a daily newspaper.


American Annuity Group Inc.(AAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For $39.50, a License To Love Dodgers of Old
WHO would have thought that the people at the Department of Motor Vehicles could teach us about loyalty and honor by bringing up our unredeemed shame on a new license plate?
Maybe they got the idea from our northern neighbors in Quebec, whose own license plates declare "Je me souviens," which in English means, "I remember." What the Quebecers remember is their defeat on the Plains of Abraham, where in 1759, Wolfe beat Montcalm and established British rule in Canada.


A.L. Pharma Inc.(ALO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jerome Stenbuck, Finance Adviser, 70
Jerome Stenbuck, chairman of the Stenbuck Company, a Manhattan concern specializing in financial public relations and financial transactions, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Mr.
Stenbuck, who lived in Manhattan, was 70.
The cause of death was cancer, said his sister, Nancy Rosenfield of Manhattan.


Colombia Tries To Renew Ban On Drug Usage
The Colombian Government announced today that it would submit legislation to Congress that would modify the Constitution to forbid drug consumption, which was legalized by a high court last May.
Vice President Humberto de la Calle said the Government had decided to back away from its original proposal to hold a nationwide referendum on decriminalization of drug use because of the high costs of conducting the vote and because a referendum might be interpreted as a form of contempt for the court's ruling.


Political Choices in Connecticut; For the Senate and House
Senator Joseph Lieberman is a career politician.
Congress would be a better place if more of his veteran colleagues were as good.
In only one term he has influenced the course of Federal legislation for the benefit of Connecticut and the nation.
We support his re-election.
He offers a wealth of state and Federal experience -- nearly half his 52 years -- and an ample record of accomplishment.
His challenger, the Republican Gerald Labriola, is a 65-year-old physician who served one term in the State Senate and has run for statewide office before, a caring man but light on public policy.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Vienna Symphony Offers A Viennese Halloween  Carnegie Hall
Carnegie Hall went Viennese on Halloween.
The Vienna Symphony played works of Webern, Beethoven and Brahms, composers Viennese by birth or adoption; the soloist in Beethoven's First Piano Concerto was the thoroughly Austrian pianist Rudolf Buchbinder.
Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos, the Vienna Symphony's director, is, granted, part German and part Spanish, but he has long been at home in the Central European scene.


In Sea of Aid, Rwandans Lack Basics
The Justice Minister sits in his fifth-floor office surrounded by debris.
Virtually every window in the front of the building is shattered; offices are barren.
Some 150 people worked in this building before the civil war; today, there are 27.
The Justice Minister, Alphonse Nkubito, cannot pay them their salaries, let alone think about trying to hire more.


76ers Derail Donaldson's Comeback Bid
JAMES DONALDSON, a 14-year veteran with six different franchises, was among the final cuts made yesterday by the Philadelphia 76ers.


Flight Recorders Found At Indiana Crash Scene
Investigators found the data and voice recorders from the American Eagle commuter plane that crashed here on Monday while in a holding pattern on its way to O'Hare International Airport, but they would not say what information the recorders contained and said they had not yet ruled out any cause for the crash.
Investigators spent the day combing a muddy soybean field here, about 60 miles from the intended destination of American Eagle Flight 4184, examining the wreckage and tagging body parts.
All 68 people on board died.


CNA Financial (CNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Some Luxury for a Change of Pace
NEW restaurants have their charms, but I never visit Los Angeles without treating myself to a meal at Valentino, a venerable restaurant that serves the best Italian food I have eaten in America.
I had my first meal at Valentino in 1978.
At the time, it was just a modest place that looked like the bar it once was, but the food was so good that I came for lunch, ate all afternoon and stayed for dinner.
Piero Selvaggio, the owner, greeted us by pulling the menus out of our hands and rhapsodizing about the exotic ingredients he had just picked up at the airport: fresh white truffles, real Italian buffalo mozzarella, virgin olive oil from Sicily.
Those were all incredibly rare commodities then, and the meal was a revelation of new flavors.
On top of that, Mr.
Selvaggio served a different bottle of Italian wine with each course.


East Side, West Side, Thompson Is Busy
It has been nearly 10 weeks since Ryan Thompson picked up a baseball bat and more than two months since he faced live pitching.
He has remained in New York, not a long drive from Shea Stadium, for most of the time, even though almost all of his Mets teammates have scattered to their off-season homes.
Still, Thompson has not been bored.
Thompson, who is scheduled to travel to San Juan, P.R., this Sunday to play winter ball in the Caribbean League, has been busy in the last few months.
He has undergone arthroscopic surgery on his right knee, and has been rehabilitating with regular visits to the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.
He has put together a modeling portfolio that features photographs of him in everything from boxer shorts to sportswear, to suits, and has received calls about potential modeling jobs.
He has signed on to appear in Karen White's new music video


Gunman's Note Mentioned Clinton as Target
In a brooding four-page note, Francisco M. Duran, the former Army medic who fired a semi-automatic rifle into the White House, mentioned a possible attempt on the life of President Clinton, Federal law-enforcement officials said today.
The officials would not give any other details about the note, which could help determine whether Mr.
Duran is charged with an assassination attempt instead of lesser crimes.


Partners Leaving Goldman
Continuing the exodus of senior managers from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, David C. Clapp, the head of the firm's municipal bond department, announced yesterday that he would retire on Nov. 25.
Mr.
Clapp, who is 57, is older than most partners who have left Goldman, Sachs.
In the last two years, the 29 partners who stepped down averaged 47 years of age.


Music Notes
Schumann's 2d of 4
The manuscript of Robert Schumann's Second Symphony, which has been in a private collection and unavailable to scholars since 1950, is to be auctioned at Sotheby's in London on Dec. 1.
The auction house expects it to sell for about $1.42 million, roughly the price the manuscript of Schumann's Piano Concerto brought in November 1989.
The record price for the sale of classical music manuscripts was set in 1987, when nine Mozart symphonies sold for $4.5 million.
The manuscript will be on display at Sotheby's in New York City from Tuesday to Friday next week.
If the score is acquired by a library and comes under scholarly scrutiny, it could yield at least subtle changes in the way the music is performed, since it includes alterations and corrections Schumann made as late as 1853.
Modern editions of the work are based mainly on the version that was published in 1847.


Clinton Accuses G.O.P. of Turning Voters Into Cynics


TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.(TRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Oct. 23 about Jerome B. Wiesner, the science adviser to President John F. Kennedy and a former president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, omitted the source of a 1981 quotation in which Dr.
Wiesner criticized the nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The quotation first appeared in the January 1981 issue of Technology Review.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a recipe last Wednesday for pumpkin puree, with an article about pumpkins, misstated the cooking methods.
A corrected version follows.
Pumpkin Puree  Total time: 1 hour 20 minutes  1 3 1/2-pound pumpkin, cleaned and cut into 8 chunks.
1.
To bake, place the pumpkin in a roasting pan and pour water in the pan to make a depth of 1/4 inch.
Cover with foil and bake until soft, about 45 minutes to 1 hour.
To steam, place pumpkin in a steamer and steam until soft, checking the water level to make sure it doesn't evaporate, about 1 hour.
2.
When cool enough to handle, scrape the flesh from the skin and place in a food processor.
Puree until smooth.
Use immediately or store in airtight containers in the refrigerator or freezer.
Yield: 3 cups.


No Headline
"Put it this way: They took away my religion." DAVID MAYNARD, of St.
Malo, Manitoba, on the hockey lockout.  [ A1:6. ]


Four Unheard Witnesses In Thomas-Hill Inquiry
Tonight "Turning Point" uses the appearance of yet another book on the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill affair as an opportunity for a reprise of the juicier parts of the 1991 confirmation hearings.
The news picked up from "Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas" by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson (Houghton Mifflin) is that four women who were prepared to give testimony about Judge Thomas's courtship style and reading habits were not heard by the Senate Judiciary Committee.
The authors will be on "Good Morning America" tomorrow.
On tonight's program, "Anita Hill vs. Clarence Thomas: The Untold Story" -- a title that echoes "The Real Anita Hill: The Untold Story" (Free Press), last year's best-selling Hill-basher -- Michel McQueen, the evening's reporter, talks to the women in question.


Holy Bull To Bask In Florida Sunshine
This was moving day at Keeneland Race Course in nearby Lexington, and they were moving a giant from Stall 17, Barn 26: The great gray superstar Holy Bull, marching to his own drum beat and ignoring the hurly-burly of the Breeders' Cup here just 70 miles up the interstate, headed for a winter in Florida.
"You've got to draw the line somewhere," said Jimmy Croll, his owner and trainer, "and I drew it."


Sports of The Times; Air Time, Live From Chicago
DICK BUTKUS and Gale Sayers were handed their jerseys in a driving rainstorm between halves of "Monday Night Football." Michael Jordan had his number retired last night on a nationally televised variety show that took paid commercial breaks.
Butkus and Sayers were feted by the Chicago Bears' owner, Michael McCaskey.
Jordan Night talent included Larry King, Woody Harrelson, Spike Lee, the comedy of Sinbad and a special musical guest, Boyz II Men.


Bayard S. Clark, 75, Educator of Adults
Bayard Stockton Clark, a former specialist in adult education at the Department of Education and a canon at the National Cathedral in Washington, died on Oct. 21 at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 75 and lived in Harwich Port, Mass.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son B. Stockton Clark Jr. of Schenectady, N.Y.


Jane Hayward, 76, Art Curator And Stained-Glass Expert, Dies
Jane Hayward, a curator of medieval art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and an authority on stained glass, died on Sunday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 76 and lived in Riverdale.
The cause was cancer, said William D. Wixom, chairman of the museum's department of medieval art.


WARY OF EXPENSE, ARABS BLOCK PLAN FOR MIDEAST BANK
Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries refused today to support a Clinton Administration proposal for a multibillion-dollar development bank for the Middle East, saying that their own economic problems make it difficult for them to put up the necessary money.
In a rebuff to the United States, the Arab countries said at an economic conference that while they support peace with Israel, they should not be expected to provide the financing for the bank because of their problems with mounting debts and low oil prices.


First Brands Corp.(FBR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Data Raise New Fears Of Inflation
Fears of inflation and robust economic growth were rekindled in financial markets yesterday by two fresh economic reports, which sent stock and bond prices sharply lower.
Analysts said the new economic data increased the likelihood that the Federal Reserve would move soon to raise short-term interest rates -- perhaps as early as Friday -- and could move them higher than previously expected over the next six months.


Utilicorp United Inc.(UCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kuhlman Corp.(KUH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southerners Facing the New Amid Ghosts of the Old
IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY
By Peter Taylor
226 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
"I don't want to live," cries a young girl in Peter Taylor's melancholy new novel, and you shrug benignly: who between the ages of 12 and 20 hasn't felt that way?
But when she adds, "I don't want to grow old in this life," that is something else again.
It is not the stuff of youthful melodrama; it is the stuff of workaday despair: the pileup of losses and adjustments, the longing that nobody's interested in, the knowledge that at points in your life you were allowed to choose, and you chose wrongly.


Getting and Spending
Continuing a time-honored political tradition, hundreds of lawyers, architects, engineers and construction companies with state contracts are making contributions to one or the other of the candidates for governor in New York -- or, for that matter, to both.
Article, page B1.


New Baseball League Offers Profit Sharing for Cities and Players
Offering partnerships in the form of an innovative profit-sharing and equity plan for cities and players alike, its founders launched the United Baseball League yesterday, intent on succeeding where virtually every other new rival sports league has failed.
"We think we're going to succeed because of a confluence of factors," Bob Mrazek, a former five-time Congressman from Long Island, said yesterday.
He cited "cities that yearn to have major league caliber baseball, investors who want to participate in a new structure and design for owning a team and enough major league players who are going to choose to play in an entrepreneurial and nonconfrontational atmosphere in this new league."


Playwright's Tough Subject Draws Funny Offers
In "The Waiting Room," three women from different centuries are waiting to see the doctor: an 18th-century Chinese wife whose feet have been bound and deformed, a Victorian lady who has been too tightly corseted emotionally as well as physically and a contemporary American woman whose breast implants have led to cancer.
Each has been abused in the name of beauty, or at least beauty as fantasized by a male-dominated society.
Lisa Loomer's new play deals with everything from medical malpractice to misogyny, while crosscutting through time and space.
Wendy Wasserstein, who saw the play in its workshop last year at the Williamstown Theater Festival, described it as "dark but colorful." "It's not a polite humor and it has a political force," she said.
"It's a play with an issue but it does not deal with it as an issue play."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An offbeat corporate campaign is the latest homage to Hollywood.
A COMPANY known, if at all, for prosaic products from coal to cookware is seeking to enliven its dowdy image with a sprinkling of Hollywood stardust.
Hanson Industries, the United States unit of the British conglomerate Hanson P.L.C., is running an unusual campaign to encourage institutional and individual investors to buy Hanson's American depository receipts, which trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
Rather than following the corporate advertising template of hyperbolically promoting its stock performance, or offering soft-focus paeans to its employees, Hanson is parodying well-known films to purvey information.


Another Defection for Cuban Boxing Team
A member of the Cuban national boxing team took advantage of a one-night stopover in Miami to defect Monday with the help of a former teammate who defected last year.
The boxer, DIOBELYS HURTADO PIMENTEL, 22, said he felt more desperate than he ever had in the ring because didn't have any relatives to call for help during his team's stop in Miami.


Texas Utilities Co.(TXU,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Placer Dome Inc.(PDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns across the country.
VIRGINIA -- A computer check of state and Federal election commission reports by the Rainbow Coalition has found that more than 40 contributors to previous political campaigns of David Duke in Louisiana have donated a combined $38,000 -- more than twice what they gave Mr.
Duke -- to Oliver L. North, the Republican trying to unseat Senator Charles S. Robb, a Democrat.
A North campaign spokesman, Mark Merritt, said the money from Duke supporters was unsolicited and came as something of a surprise.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, president of the Rainbow Coalition, said the crossover suggested "an ideological kinship" between Mr.
Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, and Mr.
North.
Mr.
North called Mr.
Jackson's assertion "fear mongering."
MARYLAND -- Eighty-two percent of black voters in Maryland back the Democratic candidate for governor, Parris Glendening, preferring him 9 to 1 over his Republican opponent, Ellen Sauerbrey, The Washington Post reported.
The newspaper said only 9 percent of black voters polled in a random telephone survey of 808 registered voters Oct. 8-11 backed Ms.
Sauerbrey, whom white voters supported 46 percent to 44 percent for Mr.
Glendening.
Mr.
Glendening courted black leaders, winning the early endorsement of Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore by promising expanded state aid and a renewed effort to stimulate economic development in the city.
Blacks make up one quarter of Maryland's population.


Borg-Warner Security Corp.(BOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crystal Brands Inc.(CBR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Harper Group Inc.(HARG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kicking Off an Anti-Hunger Campaign


Port-au-Prince Journal; High Spirits in Haiti, Even With Many to Mourn
As Haiti prepared today to commemorate its first All Souls' Day under democratic rule in more than a generation, relatives were able to mourn openly for the first time the thousands of victims of political repression.
Standing before the Universal Tomb, the mausoleum at the municipal cemetery that honors those dead who have no tomb of their own, they talked quietly to the spirits of the deceased, banging their hands on each of the four walls of the memorial as they spoke.


North Turned Blind Eye to Drug Dealers
To the Editor:
Methinks Elliott Abrams, former Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, doth protest too much when he says it is "false" and "outrageous" to suggest that Oliver L. North, the Republican Senate candidate from Virginia, countenanced the presence of drug traffickers in the United States-supported contra war campaign against the Nicaraguan Government ("2 Reagan Officials Dispute Drug Claims Against North," news article, Oct. 25).


Cut-and-Spend Democrat Lags in Connecticut
William E. Curry Jr., the State Comptroller who is running for governor of Connecticut as a "New Democrat," is the only one among the four candidates talking about creating ambitious new programs.
"This is not about changing governors, but about changing government," he often says.
That message, however, has not been an easy sell for Mr.
Curry, who has never risen above 28 percent in the polls in a state where 38 percent of registered voters are Democrats.


William Bristol, 98, Bristol-Myers Officer
William M. Bristol Jr., a retired executive of the Bristol-Myers Company, died Oct. 23 at his summer home on Madeline Island, Wis.
He was 98 and lived in Princeton, N.J.
The cause was pneumonia.


Sightings: movie queens, cigarette girls: C11


Lancaster Colony Corp.(LANC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Short of Cash, N.A.A.C.P. Stops Paying Its Employees
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, its reserves of cash depleted, has stopped paying most of its professional staff, board members of the nation's preeminent civil rights organization said today.
The furlough took effect on Monday, and although officials of the group said they hoped it would last no more than a week or two, it showed the depth of the financial crisis gripping the organization after accusations of financial abuses by some of its leaders.


General Nutrition Cos.  (GNCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 15


Danka Business Systems Plc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
THE following exchange took place between Kathleen Benson and Margaret Emily, her 4-year-old daughter, described by Ms.
Benson as "a child of her place and time: the Upper West Side in the 1990's."
Child: "Did you have to have money to have a baby?"


Expeditors International of Washington Inc.(EXPD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Agencies Selected By Dow Brands
The Dow Brands unit of the Dow Chemical Company, which markets products like Ziploc bags and Fantastik cleaner, has named Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis and the Ryan Partnership in Westport, Conn., to handle its consolidated North American integrated marketing account, advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday.
The account, with billings estimated at $100 million, was previously divided among 10 agencies including Campbell Mithun, which has handled brands like Ziploc and Saran Wrap.
The executives confirmed a report of the assignment in the Daily Fax edition of Advertising Age.
Ann Roehl, a spokeswoman for Campbell Mithun in Minneapolis, declined to comment yesterday.


Essay; Liberals' Last Stand
When a desperate President of the United States demeans his office by trying to frighten elderly voters with a rehashed old lie -- that the heartless Republicans must be secretly planning to slash Social Security benefits -- you know that the liberal philosophy is on the brink of electoral disaster.
When in deep trouble, perpetrate myths.
Here are a few that are flying around the coming rejection of the leftist "Clinton Congress."


Perot to Help Golisano's Bid For Governor
When the call from Ross Perot finally came yesterday, it seemed just another of several haphazard events in the casually dramatic candidacy of B. Thomas Golisano, the Rochester businessman running a strong independent campaign for governor.
But this was actually the moment Mr.
Golisano had awaited for more than a month.
In a surprise move, the Texan agreed to appear with Mr.
Golisano on Saturday, at a joint news conference in Manhattan and at a rally later in the day in Rochester.


C. W. Post Runner Creating a Rush
Tom Marshall, the head football coach at C. W. Post, sat in his office the other day and studied statistical information that compared his current Pioneers team with last season's squad.
"Last year in the Wagner game, we threw the ball 50 times," Marshall said.
"This year against Wagner, we threw it 38 times. In all of our games, the passing numbers have dropped off from last year, and there's a major reason for that."


Richard Krautheimer Dies at 97; Art and Architecture Historian
Richard Krautheimer, the author of influential works on early Christian, medieval and Renaissance art and architecture, died on Tuesday in Rome, where he lived.
He was 97.
The cause was heart failure, said Kathleen Weil-Garris Brandt, a colleague.


Columbia Laboratories
Shares of Columbia Laboratories Inc. have risen sharply this week.
The company, a pharmaceutical manufacturer based in Miami, received $3.8 million in working capital from investors on Oct. 18.


Bridge
The North American Pairs Championship, popularly known by its original name, the Grand National Pairs, starts at the grass roots and permits players to earn a free trip to a national final.
One qualifier this year is Luella Slaner of Scarsdale, N.Y., who at 75 is one of the oldest players to advance to this final in the open category.
Her partner is Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and they took the third and final qualifying position in play Sunday in Allendale, N.J.
The winners were Alexander Allen of Princeton, N.J., and Abe Pineles of Yardley, Pa.
Jon Green of Kingston, N.Y., and Norman Rubin of Monticello, N.Y., were second.


Continental Corp.(CIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Spree Bolsters The Dollar
The Clinton Administration went on a billion-dollar global buying spree today to prop up the value of the dollar.
It succeeded, at least for now, in reviving the currency after it had fallen to a new post-World War II low against the Japanese yen.
But other nations did not appear to join in the effort, and there were signs late in the day that the markets were questioning a declaration by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that the "movements in the dollar are inconsistent" with the strength of the American economy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the campaign for governor in New York misstated the purpose of an evening fund-raiser featuring Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The event was for the Democratic Senate Campaign Committee, not for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The article also misstated the number of campaign commercials Mr.
Cuomo has written for himself.
It is one, not two.


2 Escape Bus Heading to Juvenile Detention Center in Bronx
One was 13 years old when he was arrested on charges of fatally shooting a man in Brooklyn last April.
The other, who is 16, has been convicted of arson for throwing a firebomb in an apartment building in upper Manhattan.
Both escaped on Tuesday night from a bus transporting them from court to the Spofford Juvenile Detention Center in the South Bronx.
One turned himself in last night, but the hunt for the other continued.


An Appeals Court With Blinders
The University of Maryland was segregated until 1954, and in a recent court case, officials of the university said they felt obligated to live down its discriminatory past.
In a Federal court in Baltimore, the officials described a modest program for attracting black students who are put off by the school's lingering reputation among minorities.
It sets aside 1 percent of its financial aid budget for high-achieving minority members and lets students of all races compete for the rest.
Both the candor of Maryland's administrators and their dedication to remedying past discrimination are laudable.
The district judge found the plan sensible and effective.
But three judges of the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Richmond have reversed that judgment and, with a blindness that is maddening, held the program unconstitutional.


Maurice B. Stein, 58; Ran Summer Camp In Upstate New York
Maurice B. Stein, owner of a well-known summer camp in upstate New York, died on Monday in the crash of an American Eagle commuter plane near Roselawn, Ind.
He was 58.
For 30 years, Mr.
Stein and his wife, the former Amy Medine, operated Camp Echo Lake, five miles northwest of Lake George in Warrensburg, N.Y.


Crestar Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Stumps for Candidates But Watches Where He Goes
To hear his advisers tell it, this is Bill Clinton's mission as he begins his final cross-country charge of the fall campaign: define the choices, rally the faithful, fill the coffers and help those Democrats who want to be helped.
But these are his instructions: never, never, never stray south of the Mason-Dixon line.


He's Still the Captain
TOM GULLIKSON, whose United States team lost to Sweden in this year's Davis Cup tennis semifinals, was reappointed captain of the squad for a second year yesterday.(AP)


In Puerto Rican Winter Baseball, The Only Strikes Are at the Plate
If the major leagues were Mudville and the players and owners were a composite of the mighty Casey, he of the broken heart and wasted potential, then the somewhere where the sun still shines could well be Puerto Rico.
Here, representing what still functions in baseball is the six-team Puerto Rican Winter Baseball League, which opened tonight in three cities across the island.


Election Jitters in Limbaughland
These are busy days for Rush Limbaugh, tending the far-flung precincts of talk radio as the nation lurches toward the midterm elections, or, as Mr.
Limbaugh calls them, "Operation Restore Democracy."
Around the country, there are defecting Republicans to scold, like Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, whose endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came just as Mr.
Cuomo "was on a train ride to Palookaville." In Massachusetts, there is the sudden, distressing comeback -- "How can that be?" -- of Senator Edward M. Kennedy in his race against the Republican, Mitt Romney.
Not surprisingly, there are pre-election jitters and questions among the troops, from Jerry in San Diego to Mary Alice in Troy, N.Y.


Jets Try to Understand: Bills Are More Complex
If you believe in short-term history, the Jets (4-4) should destroy the Buffalo Bills (5-3) Sunday at Giants Stadium.
After all, the Jets have already embarrassed the Bills, 23-3, in the season opener.
If you believe in long-term history, the Bills should destroy the Jets.
After all, the Bills have reached the Super Bowls the last 4 years, they have won 12 of their last 14 games at Giants Stadium and the last 8 straight (including 1 against the Giants).


Ultimate Outsider Seeking a Seat
"Elect an Average Citizen!" proclaims the pink mimeographed flier handed out by the Democratic nominee here in Oklahoma's Second Congressional District.
"Vote for Virgil R. Cooper."
Mr.
Cooper is a 71-year-old retired middle-school principal whose fashion statement features a black windbreaker, track shoes and clip-on polyester tie, which he often yanks off in a burst of theatrics.


Alberta Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Designing With Cans Aids a Food Drive
THE client: Food for Survival, a nonprofit charity group that distributes food to 1,000 feeding programs throughout the five boroughs of New York each day.
The assignment: Build, in a single evening, a self-supporting structure with cans of food.


What's Weather Got to Do With It?
Three days before the 25th New York City Marathon, the marathon's perennial heated weather debate seems to be tilting away from the Allan Steinfeld sunny-spectator-skies model and toward the colder-the-better runners' position staked out by the marathon's founder, Fred Lebow.
Lebow, who died on Oct. 9, once described the marathon ideal as "a temperature between 40 and 45 degrees and raining." Steinfeld, Lebow's successor as marathon director, prefers balmy weather that will lure huge crowds.
"The runners," he noted, "will be there no matter what."


Knicks' Bonner Set for Surgery
Anthony Bonner will undergo arthroscopic right knee surgery today, adding to the Knicks' growing injury list.
No timetable has been set for Bonner's return, but he along with Doc Rivers (sprained ankle) and Doug Christie (recovering from ankle surgery) are expected to be placed on the injured list today.
Ron Grandison, a small forward who has enjoyed a strong preseason, is now expected to be included on the 12-man roster.


American Income Holding Inc.(AIH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M.D.C. Holdings Inc.(MDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Masco Corp.(MAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Woodforde Upsets Courier  Jim Courier's slump showed no sign of ending when he lost by 7-6 (7-3), 6-3 to Mark Woodforde yesterday in the second round of the $2.25 million Paris Open.
Courier, once the world's No. 1 player but now ranked 14th and seeded 13th in Paris, will finish the year outside the top 10 for the first time since 1990.
He has not won a tournament since August 1993, and this was the second consecutive year in which Courier lost his opening match at the Paris Open.
Pete Sampras and Boris Becker both survived first-set scares by Dutch opponents.
Sampras, the top-seeded player, downed Jacco Eltingh, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4.
Becker, fresh from a tournament victory in Sweden, eliminated Paul Haarhuis, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4. (AP) YACHT RACING  One Australia Wins  The new 75-foot yacht One Australia won the third race yesterday of the International America's Cup Class World Championship, but not without a battle to the finish with the all-women's team, America .
The women's team led at the start of the 18.5-mile race off San Diego.
The boat, skippered by J. J. Isler at the start, and later by Leslie Egnot, led six other cup yachts.
But at the fourth mark in the six-stage race, John Bertrand, skipper of One Australia, passed America .
A 17-knot wind, far brisker than the 5-6 knots that prevailed at the first two races of the championship, made the fight for first place all the more dramatic.
One Australia crossed the start line prematurely, and had to re-round.
In the meantime, America  was off to a clean start, well ahead of One Australia on the right side of the course.
After finally passing America , Bertrand found himself in a tough tactical battle, having to jibe back and forth to hold his slim lead in the fifth leg.
At the finish, One Australia was 32 seconds ahead of America  .
FOOTBALL  Seahawks Back in Kingdome


Conseco Scales Back $3.25 Billion Bid for Kemper
Conseco, the insurance company that outbid General Electric for the right to buy the Kemper Corporation in June, scaled back its $3.25 billion offer yesterday and asked Kemper to accept $2.96 billion -- about the same as the G.E. offer.
Under the new proposal, Conseco would offer for each share of Kemper a $60 package of $56 cash and slightly more than one-tenth of a share of Conseco stock worth $4.
Last summer, Conseco offered a $67 package consisting of $56 cash and $11 of Conseco stock.
Conseco would issue 4.3 million shares of its stock under the new proposal, less than half the 9.5 million of the old proposal.


Onbancorp (ONBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Focusing on the 'Anyone' In 'Anyone-but-Cuomo'
AS if out of nowhere came State Senator George E. Pataki and his entourage, startling Lisa and Charles Davi as they shopped at the Staten Island Mall.
The couple smiled.
The candidate moved on.
Ms.
Davi, of Bay Ridge in Brooklyn, stared after him.
"He caught me by surprise," she said.
"That was Pataki? I thought he was one of my husband's relatives."
Her mother, Janet Renna, apologized for the daughter: "She's been away. On her honeymoon." Did Mrs.
Renna recognize Mr.
Pataki?
"Honestly, no."


Chalk It Up to Art
IT'S the closest thing to legal graffiti: a chalkboard photo frame that comes with its own chalk, which fits right into the 8-by-7.5-inch frame.
"It was inspired by the need to personalize photos and identify special occasions and vacations," said Tom Gottlieb of Two's Company, which designed it.
"It's attractive to kids; artistic people as well as doodlers."


Canam Manac reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Everything for Homes In Javits Center Show
BUYING or renting a home is not just about the pleasures of sifting through Oriental rugs in search of the perfect colors or of ordering a custom-made sofa.
Homes also require less glamorous things like insurance, lawn mowers and vacuum cleaners.
The Home Show '95, a new consumer show that opens today at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, has 100 exhibitors who are offering not only furniture, carpets and pianos but also things like lawn mowers and waterproofing services.
Some even sell real estate.
"The show is trying to cover every aspect of owning or renting a home" in New York, New Jersey or Connecticut, said Ann Thurston, the director of sales at the show, which is being sponsored by the advertising department of The New York Times.


Norwest Corp.(NOB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bombay Co. (BBA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns across the country.
CALIFORNIA: Spending records continue to fall.
New figures released by the Federal Election Commission show that the Republican challenger, Michael W. Huffington, has raised $27.3 million, almost all from his own fortune, while his Democratic opponent, Senator Dianne Feinstein, has raised $11 million. (The previous record was $26.5 million spent in the 1984 North Carolina Senate contest.) They have spent virtually all that amount.
An analysis by The Los Angeles Times showed that Mr.
Huffington had put almost $20 million into television advertising, out-spending Ms.
Feinstein on such commercials almost 3 to 1.


Charles Busch Takes On a Trouser Role
Christopher, the hero of the utterly winning new comedy "You Should Be So Lucky" at the Primary Stages, is a lonely Greenwich Village electrolysist full of sighing references to diva films like "Laura" and "I Want to Live." But when he first appears, the cinematic quotation that springs to mind is from a very different sort of movie, "King's Row," in which an actor named Ronald Reagan said: "Where's the rest of me?"
That's because Christopher is portrayed by the play's author, Charles Busch, a fabled drag performer who has hitherto seldom set foot on a New York stage without a glitzy dress and heels high enough to induce vertigo.


Dicterow Cancellation
The violinist Glenn Dicterow has canceled his four appearances as soloist with the New York Philharmonic this week and next because of illness.
He was to have played Chausson's "Poeme" and Ravel's "Tzigane," under the direction of Charles Dutoit.
The two pieces have been dropped from the program; instead, the orchestra will play Rachmaninoff's "Isle of the Dead" in addition to Prokofiev's "Love for Three Oranges" Suite and Respighi's "Fountains of Rome" and "Pines of Rome." The concerts are tonight, tomorrow and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.


Crutchfield on Art and Music
Will Crutchfield, an opera conductor, teacher and critic, is to give an interdisciplinary lecture on "Impressionism: Art and Music," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art next Thursday at 6 P.M.
The talk is scheduled in conjunction with the museum's current exhibition "Origins of Impressionism." Mr.
Crutchfield will also accompany Deborah Massell, a soprano, in French songs of the late 19th century.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


Amtran Inc.(AMTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teen-Ager in Kidnapping Case Tells Court He Ran Away
A Jewish teen-ager who prosecutors say was kidnapped by an ultra-Orthodox rabbi and his wife testified yesterday that he had not been abducted but voluntarily ran away from an "unnormal" home in which his mother regularly beat him.
But in vigorous cross-examination, a prosecutor sought to depict the youth, 15-year-old Shai Fhima Reuven, as someone who was lying to protect the defendants -- Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans and his wife, Malka -- as well as others said to have conspired in Shai's two-year disappearance, which ended last February.


Corrections
An editorial yesterday on the Connecticut elections was in error when it said that Senator Joseph Lieberman voted against President Clinton's budget package last year.
He voted for it.


Green Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Government Joins Attack On Ballot Idea
Putting aside years of cautious silence on American domestic politics, Mexico's Government and governing party are pushing angrily into California's debate over whether to cut off social services to illegal immigrants.
In a series of increasingly bitter complaints, the administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has criticized proponents of an initiative regarding illegal aliens that is on the state's Nov. 8 ballot.


Justices Appear to Favor Employees on a Job-Discrimination Issue
In an unusually lopsided Supreme Court argument today, the Justices signaled their strong disapproval of permitting employers to escape liability for discrimination by coming up with belated evidence that a former employee filing a discrimination suit deserved dismissal for other reasons.
Several courts have recently ruled that employers who find such evidence have a complete defense to that employee's complaint of discriminatory treatment under Federal civil rights law.
Evidence in these cases typically includes a previously undiscovered infraction of work rules or an exaggeration on a long-ago employment application that would have justified dismissal had the employer known of it.


Flightsafety International Inc.(FSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arabs Now Take Charge (Sort Of) at Allenby Border Post
Ahmed Nujoum had re-entered the West Bank from Jordan many times before across the Allenby Bridge.
But today was the first time that Mr.
Nujoum, a Jericho farmer resplendent in long robes and a checkered headscarf, got to hand his travel documents not to an Israeli soldier but to a Palestinian immigration officer.
Had he won the lottery, he could not have been more pleased.


Edward Mason, 68, Chemical Physicist
Dr.
Edward Allen Mason, a chemical physicist known for his work with intermolecular forces, died last Thursday at his home in Barrington, R.I.
He was 68.
The cause was prostate cancer, said a spokeswoman for Brown University, where Dr.
Mason was the Newport Rogers Professor of Chemistry Emeritus.


No Headline
"Somebody came up to me the other day and told me, 'Hey, you wouldn't do anything in Congress, and that would be a big improvement!' It was a little joke, but you know, there's a lot of truth to it." -- VIRGIL R. COOPER, Oklahoma Congressional candidate.  [ A28:2. ]


Take Man-Bashing Out of Family Finance
To the Editor:
It seems sad that Anna Quindlen chooses to cast a serious social problem in a man-vs.-woman adversarial paradigm ("The Out-of-Work Wife," Oct. 26).
I'm a 49-year-old housewife (yes, I dare speak the word) with five growing children.
But I also happen to have a faithful, loyal husband who would no sooner leave me or his children for a "21st-century fox" than toss any of his other solid moral principles into a trash can.


U.N. Considers Action on Rising Violence in Rwandan Camps
A rapid rise in politically inspired violence in Rwandan refugee camps in Zaire and now Tanzania is forcing the United Nations to consider strengthening the role of its international mission in the region, possibly with the introduction of a protection force.
The Security Council will consider the issue this month.
It will also be the focus of a meeting of refugee and aid organizations in Geneva early next week called by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.


Haytaian, a Trenton Insider, Seeks Senate as an Outsider
For years before Chuck Haytaian began running for the United State Senate, he was running the New Jersey State Assembly with a forcefulness that left little doubt about who was in charge.
In an age in which party politics has in many places been eroded by individual personality and style, Mr.
Haytaian ruled Trenton as a master of the public gesture and the private deal, a leader who punished the wayward and rewarded the loyal in ways that left the authority of the Speaker beyond any question.


Providian Corp.(PVN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Barkley May Miss Start
Two days before the season begins, Phoenix forward CHARLES BARKLEY is questionable because of a strained stomach muscle.
Barkley sat out practice yesterday but said he was leaning toward playing.


A Set Up, Williams Gets Stung By Reality
Venus Williams, the 14-year-old tennis debutante who made a triumphant transition into professionalism with a straight-set victory on Monday, had the welcome mat abruptly yanked from beneath her tonight by Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the world's second-ranked player.
But Williams did not submit to the Spaniard's greater authority without a stirring fight.
Instead, she put on a bravura show in the opening set, and even had the veteran down and dazed in the second before her youthful enthusiasm evaporated into a 2-6, 6-3, 6-0 comeback by Sanchez Vicario.


Markel Corp.(MAKL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Art of Growing Older Forcefully
Turn the word "mom" upside down and what do you have?
No guessing here, it's "wow," and one might well ask, so what?
So, as Dr.
Ruth Harriet Jacobs pointed out at a workshop entitled "Be an Outrageous Older Woman" this weekend, WOW can, and does, stand for wonderful, wise or witty older woman.
The women in the audience, most of whom admitted to being over 50, loved it.


Erwin Knoll, 63, Crusading Editor Of The Progressive
Erwin Knoll, the editor of The Progressive, an iconoclastic magazine that crusaded for civil liberties and against nuclear weapons and United States intervention abroad, died yesterday at his home in Madison, Wis.
He was 63.
He died in his sleep, apparently of a heart attack, the Progressive said.


A Man of Movement Right at Home With Music
Lar Lubovitch is a choreographer very much at home in classical music, popular songs and the Minimalist scores that he was one of the first to use for dance in the 1970's.
All three musical genres, with "The Blue Danube" thrown in more as a fillip than filler, were represented Tuesday night at the benefit that opened a two-week season by the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


Alberta Natural reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mark VII Inc.(MVII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


A New Standard For Lead in Faucets
A national plumbing and water supply industry group has published a long-delayed voluntary standard on how much lead should be allowed to leach into drinking water from faucets, ice makers and drinking fountains, giving consumers who are concerned about contamination a way to pick and choose among fixtures.
But health experts say that the standard for the industry's new seal of approval, which will start showing up on packages on store shelves in about a year, is still too lax to insure that the water is potable.


Ireland and Britain Praise Clinton's Ulster Aid
Ireland and Britain today praised the Clinton Administration's decision to increase economic aid to Northern Ireland as a step toward advancing peace there.
The White House announced late Tuesday that the President had decided to raise aid to Northern Ireland to $30 million a year over the next two fiscal years, up from the $20 million a year that was planned.


Acuson Corp.(ACN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Protect Simpson Children's Rights Too
To the Editor:
Despite all the publicity over every conceivable aspect of the O. J. Simpson case, I've heard nothing about the legal rights of the children of Nicole Brown Simpson.


Messier Joins Leetch on Ice
Mark Messier and Brian Leetch were back on the Rangers' practice ice here at Playland today.
But that was about it.
Messier, Leetch and the rookie defenseman Joby Messier had the surface to themselves for about 40 minutes this afternoon on Day 33 of the owners' lockout.
Joby Messier was to report to the team's minor league affiliate in Binghamton Thursday.
Mark Messier and Leetch are apparently readying themselves for future exhibitions organized by the players while the lockout continues.


U.S. Embargo of Cuba Violates U.N.'s Wishes; Preserve Health Care
To the Editor:
Following up on "Health Care, Cuba's Pride, Falls on Hard Times" (front page, Oct. 30) and the United Nations vote overwhelmingly in favor of lifting the United States embargo against Cuba, I urge our Government to rethink its Cuba policy.


And on the 7th Day, Another 26.2 Miles
Last Thursday morning, Twen Govender awakened at 4:30 in Durban, South Africa, and went for a six-mile run.
That afternoon, he took a one-hour flight to Johannesburg, making his connection for a 10-hour flight to Frankfurt.
After sitting around the Frankfurt airport for six hours, Govender boarded an eight-hour flight to Chicago, arriving late Friday afternoon, feeling stiff and exhausted.
Forty hours later, he ran the Chicago Marathon.


Discovery That AIDS Can Be Prevented in Babies Raises Debate on Mandatory Testing
A finding that it is possible to prevent most cases of AIDS in babies has opened a heated debate over mandatory AIDS testing.
The problem is that to prevent AIDS in a child, infected women must take a powerful AIDS drug while they are pregnant.
And that means identifying pregnant women who, often without knowing it, are infected with the AIDS virus.
The finding arose from a Federal study whose results were so stunning that it was halted prematurely and its results were announced in February, to great fanfare.
They are being published today in The New England Journal of Medicine, along with two editorials that raise ethical questions about how to put the discovery into practice.


Journal; Justice for None
With today's publication of "Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas," American blood will come to a new boil over the most rending he-said/she-said conflict of our time.
But not necessarily because of this gripping book's revelations about Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas.
The authors, Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson of The Wall Street Journal, do produce named sources who both corroborate Ms.
Hill's testimony and detail other incidents in which a porno-fixated Mr.
Thomas hit on the more vulnerable (which is to say, black) women in his employ.
This is unlikely, however, to shock a country where a majority tell pollsters they already believe that Mr.
Thomas committed perjury.


Retrial Begins in Murder Case Tied to Confession to A.A. Group
In a case that has raised questions about the limits of confidentiality in self-help groups, a Larchmont carpenter is on trial again on charges of breaking into his childhood home and murdering the couple who had bought the house from his parents.
The first trial of the carpenter, Paul Cox, 27, ended in a mistrial, with jurors deadlocked 11 to 1 in favor of conviction.


CSF Holdings Inc.(CSFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Spy Trader Goes on Trial In Germany
A cold war lawyer and spy trader who brokered freedom for 33,755 East German political prisoners in exchange for $2.3 billion paid to the Communists by the West German Government went on trial today on charges of helping the secret police blackmail former clients into leaving houses and property behind.
The lawyer, Wolfgang Vogel, 69, who became a millionaire and was a respected confidant of leaders on both sides of the Berlin wall until its collapse five years ago made his services unnecessary, is the most prominent East German private citizen to be charged with knowingly taking part in criminal wrongdoing by the Communist Government.


Bond Prices Follow Dollar In Decline
Prices of Treasury securities slid yesterday, as they have every day this week, following the dollar's plunge to a post-World War II low against the Japanese yen and the Federal Reserve's latest "beige book" report suggesting that inflation could accelerate.
A weakening dollar causes dollar-denominated investments like Treasury securities to become less attractive to foreign investors, and as a consequence the yield on the long bond was pushed very close to a three-year high.


Citicasters reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.B.I. Rebuff For Witness In Shooting
The garage mechanic who eventually led investigators to the man suspected of shooting at a van full of Hasidim on the Brooklyn Bridge described yesterday how he frantically tried to tell the F.B.I. that the gunman was in his shop -- only to be rebuffed.
Twice he called; first he was told to give his information over the phone, which he refused to do, and when he called again he was told someone would be sent out to talk to him.
Finally, the F.B.I. agreed to send someone to meet him on a street corner, but no agent ever showed up, the mechanic, Amir Abudaif, testified.


Corrections
The Our Towns column on Tuesday misidentified the cemetery where the magician Harry Houdini is buried.
It is the Machpelah Cemetery in Glendale, Queens, not Woodlawn in the Bronx.


Airliner Turned Over Before Crashing
The American Eagle plane that crashed near here on Monday night took an unexplained dip to the right, recovered, dipped again and turned upside down just before it plunged to the ground, killing all 68 people aboard, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board said at a briefing tonight.
The cockpit voice recorder and the the flight data recorder from the airplane, which was on its way to O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, showed that the wing flaps, which can be used to increase lift, were extended 15 degrees.
It also showed that as the plane began descending from 10,000 feet, probably in response to instructions radioed to the pilots from the ground, it picked up speed.
Then, an alarm sounded, indicating that it was moving too fast to have its flaps extended.


The Birthday Gift That Keeps on Giving


Editors' Note
An article on Oct. 24 about The National Enquirer's coverage of the O. J. Simpson case compared that tabloid's performance with those of several mainstream television stations, newspapers and magazines.
It cited false reports or missteps by some of those organizations.
As one example, the article reported that The New Yorker magazine, in the July 25 issue, speculated that a Los Angeles police detective, Mark Fuhrman, planted a bloody glove at Mr.
Simpson's estate.


U.S. Embargo of Cuba Violates U.N.'s Wishes
To the Editor:
The United States has asserted itself as the key player in the United Nations, utilizing it as a bulwark in creating multinational forces.
The United States has prided itself on the cohesiveness of these coalitions.
I do not want to debate its role in any of these actions; I merely seek to point out the hypocrisy of continuing an embargo against Cuba when the General Assembly last week voted 101 to 2, with 48 abstentions, to condemn the embargo.


Abortion Foe Is Guilty of Murder In Deaths of 2 at a Florida Clinic
A Florida jury took only 20 minutes today to convict Paul J. Hill of two counts of first-degree murder for shooting to death a doctor and an escort outside an abortion clinic last summer.
On Thursday, the jury of six men and six women will consider whether to recommend that Mr.
Hill, a former Presbyterian minister and a militant opponent of abortion, be executed in Florida's electric chair.


Endowment Ends Program Helping Individual Artists
The National Endowment for the Arts, wrestling with nearly $3 million in budget cuts that followed Congressional rebukes over works it backed, has eliminated the system that allowed local nonprofit organizations to earmark $1.3 million in Federal grants for individual artists.
The change, which endowment officials describe as a strictly budgetary response to a shrinking fiscal pie, has raised a furor among nonprofit arts agencies.
They contend the endowment made the cuts in part to avoid the political fallout that has come from helping artists whose work is unconventional and sometimes controversial, and that it disproportionately hurts individual artists rather than institutions.


PrimeSource Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rodman Suspended For 3 Games by Spurs
DENNIS RODMAN was suspended by the San Antonio Spurs yesterday for the first three games of the National Basketball Association regular season because of his recent behavior.
He will not be paid for the games he misses.
"This action is not taken lightly," General Manager GREGG POPOVICH said.
"It is my sincere hope that Dennis will decide to become a productive part of this basketball team."


Review/Fashion; Lauren Takes a Cue From Cool Beauties
RALPH LAUREN is back on home ground.
After forays to Indochina and medieval England in his last two collections, the spring show yesterday was a return to more familiar territory.
Taking inspiration from cool Hollywood beauties like Grace Kelly and Audrey Hepburn, he showed clothes that were quiet and understated in the softest of colors and the finest of fabrics.
He used opalescent tones of pink and blue for satin and cashmere, chose pastel hues for floral silk chiffons and put white linen collars and cuffs on black dresses and sweaters.


At $3.6 Million, Warhol's 'Marilyn' Is a Star Again
In three and a half minutes, Andy Warhol again catapulted to the top of the art market last night.
At Christie's brilliant auction of contemporary art, Warhol's "Shot Red Marilyn," the famous 1964 silk-screen of Marilyn Monroe with a repaired bullet hole over the left eyebrow, fetched $3.6 million, nicely above Christie's estimate of $2.5 million to $3 million.
The painting, one of the most famous images in contemporary art, was sold to an unidentified telephone bidder.
This was not just any image of the actress, but the one that fetched a Warhol record of $4.01 million at Christie's in New York in 1989, at the height of the market.
The buyer then, Masao Wanibuchi, a Tokyo-based tailor and collector, was the seller last night.
And everyone considered the 1994 price, just 10 percent less than its record, a triumph.
"It's the recognition we were waiting for," said Doris Ammann, a Zurich-based dealer who ran the business with her brother Thomas Ammann, a major Warhol collector, who died last year.
"It was a wonderful surprise."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  BAD AIR IN EAST EUROPE  Almost five years after the collapse of Communism, the environment of most of Eastern Europe is continuing to decay, with capitalism bringing new problems, including pollution from increased traffic.
A1


Foamex International Inc.(FMXI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


The Suburbs of Johannesburg Stay Cold to Blacks
After the cage of apartheid began to open up and the borders of his existence were no longer the pocked roads of Soweto, Vusi Makhubela found a peach-colored house in a white promised land with rose bushes and a two-car garage.
It was there that he knelt with his family in a corner of his bedroom to thank the ancestors for the family's good fortune.
He sprinkled tobacco on the carpet, because the ancestors must have their snuff, and marked the sacred spot with his deceased father's wooden walking stick.
Outside he planted a tiny sapling, which he named Watch Us Grow.


Food Industry Groups Sue to Stop U.S. Testing of Ground Beef
Seven food industry trade associations have filed a lawsuit to stop the Department of Agriculture from testing ground beef for bacteria that may be responsible for as many as 500 deaths a year.
At a news conference on Tuesday, several of the associations asserted that the testing program was illegal because the Agriculture Department lacked the authority to regulate bacteria in meat.
In addition they said the program was unfair because the sampling size was too small to reflect accurately or guarantee the safety of ground meat.


Shades of the Go-Go 80's: Takeovers in a Comeback
The deals are not as big, the fees are not as fat and the personalities are not as flamboyant.
Still, corporate takeovers are back.
With two months to go until the end of the year, 1994 is on track to be the second-biggest year for mergers and acquisitions in history.
As of Oct. 31, deals valued at $284.4 billion were announced, according to the Securities Data Company, a Wall Street research firm.
That is just shy of the $292.9 billion announced in all of 1989.
The record is $335.8 billion in 1988.


Hong Kong Welcomes Its Return to China
To the Editor:
"Enter the Dragon," by Martin C. M. Lee (Op-Ed, Oct. 26), attempts to create the false impression that Mr.
Lee and his Democratic Party of Hong Kong represent the people of Hong Kong.


Campbell Mithun Adds Unit for Dow
Campbell Mithun Esty said yesterday that it would create a separate agency within the agency to handle its new Dow Brands consolidated North American integrated marketing account, with billings estimated at $100 million.
The new shop, yet unnamed, will be headed by Rich Rosengren, 44, executive vice president of Campbell Mithun's integrated marketing group.
It will operate from the Campbell Mithun office in Minneapolis, working exclusively on products like Fantastik cleaner, Saran Wrap and Ziploc bags.


GranCare Inc.(GC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Rules Fiske Removal Was Ethical
A Federal appeals judge has ruled that no ethics rules were violated by Judge David B. Sentelle, who dismissed the Whitewater independent counsel shortly after having lunch with the counsel's harshest critic in the Senate.
The counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., was replaced three months ago by a special three-judge panel headed by Judge Sentelle of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
The panel instead chose Kenneth W. Starr, a Solicitor General in the Bush Administration who has been critical of President Clinton.


Fed Report Said to Point To Rate Rise
With unemployment falling most places and every region of the American economy growing, manufacturers are beginning to raise prices, the Federal Reserve said in a report released today.
Private economists interpreted the report, prepared with contributions from each of the 12 regional Fed banks, as another sign that the central bank is likely to raise interest rates again soon.
Today's report on the health of regional economies, known as the beige book, pointed to accelerating economic growth in the regions surrounding Minneapolis, Chicago, Dallas and Philadelphia, and steady growth almost everywhere else in the country.
The only conspicuous exception to the Fed's overall optimism lay in New York State and the Connecticut and New Jersey suburbs of New York City.
The region's economy continued to recover in October but the pace of that growth slowed, the Fed said.


Linking Centuries At the Louvre Cafe
IF the dictum of success in real estate is "location, location, location" then the Cafe Marly, a 300-seat restaurant that overlooks the Cour Napoleon at the Louvre, is a sure-fire winner.
The Cafe Marly -- its official address is 93 rue de Rivoli -- fills up completely between 12:15 and 12:30 P.M. and is a rendez-vous de rigueur both for Parisians and for tourists who flock to the museum.


American Medical Response Inc.(EMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rowland Leads in Bundled Donations by Linked Contributors, Study Finds
Large campaign donations by groups of linked contributors, a phenomenon known as bundling, accounted for more than 9 percent of the money raised through early last month by John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, according to a study released today by Common Cause, the nonpartisan government watchdog group.
Executives and employees at 13 companies gave Mr.
Rowland $264,650 out of a total of $2.83 million raised, the group said.
Executives, employees and spouses related to just two interconnected companies, USCO Distribution Services of Naugatuck, and the Shannon Hotel Group of Florida, gave Mr.
Rowland $66,750, the report said, by far the highest amount contributed to any one candidate in the race.


Borg Warner Automotive Inc.(BWA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quaker Oats to Acquire Snapple
The Quaker Oats Company, which itself had been rumored as a takeover target, announced an agreement yesterday to buy the Snapple Beverage Corporation, for $1.7 billion, or $14 a share, in cash.
The combined company, which would pair Snapple with Quaker's Gatorade, would create the third- largest nonalcoholic beverage marketer in North America.
The announcement came as Snapple, a Long Island success story that once was a Wall Street darling and the toast of iced-tea fanciers, reported that its third-quarter profit had plunged 74 percent on 6 percent lower sales.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Birch Borers
Q.
We've been told that a white birch we love has borers and might live only a few years.
Is there anything we can do or must we just watch it die? -- Roberta Shields, Morristown, N.J.


2 Families Unhappily Entwined for 3 Generations
ALL OUR YESTERDAYS  By Robert B. Parker  401 pages. Delacorte Press. $22.95.
In a rare departure from the detective novel format, Robert B. Parker writes powerfully of three generations of Boston Irishmen in "All Our Yesterdays," whose title comes appropriately enough from Macbeth's lament, "And all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty death."


Cantrex Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Earth Wind and Fire's Ethic Survives
If virtuosity could save the world, Earth Wind and Fire would have done the job by now.
From 1975 to the early 1980's, Earth Wind and Fire was one of the most popular bands on Earth, singing about love and backing its utopian wishes with music that fused gospel sentiments, funk syncopation, pop melody, jazz harmonies and Latin rhythms.
At its peak, Earth Wind and Fire came up with music that was both ingenious and embracing, proffering hope and reassurance through cross-cultural synergy.
It was generous music, with an abundance of harmonizing voices and deftly deployed horns.
But it couldn't stand up to the corrosive 1980's, when best-selling black pop polarized into bare-bones, confrontational hip-hop or plush come-ons.
Now, Earth Wind and Fire is an oldies act, but still popular enough to sell out two nights at the Beacon Theater.
"We're going to take you back to the 70's," Philip Bailey declared on Tuesday.
It's a reconstituted band.
Maurice White, the band's founder, producer and main songwriter, no longer tours with it; he has taken with him his kalimba, the African thumb piano that was a band trademark.
Along with Mr.
Bailey, the current lineup includes only two other longtime members, Verdine White on bass and Ralph Johnson on vocals and percussion.


Norcen Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Outboard Marine (OM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Iranians Go on Trial in France in Slaying of Exiled Ex-Premier
In a case that has already strained relations between Paris and Teheran, three Iranians went on trial here today for the 1991 slaying of Shahpur Bakhtiar, an exiled former Iranian Prime Minister.
French prosecutors are expected to argue that the killing had Iranian Government approval.
One of the three men is charged with killing Mr.
Bakhtiar and his secretary in a Paris suburb on Aug. 6, 1991, while the two others are accused of acting as accomplices.
Six more Iranians, including two who supposedly took part in the killing, are to be tried in absentia.


1999 Super Bowl Winners To Jump Over Candlestick
San Francisco won the bid over Miami to play host to Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999, the Carolina Panthers were placed in the N.F.C.
West Division and the Jacksonville Jaguars landed in the A.F.C.
Central for the 1995 season, as National Football League owners concluded a two-day meeting.
San Francisco and the Bay Area are expecting an economic bonanza of more than $200 million from the Super Bowl.
The city has agreed to pay $26 million for stadium renovations at Candlestick Park that includes a grass field, skyboxes and a drainage system.


Chief of Towers Financial To Settle 2 Fraud Lawsuits
Steven Hoffenberg, the brash New York financier accused by Federal prosecutors last year of running one of the largest swindles of recent times, has agreed to out-of-court settlements in the two most significant civil fraud suits against him.
But those settlements offer little hope to the thousands of people who had invested more than $415 million in Mr.
Hoffenberg's failed flagship company, the Towers Financial Corporation, from 1988 to 1993, because it is unlikely that the money can be collected.


One Man's Campaign To Rename a Creek
There is little to distinguish Negro Run except its name.
For most of its two-mile course, the waterway is a weed-choked ditch cutting through forested fields.
Skunk cabbage, wild rye and spike rush crowd its shallow banks, and flying insects skim the mottled surface.


Economic Scene; Why isn't a better economy helping Clinton's popularity?
AS President, George Bush took the rap for the recession.
Why isn't President Clinton benefiting at the polls from the economic recovery?
Maybe he is.
William Nordhaus, an economist at Yale University, believes that Mr.
Clinton is, in fact, getting his share of the credit, but the cheers have been lost in the roar of general disapproval about other issues.
Factoring out the benefits he should be enjoying because of the good economic news, Mr.
Nordhaus says, "Clinton is the most unpopular president since Truman."


One 'From the Warrior Class' Fights Another Battle; A Month After Assault in Brooklyn, a Detective's Family and Friends Look Back
Louis Cosentino, one of the most colorful and powerful members of the Transit Police Department, dressed immaculately -- his style part head of state, part gangster.
He talked tough with his superiors.
He sat and smiled with politicians at restaurants, and then screamed at them across the bargaining table.
He began his career with the transit police flouting department rules by riding patrol in Coney Island in his Cadillac convertible, and he went on to lead the department's top squad of detectives.
He was a union leader, a father, a local legend in the small but meaningful way that cops who live and work in Brooklyn can be.


200 Egyptians Die When Blazing Fuel Floods Their Homes
At least 200 eople were killed today in southern Egypt when an explosion and floods sent blazing fuel racing through the streets of a small village, security officials said.
The disaster began when gales and flash floods caused a bridge to collapse over a military fuel complex in the Durunka, 200 miles south of Cairo.
Some fuel tanks toppled over, setting off an explosion that enveloped an estimated 15,000 tons of motor and aircraft fuel.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L. Players Threaten to Reduce Playoffs
While the National Hockey League chopped 10 more games from its damaged regular season today, its locked-out players union met here and discussed the possibility of retaliating by threatening not to play some post-season games.
Such a move would hurt owners more than players because playoff games generate higher ticket prices and profits, as well as more television revenue, under the terms of the league's television contract, which is heavily weighted toward playoff games.


Jack in the Box Goes to Chiat/Day
Foodmaker Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., to handle the account of its Jack in the Box fast-food chain, with billings estimated at $35 million to $40 million.
The account had been at Cohen/Johnson in Century City, Calif., for eight years until that agency was dismissed in September.


Cuomo and Pataki Compete for Undecided Voters
New York's leading gubernatorial candidates spent yesterday vying for the mantle of underdog in a close race and reaching out to the women who make up a majority of undecided voters, with pointed appeals from Hillary Rodham Clinton for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and from the wife of the Republican candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki, in his behalf.
Mrs.
Clinton raised $250,000 and a battle cry for Mr.
Cuomo at a women's luncheon in Manhattan, while Mr.
Pataki's wife, Libby, and his running mates released a new television commercial on his support for abortion rights.


Health Systems International Inc.(HQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Implant Easily Surpasses Pill in Averting Teen-Age Pregnancy
A study of contraceptive implants in teen-agers has shown that the devices are far more effective in preventing pregnancy than pills and do not discourage the use of condoms to prevent disease.
The device, Norplant, prevents pregnancy for five years with one insertion and had already been promoted as a breakthrough in contraception for teen-agers because it would not require daily pill taking.
But it has raised concerns among specialists in family planning that its use might have some unwanted consequences.


Lenehan and Charisma A Winning Duo Again
Leslie Lenehan and Charisma, a team for the last six years, were head and shoulders above everyone else in the field of 32 tonight as they captured the $25,000 International and Open Jumper Grand Prix, the feature event on the opening day of the 111th National Horse Show.
Riding an 11-year-old gray mare who looked every bit as good as she used to be, Lenehan covered the Byrne Meadowlands Arena course in 29.76 seconds for the $7,000 first prize.


Thomas Case Shows Divide At the Journal
Across the front page of its second news section yesterday, The Wall Street Journal published an article based on a much-promoted new book by two of the newspaper's journalists.
The article, "A Closer Look at Clarence Thomas," was filled with information that the writers, Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson, said corroborated Anita F. Hill's version of events in the hearings that transfixed the country three years ago.


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bank Plan Would Rescue Co-ops Hurt by Recession
Throwing a financial lifeline to scores of cooperative apartment buildings in New York City, a consortium of banks has put up $100 million to help rescue co-ops that were hit hard when the real estate market collapsed in the late 1980's, and to help new buyers obtain mortgages.
Officials estimated that the program could involve 6,000 to 7,000 apartments in 150 to 200 buildings.
Many are in middle-income buildings in Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn that were brought to the brink of collapse after their sponsors went bankrupt when apartment sales fell far short of expectations.


Cable Networks Keep Tight Rein on Offerings
To the Editor:
"Tomorrow's Interactive Home" (editorial, Oct. 27), on the information superhighway, asserts that consumers should take heart that cable television companies, if permitted greater profits, will expand offerings.


Avondale Industries Inc.(AVDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Laxity Found On Insurers
Representative John D. Dingell, a proponent of Federal regulation for insurance companies, released a new study this week titled "Wishful Thinking," which describes inadequacies of state regulation of the insurance industry.
The report follows six years of investigation by a subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, of which Mr.
Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, is chairman.


Weights Of the World
AT last, paperweights for the admittedly imperfect: A crumpled-up blueprint for the architect, yellow legal pad for the lawyer, newspaper stock table for the broker and ledger sheet for the accountant "who makes huge mistakes," said designer Tibor Kalman.
Mr.
Kalman is the founder of M&amp;Co, which manufactures the steel paperweights.
"We were sitting around a table trying to come up with some ideas for gifts, and the result of our afternoon was a heap of crumpled pieces of paper," he recalled.
"So we started joking that we should give people those pieces of paper and make design out of garbage."


Playtex Products (PYX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Starter Series in Opera For Children 6 to 12
The Metropolitan Opera Guild has scheduled three programs to introduce children to the world of opera.
"First Stop Opera '94," the first, demonstrates the elements of opera: story, music, sets, costumes and lighting.
Performances are Nov. 19 and 20 and Dec. 3 and 4 at 11 A.M., 1 P.M. and 3 P.M. in the Clark Studio Theater of the Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
A double bill of "Marita and Her Heart's Desire," a fairy tale about a young girl who believes the moon can grant her wishes, and "The Amazing Adventure of Alvin Allegretto," about a small town where everyone sings instead of speaking, is scheduled for Jan. 28 and 29 at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. at the John Jay Theater, 899 10th Avenue, at 59th Street, Manhattan.


Aquila Gas Pipeline Corp.(AQP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Executives Plead Guilty In Meter Case
Three former executives of the company that dominated water-meter installation in New York City in the 1980's pleaded guilty yesterday to a misdemeanor charge of filing false records with a municipal agency, the Manhattan District Attorney's office said.
The three former officials worked for Vanguard Meter Service Inc., of Owensboro, Ky., and were indicted in 1991, along with the company itself and another executive.
A series of articles that year in The New York Times described installations that were done poorly and workers who had been underpaid.


Physicians Health Services Inc.(PHSV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Home Screen Is Getting Sexier
Even as the Helmsian hordes of the religious right thunderingly denounce pornography and licentiousness, even as the latest sex survey contends that Americans are not really very promiscuous, television pursues a scenario that might be titled "Sex Unplugged." Obviously, the stuff still sells, so barriers continue to be challenged in what is, after all, a gloriously free market.
Sort of.
Television is hardly alone in battering once traditional taboos.
Take, for instance, male frontal nudity.
In the theater, this used to be limited to the artsy avant-garde or touchy-feely counterculture musicals like "Hair." But suddenly New York stage actors are casually strutting the boards not only giving but showing their all (e.g.: Terrence McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!")


For This Jewelry, A Jewel-Box Shop
THE new boutique called Elizabeth Locke at Peipers &amp; Kojen, 968 Madison Avenue (at 76th Street), is possibly the smallest on the avenue, at 200 square feet.
"It's a jewel box itself," said the architect Stover Jenkins, who lined the walls with mahogany and designed the bronze display cases.
"Like the jewelry, its grandeur is packed in a small volume," he said.
"It all came down to proportion and materials."
Elizabeth Locke designs classically inspired, one-of-a-kind hand-hammered gold settings for pieces she finds on her world journeys: ancient coins, antique Italian micromosaics, 19th-century Venetian glass intaglios.


Nine West Group Inc.(NIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Can Foreman Try to Rope A Dope, Too?
IN two months, George Foreman will be 46.
Even in a boxing era when the marquee is more important than the man, that's old.
And it's not as if big George has been a winner or even been busy.
When he challenges Michael Moorer for two of the world's three heavyweight titles Saturday night in Las Vegas, Nev., he will be in a ring for the first time since he lost to Tommy Morrison 17 months ago.
Over the last four years, he has had only five bouts; he also lost to Evander Holyfield in his 1991 title shot.


The Siren Song of the Sports Center
IN an era when a school's athletic centers can be a bigger student draw than its educational programs, New York architects are being commissioned to design ever more spectacular gyms.
The most recent to open is a $12 million, 60,000-square-foot athletic center for 3,000 students at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J.
It was created by David Finci, a principal of the recently merged Hillier/Eggers Group in New York, now the fifth-largest architectural firm in the United States.


CHRONICLE
Sometimes it helps to have a relative in the shoe business.
KENNETH COLE, a son-in-law of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, was determined not to be drawn into partisan politics, but with election day drawing nigh, he couldn't resist.
Mr.
Cole created an advertisement that began appearing this week on telephone kiosks all over the city.
It will also be published in The New York Times Magazine on Sunday.


J&amp;J Snack Foods Corp.(JJSF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Michigan National(MNCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hanover Ensemble Plays Schumann
The Hanover Band, a British period-instrument ensemble that has been toiling in the fields of early Romanticism since 1980, offered its concert at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday as a benefit for the Royal Society for Nature Conservation.
That, at least, was the official billing, and to make things sufficiently ceremonial, the performance was attended by the Duke of Kent, who is listed as the orchestra's patron, and Sir David Attenborough, who is the nature society's president.
The orchestra's unofficial agenda, though, was to celebrate the release of its set of Schumann symphonies by BMG Classics, and for the occasion the 74-member enemble and its conductor, Roy Goodman, gave a performance of the Fourth (Op. 120) that was the highlight of an uneven evening.
Using the 1841 version rather than the more common revision of a decade later, Mr.
Goodman drew bright string and brass sonorities, crisp attacks and unified ensemble playing from his band.
And in the finale, the players followed his animated beat with an enlivening rambunctiousness.


Pritchard Season Over
Denver placed wide receiver MIKE PRITCHARD on the injured-reserve list yesterday, ending his season.
Pritchard, 25, was a key off-season acquisition by the Broncos, having caught 201 passes in his first three pro seasons with Atlanta.
But on Sept. 23, he suffered a lacerated kidney in practice and was hospitalized for 11 days.
He has been unable to work out and has missed five games.
Pritchard underwent a CAT scan yesterday.
It showed that his kidney was healing but that a slight laceration remained. (AP)


Breeders' Cup Favorites On Outside Rushing In
By the luck of the draw, bad luck as they saw it, four favorites drew outside or next-to-outside post positions today for the Breeders' Cup races on Saturday.
Lure was assigned the 14th and last post in the Mile, Devil His Due the 14th of 14 in the Classic, Sky Beauty the ninth of 10 in the Distaff and Paradise Creek the 13th of 14 in the Turf.


Moore Corp.(MCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Correction
Because of an editing error, Monday's column gave an incorrect date for the North American Charity Game.
It will be played on Nov. 21.


Panama Chief Seeks to Prod The Economy
Seeking to stimulate the economy and reduce poverty, Panama's new Government has introduced an ambitious plan to sell stakes in state-run industries, reduce import tariffs and revise labor laws that inhibit foreign investment.
President Ernesto Perez Balladares, a wealthy businessman who took office in September, has said modernizing the economy and reducing poverty are his top priorities for Panama, where more than half the 2.5 million people live in poverty and unemployment is officially about 14 percent.


Abex Inc.(ABE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Big Winners, Big Losers In Snapple's Life Story
As a public company, the Snapple Beverage Corporation may not make it to its second birthday.
But its short life story is a fascinating one.
Those who got in before the company was sold to the public made more than $1 billion.
Those who got in within the first few weeks Snapple was public did very well as it became one of the hottest offerings in years.
But almost all those who bought Snapple more than six months after it went public will emerge poorer for the experience.
Some, mostly the public owners of the stock, will lose more than half the money they invested.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Recounts Tough Times
CANDIDATE -- Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER -- The Garth Group, New York City


Executive Changes
FLEET MORTGAGE GROUP, Columbia, S.C., a unit of Fleet Financial Group, named Gerald L. Baker chairman and chief executive.
USLIFE CORP.,New York, appointed William A. Simpson president and chief executive, succeeding Gordon E. Crosby Jr., who will continue as chairman.
All American Life Insurance Co., New York, a subsidiary of USLife, appointed James A. Bickler president and chief operating officer.


U.S. Says Many Arab Lands Back Aid Bank
The Clinton Administration insisted today that its hopes of establishing a multibillion-dollar development bank for the Middle East were not dead and that many Arab countries were open to contributing to it.
Although Administration officials acknowledged that several Arab countries had not committed money to the bank, they said these countries had given a green light to the idea at a conference in Casablanca by setting up a study group on how to structure and finance the bank.


Cascades Paperboard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mr. Ames Exposed More Than Spies
It is now clear beyond doubt that Aldrich Ames turned the old cold-war game of spy versus spy into a total rout -- in the Soviets' favor.
According to a Senate Intelligence Committee report, Mr.
Ames managed to betray most U.S. and allied espionage operations in the Soviet Union from 1985 on.
His treachery resulted in the exposure and rolling up of over 100 spy operations, the "loss of virtually all of C.I.A.'s intelligence assets targeted at the Soviet Union," the deaths of at least a dozen prized Soviet agents and the exposure of other Soviet agents who were then forced to feed false information back to Western intelligence.


Political Choices in New Jersey; Balloting for the House -- and Homes
Two Congressional races in northern New Jersey rate special notice.
In one, a one-term incumbent has a tight contest.
In the other, the seat is open.
Eighth District (parts of Essex and Passaic Counties): This seat has been Democratic for decades, but a Republican, William Martini, a lawyer and former Assistant U.S.
Attorney, is giving Herb Klein, a first-term Representative, a stiff challenge.


Nude Cellist and Video Chaos, in Reprise
Seoul-Nymax: A Celebration of Arts Without Borders is an ambitious monthlong festival that sprawls through South Korean contemporary dance and electronic arts, classic and new multimedia work and the art of Fluxus, the post-Dadaist movement of the 1950's and 60's here and abroad.
The festival got off to an intriguing start on Oct. 8 with a program that featured a concert by Vytautas Landsbergis, the piano-playing first president of free Lithuania.
But "Drama 20/21," a comprehensive tribute to Fluxus that suggested both its history and its meaning today, promises to have been the oddest event in the festival.
The program, at Anthology Film Archives on Tuesday night, was for the most part a celebration of the blithe, wired spirits of the 1960's.
It offered a series of high jinks on a stage covered with electronic equipment, preserved for posterity by an audience armed with still and video cameras and tape recorders.
But the evening began with an homage to Charlotte Moorman, the topless video-cellist of the 60's, that proved to be as nuanced and touching as it was funny.


Lowell Johnson, 82, Business Consultant
Lowell Ferris Johnson, a retired consumer-products executive and business consultant, died on Saturday at Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center in Plainfield, N.J.
A resident of North Plainfield, he was 82.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Corporate takeovers are back, but without some of the flash and excess of the 1980's.
This year is likely to be the second biggest for mergers and acquisitions, after $335.8 billion in 1988.
Companies that slashed costs in the early 1990's are now looking to increase their revenue, and acquisition is an easy way to do it.  [ Page A1. ] Manufacturers are beginning to raise prices as the recovery picks up speed, the Federal Reserve said in its September survey of regional economies, known as the beige book.  [ D1. ]


Cytec Industries Inc.(CYT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Psychoanalyst Loses Libel Suit Against a New Yorker Reporter
A jury in Federal District Court here may have finally ended the long-running saga of Janet Malcolm and Jeffrey M. Masson.
It ruled today that while two of five disputed quotations Ms.
Malcolm attributed to Mr.
Masson in a 1983 profile of the psychoanalyst in The New Yorker magazine were false and one of those was defamatory, none were written with the recklessness required for libel.
The verdict, from a panel of seven women and one man, culminated -- and may well conclude -- nearly 10 years of litigation in which the case reached the United States Supreme Court once and juries twice, consumed a fortune in legal fees and triggered a debate over what constitutes quotations and the license reporters may take with them.


Raul Julia Memorial
A memorial tribute to the actor Raul Julia is to be held on Sunday from 10 A.M. to noon at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village.
Mr.
Julia died on Oct. 24 at the age of 54, of complications from a stroke.
The tribute, which is open to the public, will be held in the Newman Theater, with additional seating in the Shiva, Anspacher and LuEsther Theaters, where there will be video monitors.
There will also be loudspeakers in the lobby of the Newman and on the sidewalk outside.


Dames &amp; Moore (DM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gilda's Club for Cancer Patients Is Rising
A FEW months from now, it is likely that someone with cancer will walk through the doors of 195 West Houston Street seeking reassurance and solace.
He or she will be welcomed by an open-armed group of cancer survivors.
That would make Gilda Radner happy.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 28
Oct. 21
Oct. 29
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.1
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.5
Gasoline stocks
198.0
202.7
210.5
Distillate stocks
143.7
145.1
138.5
Crude imports, daily
7.0
7.2
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.4
2.0
Crude stocks
338.5
333.0
333.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.3
90.2
92.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Bosnians and Croats Continue Pounding Serbs
Contingents of the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army and the Croatian militia advanced overnight and today in fighting around the Bosnian Serb-held town of Kupres, following up on the most significant Serbian setbacks of the war, local media reports said.
The official Croatian news agency reported tonight that units of the Bosnian Croat militia, the Croatian Defense Council, were overrunning Bosnian Serb forces south and west of Kupres and had surrounded the Serbian-held village of Rilic, driven the Serbs from Donji Malovan and seized "significant" quantities of weapons and ammunition.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Consolidated Edison's guilty plea in a case involving the release of asbestos in a 1989 steam pipe explosion in Manhattan referred imprecisely to the admissions made by a former company executive, Constantine J. Papakrasas.
He pleaded guilty to failure to report the asbestos release to a Federal agency, not to having concealed the information.
And while Con Edison has acknowledged that more than 200 pounds of asbestos was released in the explosion, Mr.
Papakrasas did not say tests immediately after the blast showed that such an amount was released.


Improvising In the Style Of the 1960's
The pianist Rachel Z performed the Herbie Hancock composition "Eye of the Hurricane" in the middle of her first set at the Iridium on Tuesday night, and it swung.
Her group, Dave Liebman on soprano saxophone, Ron Carter on bass and Lenny White on drums, dug into the rhythm of the piece.
Mr.
Carter, who was on the original recording, prodded the rest of the band into a bristling, exciting performance.
Rachel Z is a disciple of the literate, harmonically probing jazz that was produced in the 1960's, and her improvisations rang with the sounds of McCoy Tyner and Mr.
Hancock.
At their best, they had a sense of play to them.


National Education Corp.(NEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's Quantity Rather Than Quality at Nets' Center Spot
Butch Beard, the first-year coach, might have to make the decision with his allocation of minutes.
Willis Reed, the general manager, could concoct a last-minute trade and save Beard the trouble.
Either way, the Nets need to take a long, hard look into their forest of big men and begin whittling.
No less than five players are competing for minutes at the center position, and after the 7-foot Benoit Benjamin it is anyone's guess who will secure playing time this weekend as the club leaves for a three-game Texas trip to begin the regular season.


Picturetel Corp.(PCTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Sculpture for the Walls
THE artist Jeffrey Brosk melds weathered cherry wood with slate, in wall reliefs as graphic and spare as a Japanese sword.
"It's a collaboration between the wood and myself," says the M.I.T.-trained architect turned sculptor.
The elegant reliefs succeed as both sculptures and pictorial compositions.
Brosk sets up a powerful tension in each piece by combining warm, fine-grained old cherry with cool, dense dark slate.
His solo exhibition, through Nov. 19 at the Stephen Rosenberg Gallery in SoHo, is of wall sculptures, though Mr.
Brosk also accepts commissions for furniture and large outdoor installations.


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Calendar: Shows, Talks, Sales, Tours
An Architect in Rotterdam  Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.
An exhibition of models, drawings, photographs and installations featuring projects by the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas, whose work deals with urbanism, architecture and public space, opens today and continues through Jan. 31.
Projects in the show include the Rotterdam Kunsthal, the Jussieu Library for the University of Paris, and Euralille, the southern terminus of the English Channel rail tunnel system.


AmVestors Financial Corp.(AVFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pepsico Pushes a Star Performer
Attention snack food aficionados: What will soon be 20 percent larger, 15 percent thinner and stronger tasting?
The answer: Doritos.
Pepsico's Frito-Lay division, which makes the tortilla chips -- the country's biggest-selling snack food -- is spending $50 million to jazz up the corn chip in the costliest redesign in Frito-Lay's history.
The most it had shelled out before was $35 million -- for the 1992 redesign of its Lay's and Ruffles potato chips.


BIC Corp.(BIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Strike Prevents Delivery of San Francisco Daily Newspapers
Employees of this city's two major daily newspapers, longtime rivals that have limped along under a joint operating agreement since 1965, went on strike Tuesday night as 2,600 reporters, editors, drivers, press operators and paper handlers walked off the job.
They had been working without a contract for the past year.
The work stoppage at The Chronicle and The Examiner, the first at the newspapers since a 52-day walkout in 1968, began a day after the original Halloween strike deadline set by eight unions had been extended for a flurry of last-minute negotiations.
But the talks failed, and while hundreds of thousands of papers for Wednesday were printed, few if any reached readers' hands.


Foreman Shedding Nice Guy Profile
Suddenly, a mellow, avuncular George Foreman disappared today.
He had been given a dispensation by the Almighty to hurt people.
Or so he said.
It was as if the clock were turned back 20 years, when a young, snarling Foreman rumbled over opponents and friends alike.
Saying he regretted that he had taken it easy on opponents, Foreman implied that he would try to kill the heavyweight champion Michael Moorer in their bout here Saturday night.


For Suffolk District Attorney, Feuding Spills Over
The Suffolk County District Attorney today called a news conference to defend himself against accusations that he had tried to silence top county officials he has been feuding with by threatening to humiliate them with grand-jury investigations.
In response, the Republican and Democratic leaders of the County Legislature called on the District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., to step aside pending the outcome of investigations into a $17 million county car-leasing deal that was drafted by his son and involved a longtime family friend.


Energy Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's Nature. What's It Doing in Midtown?
In Peoria, no one would have noticed.
In Manhattan, it was the Mystery of the Peculiar Petals.
What were those white fluffy things drifting softly down from the sky?
By 2 P.M. yesterday, hordes of Manhattan office workers crowding the streets at lunch hour were asking just that question.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.





Israeli Woman Sues for Chance to Be a Combat Pilot
The problem, Alice Miller recalls, first arose when she was a high school senior in this town near Tel Aviv, approaching her compulsory military service.
Boys in her class had been summoned to qualification exams for pilot training in the air force.
A civilian pilot who loves to fly and had once written to NASA about becoming an astronaut, she was not even considered for the air force because Israel bars women from combat.


Harris Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suit Against Bausch &amp; Lomb Is Judged a Class Action
A decision by a Federal judge in Alabama to allow a lawsuit filed in May against Bausch &amp; Lomb by three consumers to proceed as a class-action case was met with indifference yesterday by both the eyewear company and Wall Street.
United States District Judge U. W. Clemon ruled in Birmingham on Tuesday that buyers of Bausch &amp; Lomb's Medalist and Optima lines of contact lenses are entitled to join the suit.


A Playwright's Post-Beckett Period
Twenty years ago, Marina Carr, Ireland's most celebrated young playwright, was a girl of 9 putting on plays in the garage of her home in the hamlet of Pallas Lake, deep in the quiet of the rustic Irish Midlands.
Her family, she says, was one of "rural literary pretension." Her mother, whose first language was Gaelic, wrote unpublished poems in that language.
Her father, Hugh, is a minor playwright.
Miss Carr had no high hopes, but she knew she liked words and playacting.


INSIDE
H.I.V. Tests and Women
A finding that it is possible to prevent most cases of AIDS in babies has opened a heated debate on the idea of mandatory AIDS testing of mothers.
Page B14.
Plane Rolled Before Crash
A commuter plane dipped to one side, righted, then flipped upside down before it plunged to the ground, killing 68 people.
Page A20.
"Shot Red Marilyn," one of the best-known images in contemporary art, tops Christie's sale.
Page C19.


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Price Is Too High To Be the Best
The expectations could not be higher, and the players know it.
So does Pat Riley.
Anything less than a championship has become unacceptable to the Knicks.
That's the way it was in Los Angeles during the 1980's, when Riley coached the Lakers.
And it has become that way in New York, where the Knicks suffered through a summer of being second best.


Simpson Strategy: There Were Several Killers
Outlining what is expected to become a central defense theory in the O. J. Simpson case, a defense lawyer said today that two or more people were involved in the slayings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman and that Mr.
Simpson did not have to solve the crime in order to prove his innocence.
"Are any of you going to require Mr. Simpson and his lawyers to solve these killings and identify the real killers?" the lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., asked potential jurors this morning.
Answering his own question, he said, "You understand, that's not our job."


Times Names Editor To Its Editorial Page
The appointment of Philip Taubman as an assistant editor of the editorial page at The New York Times was announced yesterday by Howell Raines, editorial page editor.
Mr.
Taubman is the deputy national editor of The Times.
In his new position, he will be involved principally in editing and writing editorials on foreign policy and national security issues.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.76
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
5.07
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.52
5.51
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.95
7.90
5.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.09
8.06
6.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.88
7.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.03
6.93
5.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Five Years Later: Eastern Europe, Post-Communism -- A special report.; East Europe Still Choking on Air of the Past
One place to measure the disheveled state of Eastern Europe's environment these days is a great electronic scoreboard in Usti nad Labem, a Czech town on a bend of the Elbe River.
New sensors are sniffing the bad breath coming off the local factories and on the scoreboard, the people of Usti can track the gases they inhale as if following an important sports event.


Reeves Questions Some Personnel Moves
In a conference call with reporters in Dallas today, Giants Coach Dan Reeves said that the team may have made some mistakes in the handling of certain personnel situations, especially in relation to the salary cap and free agency.
While he didn't give details, Reeves made it clear to reporters there that he was unhappy with how the team went down in payroll but didn't pick up any high-profile free agents.


Milk Campaign Expanding Markets
The popular Got Milk? campaign created by Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco for the California Milk Processor Board is being expanded again to include New York State.


METRO DIGEST
PEROT SIGNALS HE WILL SUPPORT GOLISANO In a surprise move, Ross Perot agreed to appear with B. Thomas Golisano, the Rochester businessman running a strong independent campaign for governor.
A1.
The leading gubernatorial candidates vied for the mantle of underdog in a close race.
B8.


Dow Off 26.24 in 3d Consecutive Loss
Stock prices tumbled yesterday for a third consecutive session, despite a series of efforts by the Federal Reserve to support the falling dollar.
Stocks rose in early trading when the Fed, acting as agent for the Treasury Department, bought a billion or so dollars and sold German marks and Japanese yen in the currency markets.
But this action was not enough to prevent losses for the day in both stocks and bonds.
A weak dollar increases the possibility of higher inflation and discourages investment from abroad.


Japanese Pass Bills On Electoral Reform
After more than four years of battling, the lower house of Parliament today passed the final versions of bills to set up a new electoral system and to toughen campaign financing laws, part of a long-promised effort to clean up Japan's scandal-haunted politics.
Approval of the bills, which included detailed outlines of the 300 new electoral districts, means that the bitterly contested laws can take effect in December.
As a result, the next parliamentary elections will be held under the new system, and thus could profoundly alter the balance of power in Parliament and further realign the battered party system.


VOTERS DISGUSTED WITH POLITICIANS AS ELECTION NEARS
Heading into Tuesday's election, voters are profoundly alienated from their elected representatives and from the political process and confess to a deepening powerlessness and pessimism over the future of the nation, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Disgust with Congress is near the recorded high, and more than 60 percent of those polled were unable to name an elected official they admired.


Political Choices in New Jersey; Re-elect Senator Lautenberg
Thanks in large measure to Frank Lautenberg, smoking on commercial airliners within the United States is against the law.
So is ocean dumping of sewage and plastics.
With accomplishments like those, Mr.
Lautenberg, a businessman turned U.S.
Senator, has earned re-election.
His Republican challenger is the Speaker of the State Assembly, Chuck Haytaian.
After many years in politics, including 12 in the Assembly, Mr.
Haytaian cannot claim to be a new face in this anti-incumbent year, and there is nothing in his record to argue that his achievements would match Mr.
Lautenberg's.
Moreover, his hard-knuckle campaign and tolerance for talk-radio bigotry are unattractive, as is his waffling on issues like abortion.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Joe Courtney, forward.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Acquired Rony Seikaly, center, from the Miami Heat for Billy Owens, forward, and the rights to Predrag Danilovic, guard.


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns in New York and New Jersey. NEW YORK
Governor -- A day after he endorsed Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas, Ross Perot agreed to extend his blessing to the candidacy of B. Thomas Golisano, the third-party challenger for New York governor.
The Texas billionaire has agreed to come to New York to campaign with the Rochester millionaire, a move that is expected to hurt State Senator George E. Pataki and help Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Page A1.


D&amp;K Wholesale Drug Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carr-Gottstein Foods Co.  (CGF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


COMPANY BRIEFS
EASTMAN KODAK CO., Rochester, completed the sale of Sterling Winthrop Inc., New York, a pharmaceutical and health products concern, to SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., Brentford, England, for $2.93 billion in cash.


Market Place; Big Winners, Big Losers In Snapple's Life Story
As a public company, the Snapple Beverage Corporation may not make it to its second birthday.
But its short life story is a fascinating one.
Those who got in before the company was sold to the public made more than $1 billion.
Those who got in within the first few weeks Snapple was public did very well as it became one of the hottest offerings in years.
But almost all those who bought Snapple more than six months after it went public will emerge poorer for the experience.
Some, mostly the public owners of the stock, will lose more than half the money they invested.


Race for Governor: Pataki Says Tax Cuts Are Possible
CANDIDATE -- George E. Pataki PRODUCER -- Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif.


Cowboys Have Easy Rumbles In the East
They lost their head coach, who is sunning himself in Florida, and still the Dallas Cowboys haven't lost a beat.
When their offensive coordinator bolted to the nation's capital to try and pull the Washington Redskins back to respectability, the Cowboys didn't worry.
If someone dropped a bomb in the middle of their locker room, it seems, the Cowboys wouldn't worry.
An incredible amount of talent and skill and work ethic have made the Cowboys almost indestructible.
Two Sundays ago, quarterback Troy Aikman was knocked silly, and Dallas still beat Phoenix with backup Rodney Peete.
Tight end Jay Novacek, one of the best in the business, has missed games because of stomach injury, and the beat goes on.
They lose the Pro Bowl offensive tackle Erik Williams for the season after a car wreck, and still nothing slows them down.


Midwest Resources Inc.(MWR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Luxottica Group SpA (LUX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Upholds Charging Man In Gun Attack
A Federal magistrate judge ruled today that the Government had adequate legal grounds to file four felony charges against Francisco M. Duran, a former Army medic accused of firing a semiautomatic rifle at the White House on Saturday.
The ruling by Magistrate Judge Deborah A. Robinson, came after Mr.
Duran, 26, underwent a psychiatric screening on Tuesday evening and was found mentally competent to understand the charges against him.
Judge Robinson ordered Mr.
Duran held without bail.


AWAY FROM HOME WITH: Liz Carpenter; With Three, She Gets Nine Inch Nails
LIZ CARPENTER is having a great book tour.
Sure, there are parties in every city, given by social and prestigious names -- "Age blesses you with a bounty of friends," she said -- but that's not it.
It's just that after a long drought, she's enjoying adult conversation, is happily ignoring the vagaries of who's who in the rock world and has wiped the word "homework" from her vocabulary.
Well, at least for a couple of months.
Ms.
Carpenter, at 74, is the unexpected mother of three teen-agers, and her new book, "Unplanned Parenthood: The Confessions of a Seventysomething Surrogate Mother" (Random House), is a tale of how it all came about.
It's as down-to-earth as its author, which means it's mostly funny, sometimes hilarious and occasionally outrageous.
For although Ms.
Carpenter, with her comfortable figure, halo of gray hair and sincere blue eyes, looks like the grandmothers-who-used-to-be, she isn't.
Even in her native Texas, a state not short of characters, she's in the upper echelon of the breed, and that has nothing to do with the fact that she was bitten by a mad dog at age 6.


Victorian Opera at Juilliard
The Juilliard Opera Center is to present three performances this month of Rutland Boughton's "Immortal Hour," an opera composed in 1912-13 and based on a Celtic folk parable about lost love.
Randall Behr will conduct the production, which is being staged by Frank Corsaro.
Performances are Nov. 16 and 18 at 8 P.M. and Nov. 20 at 2 P.M. at the Juilliard Theater, 165 West 65th Street.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Aaron Rents reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deborah Voigt Recital
The soprano Deborah Voigt is to sing works by Brahms, Wagner, Mascagni, Griffes and Richard Strauss in her first New York recital, on Nov. 20 at 3 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Ms.
Voigt, who was the 1992 winner of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation Award, made her Metropolitan Opera debut in 1991 as Amelia in Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" and has since sung Leonora in "Il Trovatore," the title role in "Ariadne auf Naxos" and Chrysothemis in "Elektra" in the house.
Tickets to the recital are $28.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Mascotech Inc.(MSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doehler-Jarvis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Martin Stryker, 51, Blood Plasma Expert
Dr.
Martin H. Stryker, an official of the New York Blood Center who helped make the clotting factors derived from blood plasma safe for hemophiliacs, died on Sunday in Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He was 51 and lived in Jericho, L.I.
The cause was complications from gall bladder surgery, said his wife, Margaret.


With its fourth Miller Lite campaign in three years, an agency hopes consumers are thirsty for change.
IT would be far too harsh when discussing advertising for Miller Lite to repeat the familiar remark about mercurial weather -- that those who dislike it should stick around because it will change any minute.
After all, there's nothing wrong with a rainstorm being suddenly replaced by a rainbow.
And ad changes can be good, too.
Few consumers would still want to be watching the "Miller Lite All-Stars," that irksome gang of aging former athletes, has-been comedians and never-were celebrities who once brashly promoted the beer brand.


Kormeada Journal; The Unforgiven in Ethiopia: Its Refugee Families
Fanta Belete had lived in Eritrea for 17 years when Ethiopia fell to rebel troops in 1991.
He gathered his wife and children and joined an exodus of more than 200,000 people expelled by the Eritrean nationalist rebels, who were allied with the Ethiopians who won the war.
Many of those forced to leave were soldiers of the defeated army or Ethiopian civil servants who had worked for the ousted Marxist Government of Mengistu Haile Mariam.


Offensive Defense Mark
After wading through stacks of records, the National Football League confirmed yesterday that Minnesota cornerback Anthony Parker is the first defensive player to score touchdowns in three straight games.
Parker, getting his first chance to start after five injury-plagued seasons, returned an interception 41 yards for a touchdown against Tampa Bay on Sunday, returned a fumble 23 yards against Green Bay on Oct. 20 and an interception 44 yards against the Giants last Sunday. (AP)


CHRONICLE
The novelist HERMAN WOUK, 79, made a rare public appearance yesterday at a luncheon at the National Press Club in Washington.
He and his wife, BETTY SARAH WOUK, still keep a house in the capital, where he lived for a number of years while researching his two World War II novels, "Winds of War" and "War and Remembrance." Now they live in Palm Springs, Calif., which, Mr.
Wouk noted, "is sometimes described rather unfeelingly as God's waiting room."
The title of his talk was "Education of a Writer," and he described "the strange arch of my work that goes from gag writing for Fred Allen to World War II and Israel."


Cowboys' Smith Is Unhurt in Auto Mishap
The Dallas Cowboys running back EMMITT SMITH escaped injury in a two-car collision yesterday morning.
Smith's car and another vehicle collided as the Cowboys player was driving to Valley Ranch, Tex., where the team practices, officials said.


Rome Journal; For the Long-Suffering Colosseum, Intensive Care
It's the top, after all -- it's the Colosseum.
So the city government's measures to restore dignity to the immense ruined stadium seemed fitting.


Retired Admiral Assails Senator Over Sex Harassment Complaint
In an unusual personal attack, the former commander of the Navy's Atlantic Fleet has lashed out at Senator Patty Murray for trying to delay his retirement because of what she said was his mishandling of a sexual harassment complaint.
Senator Murray, Democrat of Washington, led an unsuccessful effort to hold a hearing on the officer, Adm.
Henry H. Mauz Jr., before he was retired at four-star rank.
A Navy lawyer, Lieut.
Darlene Simmons, had accused Admiral Mauz of failing to protect her from reprisals by other officers after she made accusations of sexual harassment.
Admiral Mauz denied this.


Fuss Over Photos of Mitterrand's Other Child
Breaking a French taboo on press revelations about the private lives of public figures, Paris-Match magazine published photographs today of a young woman whom it described as President Francois Mitterrand's daughter, who was born out of wedlock.
The magazine's decision promptly set off a stormy debate, but not about Mr.
Mitterrand's morals.
Rather, Paris-Match was roundly criticized by French politicians and journalists for dragging the French press toward the muck-raking practices of British and American tabloids.


Speeder Hunted After Father and Son Are Killed
They shared the same name and did almost everything together.
And on Wednesday night, the police said, the father and son died side by side when their car was hit by a vehicle that sped through a red light.
The collision threw Jesse Solomon, 67, and his 41-year-old son, Jesse Jr., from their seats as the other driver fled the scene.
The accident, which injured two other people, was one more instance in which a bad driver took someone's life, the police said, and this time it left a woman mourning both her husband and son.


David Feinberg, 37, an Author Who Wrote of Life With AIDS
David B. Feinberg, an author and Act Up member who chronicled AIDS in his books and battled it in the streets, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 37.
The cause was AIDS, said Wayne Kawadler, a friend.


Household International Inc.(HI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Devils Trim Their Front-Office Staff
The Devils became the first of the three hockey teams in the metropolitan area to reduce their front-office staff as a result of the delay in the opening of the National Hockey League season.
LOU LAMORIELLO, the president and general manager of the Devils, would not reveal the number of employees laid off, but he acknowledged yesterday that it was "more than a dozen."


Peter Taylor, Short-Story Master, Dies at 77
Peter Taylor, a novelist and short-story writer whose work was often praised for its gentility and its emotional precision, died on Wednesday at the University of Virginia Hospital in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 77 and lived in Charlottesville.
He had suffered several strokes in October, said his son, Ross.


United Healthcare Corp.  (UNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ground Round Restaurants reports earnings for Year to Oct 2


USLico Corp.(USC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns in New York and New Jersey. NEW YORK
Governor: Al Gordon, chairman of the state Democratic Party, filed a complaint with the Senate Select Committee on Ethics accusing Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of using his Congressional franking privileges to help Mr.
Pataki.
Mr.
Gordon said that while none of the mail mentioned Mr.
Pataki by name, the messages were coordinated with those of the gubernatorial candidate.
Zenia Mucha, Mr.
Pataki's spokeswoman, said, "Al Gordon has lost every marble he's ever had in that puny little brain of his, and this sets a new stand for desperation."


Tall Ships and High Expectations in Bridgeport
Anna Prizzia, 17, grew up dreaming about a life at sea and a career involving ships, especially tall ships.
Today, she was on hand with her classmates from the Bridgeport Aquaculture School, a magnet school, as several tall ships arrived at Captains Cove Seaport here for a convention of the American Sail Training Association.


Group Shows: One Groovy, One Graphic, One Grating
Group shows are a mixed blessing.
Designers showing together with corporate sponsorship risk being morphed into one blob of trend and fabric, while designers who may never show get the chance to offer a concise and tantalizing morsel of their works.
Group shows can never be better than the sum of the parts, but when sponsors pick strong designers and let them show a range of work in one block, these shows are a real service.


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Antidote For Reality: Box Scores
YOU want to know why Americans are so disillusioned with politicians this year?
That's what the front page said yesterday, and I just figured it out.
No baseball.
No hockey.
In normal times, we depend on our daily fix of sports to keep us amused.
Deprived of our rituals, some of us have inadvertently been exposed to political candidates.
We turn on the tube and listen to some guy in California explaining why he's against foreigners coming to this country, but he has got some kind of moral dispensation to hire an illegal alien.
In New York, a candidate has commercials that blatantly urge Jews not to vote for his black opponent.
In Montana, there's a guy running for re-election who's proud of voting for lobbyists who buy him supper.
How long has this been going on?


Critic's Choice/Film; Calm During a Storm: Celebrating Bresson
These days, Robert Bresson may be the least-shown of master film makers.
His signature style is the clear-sighted film that serenely explores emotional and social upheavals, like "Diary of a Country Priest," the 1950 tale of a quiet priest's religious crises.
"The Devil, Probably" is a late, little-known Bresson film that takes the same calm approach to a world crumbling from the inside out.
The film was shown at the 1977 New York Film Festival, then virtually disappeared from the United States until today, when it begins a weeklong run at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
The film, set in contemporary Paris, begins with a newspaper account of a young man's suicide, then flashes back to the final six months of his life.
Charles is 20 and in despair over a meaningless life.
With his head hanging down, and his long hair parted in the center and hanging over his face like curtains, he seems a fragile, Christ-like creature.
He has lost interest in the causes that consume his closest friends.
One leads an environmental group; another hands out anti-clerical pamphlets in church.
And when Charles finally sees a psychiatrist, the advice he gets is the most dangerous of all.
Who controls such a world?
"The devil, probably," says a man on a bus engaged in a typical Bressonian philosophical argument.


A Psychiatrist Who Falls For a Knife-Wielding Psycho
B movies used to look cheaper than their higher-class counterparts, but today they can have the antiseptically affluent look of a television show.
Not to mention the cast: "A Passion to Kill" stars Scott Bakula ("Quantum Leap") as a California psychiatrist who falls for his best friend's wife (Chelsea Field, the mom in "Andre," the summer's pet-seal movie) despite the warnings of his ex-girlfriend (Sheila Kelley of "L.A. Law").
"A Passion to Kill" also has the abundance of close-ups and medium shots that suggest television or video is its natural home.
It does have a B-movie screenplay (by William Delligan) with some inadvertent merriment.
The fun is enhanced because we know Diana (Ms. Field) to be a knife-wielding psycho and David (Mr. Bakula), despite his psychiatric training, hasn't a clue.
David seems to be better at racquet sports and drinking orange juice out of the carton than he is at fathoming the mysteries of the human mind.


Schulman (A.) Inc.(SHLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


IN A SEA OF MUD, EGYPTIAN DEATHS RISE BEYOND 400
Mohammed Ali, his hands and feet caked with dried gray mud, hiked up his flowing white robes and waded into a murky canal running by the smoldering remains of this farm town where at least 400 people and possibly as many as 600 perished in floods and fire this week.
"I have been here since dawn," he explained, as he plodded down the embankment.
"We usually find the small children in groups of three or four. Most of them drowned. But the adults are so badly burned we often do not know who they are."


SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc.(SPI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mamet's Lesson in Sexual Harassment
For David Mamet, conversation is a blood sport and words are lethal weapons.
In "Oleanna," his incendiary play about sexual harassment, a college student and her professor pace around his office hurling words at each other, actions that inspired knock-down-drag-out verbal fights in theater lobbies when the play was first produced.
But that was in 1992, when the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings were still fresh in our minds.
Since then, sexual harassment has sometimes dominated the news, as in the Tailhook and West Point scandals, or in Paula Jones's accusations against President Clinton.
And the issue has even become fodder for popular entertainment, as in Michael Crichton's best-selling novel "Disclosure," coming up as a Christmas movie.
Now this faithful, flat-footed screen version, directed by Mr.
Mamet, offers a reminder that "Oleanna" was always more effective as a debate topic than a work of drama.
Its two characters, Carol and John, are puppets manipulated by their creator, which makes "Oleanna" less volatile today than when it was the only sexual-harassment game in town.


Anderson Wants a Peek at the Prize Before Nets Take On the Champions
Kenny Anderson said he might ask Kenny Smith, his close friend and backcourt counterpart with the Houston Rockets, to show him his championship ring on Friday night.
There is nothing wrong with peeking at basketball's ultimate accomplishment, Anderson, the Nets' point guard, reasoned.
And since his club is in Houston for its opener against the defending champion Rockets, well, what's the harm?


Campaigns Focus on 2 Views of West
When the Democrats won the West in the 1992 Presidential election, they took it as a mandate to phase out century-old Government subsidies that were used to lure people and industry to the trackless corners of America's public lands.
Almost immediately, Republicans called this shift "a war on the West," and said it would cost Democrats what had been their best showing in the region in 30 years.
The slogan transferred easily to bumper stickers throughout the rural West, and has become a mantra in this year's midterm elections.


Redistricting Heats Up Election Races; Giuliani's Real Motive
To the Editor:
William Safire presents a distorted picture of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Mario M. Cuomo in the race for New York governor (column, Oct. 27).
Casting the move as the latest round in a personal feud, Mr.
Safire depicts a vindictive Mayor betraying the Republican Party to spurn Senator Alfonse D'Amato, his onetime sponsor and now bitter foe.


Creative Executive Is Joining Freeman
David Angelo, 33, has joined Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York as executive vice president and co-creative director.


Detroit Sets Truck Records As Vehicle Sales Jump 8.9%
Drawn by the fresh curves of some 1995 vehicles and the reduced prices on 1994 models, customers continued to flock to new car dealerships in October, buying 8.9 percent more cars and light trucks than were sold during the brisk period a year earlier, the auto makers reported today.
During October, the first month of the 1995 model year, sales of cars rose 2.9 percent, to 738,221, while sales of light trucks -- pickups, mini-vans and sport utility vehicles -- rose 18.8 percent, to 525,285.


New Plans For Petrie
The Petrie Stores Corporation said yesterday that it had decided to pursue the sale of its retailing operations separately from a plan to liquidate itself by distributing its 38.8 million shares of Toys "R" Us to its shareholders.


Art in Review
Joan Mitchell
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Through Nov. 12
The paintings in this show date from 1964, the year after the death of Joan Mitchell's father.
She called them her "black paintings," though she used no black in their making, and their somber palette can be read as an extended gesture of mourning.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS, a division of General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., has received a $164 million contract to build a 300-megawatt addition to a Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, power plant of Saudi Consolidated Electric Co.
HANSON P.L.C., London, said it would invest $435 million in the next three years in its United States chemicals businesses -- Quantum Chemical, SCM Chemicals and SCM Glidco Organics.


Redman Industries(RDMN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Boxing Ring As a Parable On Manhood
Oliver Mayer's "Blade to the Heat" is a one-alarm play, but it is getting a four-alarm production at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
It begins with the growling of wild beasts and ends with a boxing match as brutal as you are likely to see on a stage.
In between, the lights throb, the bloodthirsty crowds roar and two drummers, as if possessed, beat a mad tattoo on the congas.
Flashbulbs rip holes in the darkness, already fouled by clouds of smoke.
Even the scene changes are explosive: the stagehands seem to be running for their lives.


Oshkosh B' Gosh (GOSHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Never Mind Those I.Q. Scores: It's Dedication That Counts
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Brent Staples for taking the I.Q. worshipers to task so pointedly and effectively in "The 'Scientific' War on the Poor" (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 28).


CHRONICLE
A familiar figure on the Washington diplomatic circuit, HARRY H. SCHWARZ, the Ambassador from South Africa to the United States since 1991, is on the move.
He is stepping down on Nov. 15 to become a senior adviser to the Washington law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld, the law firm announced yesterday.
The appointment is part of an effort by the firm to expand its international trade and investment practice.
Its partners include Robert Strauss, the former United States Ambassador to Russia, and Vernon E. Jordan, who headed President Clinton's transition team.


Itel Corp.(ITL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Downhill After the Los Angeles Riots
"Am I losing my mind? Am I sick?" worries John Boyz (James Le Gros), the unemployed, 30-something narrator of Peter McCarthy's brave but misguided contemporary satire, "Floundering." The Los Angeles riots have barely subsided, and John, who lives in Venice Beach, is haunted by what he calls a "pervasive feeling of doom." His edgy mood is made worse by his morbid habit of obsessively replaying his own homemade videotapes of the riots.
Prominently featured in those videos is Merryl Fence (Nelson Lyon), a Los Angeles police chief who suggests a monstrous caricature of the real-life Daryl F. Gates.
John seems almost eager for disaster to strike, and on one especially terrible day it finally does.
In the space of a few hours, he discovers that the Internal Revenue Service has put a lien on his savings account, his unemployment compensation has run out, and his brother has fled a drug rehabilitation clinic.
Seeking solace from his girlfriend, Jessica (Lisa Zane), he finds her in bed with another man.


Chilly Partners -- A special report.; Saudi Arabia, Its Purse Thinner, Learns How to Say 'No' to U.S.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry was pitching hard, but Prince Sultan was unreceptive.
After a late-night banquet of roasted meats and exotic fruit juices at the Saudi Defense Minister's palace in Jidda last month, the talk turned to money.


Give 'Em an Eph! Oozing Excellence at Williams
When it comes to athletics, there is little humility to be found on this idyllic campus.
Rather, the Ephs (the college was founded in 1793 by Col. Ephraim Williams) take for granted victory after victory and championship after championship.
Tomorrow, the unbeaten football team that has outscored six opponents by 238-38 plays host to Wesleyan in its first Little Three game.
Williams has won its last 14 Little Three games.
In fact, Williams teams have defeated Amherst and Wesleyan so often that the Ephs are no longer awarded those Little Three plaques, at $14 each.


Champion Account Goes to Merkley
The Champion Products division of the Sara Lee Corporation, which markets sportswear and other casual apparel, said yesterday that it had named Merkley Newman Harty in New York to handle its account, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
Billings were estimated at $12 million.
After a two-month review, Merkley Newman was chosen over two other New York-based finalists, Angotti, Thomas, Hedge and Deutsch Inc.


Ireland's Premier Assures Protestants in North of Their Rights
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds said today that his Government was prepared to approve a radical change in the Constitution of the Irish Republic to assure the people of Northern Ireland, with its Protestant majority, that they would never be subsumed into a united Ireland against their will.
Mr.
Reynolds said that he hoped his promise, made publicly and specifically for the first time, would assuage Protestant fears and speed the peace proposal he advanced last December with Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
He said he hoped that in return, Britain would give up its claim to sovereignty, something he said he thought was possible.


On Stage, and Off
Jerry, Yes Almost. Tina, No for Sure.
Casting plans for musicals usually exist somewhere between bright idea and official announcement.
The name for that limbo is rumor, and there are two in town about casting right now.
The "Jerry Lewis is replacing Victor Garber as the Devil in 'Damn Yankees' " one seems headed out of limbo.
"Jerry's had lunch with the producers and director," a man involved in the production said.
"He's interested and they're interested, as long as he wants to do serious acting, not the gags and the buck teeth." Other ideas batted around "Yankees," he said, were Joel Grey or "someone of color, like Greg Hines," which is a fairly cynical expression of the theory that a black star can revitalize a box office by drawing black theatergoers, as Vanessa Williams did for "Kiss of the Spider Woman."
Which brings us to rumor No. 2.
Tina Turner replacing Vanessa Williams?
Denied -- believably.
"No, honestly, we haven't even been approached about it," said Roger Davies, Ms.
Turner's manager.
"Tina doesn't even want to work until 1996. She's living in Europe now." And Mary Bryant, a spokeswoman for the show, which is produced by Garth Drabinsky, said: "It sounds like an old rumor getting recycled. Garth used to talk about getting Vanessa, or Tina Turner, or Cher, or Janet Jackson, or Diana Ross, when Chita Rivera left."


Embryo Sheds Light on Dinosaurs' Origin
In a discovery that should begin to round out knowledge of the full life cycle of dinosaurs, paleontologists exploring the Gobi Desert of Mongolia have found the first fossilized embryo of a meat-eating dinosaur.
Only six or seven other dinosaur embryos are known to science, and none is as exquisitely preserved as this one.
Curled up and resting in part of its oblong egg, the specimen looks very much like a tiny dinosaur on the half-shell.
With tail and all, the fully extended embryo would probably measure eight inches long.
But it is still in the fetal position, the head tucked near the knees.
A hand is over the face.
Except for the missing pieces of the tail and the top of the skull, everything about the skeleton seems complete, with individual vertebrae, pelvic bones and limbs all well formed and clearly identifiable.


Despite the Distractions, Ward Keeps Riding High
McLain Ward's world is horses.
At the age of 19, he has some remarkable accomplishments to his credit, and he plans to have many more in the years to come.
He plans this despite the distractions caused by his father's recent indictment on charges of being part of a group charged with killing horses to collect insurance benefits.
The indictment is something Ward avoids discussing even with casual friends on the circuit, or at shows such as this week's National Horse Show at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the most prestigious of all United States equestrian events.


17 Warrant Evaders Are Arrested in Raids at Their Homes
In a new crackdown on those who fail to show up for court appearances, 17 people wanted for crimes from vandalism to robbery were arrested in early-morning raids yesterday at their homes in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
Many of the offenders were rousted from their beds.
And as a result of the arrests, officers got information on one unsolved killing and several drug locations, said Capt.
Thomas J. Palazzo, commander of the 72d Precinct.


The 2 Wizards of the Smoke-and-Mirror Trade Guiding Cuomo and Pataki
One never talks to the press, and the other threatens not to but can't quite stop.
One works exclusively in his socks and eats only fried food, and the other is a rogue and a connoisseur.
One builds a campaign around a single, simple slogan and the other is the master of a million nuanced insinuations.
And in the last week of the New York governor's race, the strategists for the two main candidates are as different as the television commercials they have devised for their clients.
For George E. Pataki there is the reclusive Arthur Finkelstein, and for Mario M. Cuomo the unavoidable David Garth.


Raise the Hurdle for College Athletes
People who worry about education -- and how colleges exploit athletes without providing it -- will find some alarming news in "The Last Shot: City Streets, Basketball Dreams," Darcy Frey's new book about the sports obsession in America's poorest neighborhoods and public schools.
It is by now a familiar story that students who neglect their studies in quest of sports stardom end up jobless and without degrees when their college scholarships expire, even while the colleges themselves earn millions in revenues.


America West Airlines (AWA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cutting Legal Aid Costs
Like all cities, New York is constitutionally obliged to provide legal help for indigent defendants.
Unlike most cities, New York contracts the work to a private organization, the Legal Aid Society.
Despite a history of dedication to an often thankless job, the society has grown fat with age.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has correctly chosen to pare the fat.
That will cause the society financial pain.
But it may also bring about new ways of dealing with the city's immense criminal caseloads and better justice at lower cost.
Two factors moved the society into the Mayor's line of fire.
One was the city's budget crunch.
The other was the society's foolish two-day strike in September.
The strike, which Mr.
Giuliani halted with a threat to fire the society, strengthened his hand just at budget time.
Now he calls for a cheaper system -- $12.5 million less than the current budget of $79 million -- and a modern legal services contract to replace the one first signed in 1966.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; These days, getting out the vote means getting in your face.
JUST as advertisements for political candidates have evolved over the years to reflect changing attitudes, so, too, have advertisements that urge Americans to vote.
Earnestly straightforward public service announcements, appealing to people in sincere, measured tones to perform their civic duty, have been supplanted by sharper messages, more sophisticated and visceral, that seek to amuse, surprise or even shock.


Eli Lilly Deal Is Approved By the F.T.C.
The Federal Trade Commission gave conditional approval yesterday to Eli Lilly &amp; Company's $4 billion purchase of PCS Health Systems, the nation's biggest prescription drug benefit company, and made clear that it would keep similar deals under surveillance for possible antitrust violations.
In a consent order, Lilly agreed to keep the PCS system, which it is buying from the McKesson Corporation of San Francisco, open to drugs made by competitors.
Lilly will also build a "fire wall" to prevent it from competing unfairly by obtaining pricing information submitted to PCS by other drug makers.


Prasad Hopes to Avert Painful Stitch in Time
After 11 miles, Nadia Prasad of France felt the pain so sharply that she stopped running and doubled over.
Two or three miles later, the pain returned and she stopped again, breathing deeply and attempting to touch her nose to her knees.
Every runner has dealt with a stitch in the side.
But this was no training run.
This was the middle of the 1993 New York City Marathon.
"It felt like a knife poking me in the side," Prasad said in a recent telephone interview from her home in Boulder, Colo.
"I had started too fast, then I didn't know how to grab the water bottles. I was scared of them. I was drinking too fast and I got a stitch."


6 Astronauts Are Launched Into Space
The refurbished space shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit today on a planned 11-day mission to study Earth's atmosphere, particularly the effects of solar radiation interacting with man-made chemicals on the ozone layer high in the atmosphere, which protects the planet from harmful ultraviolet radiation.
It is the third shuttle flight in as many years to carry an array of environmental-science instruments called the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science, or Atlas.
On Friday, the astronauts are to deploy and later retrieve a German-built satellite for further atmospheric studies.


Bringing Action to Blind Theatergoers
Sitting on a chair at the back of the Marquis Theater, Laura Congleton watched "Damn Yankees" and described what she saw.
"Joe takes the pen," she said very softly, speaking into a tiny microphone.
"Signs the book. They shake hands. Applegate looks at the book and smiles." In the audience, four people listening to her on headsets understood, though they could not see.


SPX Corp.(SPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Views of Clinton, Both Unflattering
HIGHWIRE  From the Backroads to the Beltway: The Education of Bill Clinton
By John Brummett
294 pages. Hyperion. $22.95.  ON THE EDGE  The Clinton Presidency
By Elizabeth Drew
462 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


Never Mind Those I.Q. Scores: It's Dedication That Counts; Breast-Feeding's Role
To the Editor:
Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein produce evidence in their book "The Bell Curve" showing that the 15-point gap between white and black I.Q. scores remains even after controlling for all sorts of social factors.
But there is one factor they do not discuss.


Inside Art
A Gift From the Panzas
The Italian industrialist Count Giuseppe Panza di Biumo and his wife, Countess Giovanna, continue to be strong international supporters of contemporary art.
This week, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles announced that the Panzas had given the museum 70 works, created over the last 12 years by 10 Los Angeles artists.
Among the artists are Lawrence Carroll, Jeff Colson, Gregory Mahoney, Peter Shelton, Mark Lere and Roy Thurston.
"I have been collecting Los Angeles artists for 30 years," Count Panza said in a telephone interview this week.
He joined the museum's board in 1980, and four years later he sold the museum 80 works of Abstract Expressionist and Pop art from his collection, for $11 million.
They included paintings and sculpture by Roy Lichtenstein, Claes Oldenburg and Robert Rauschenberg.


Sealed Air Corp.(SEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reinsurance Group of America Inc.(RGA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Scratch Nets Lukas An Extra Cup Edge
Two days before the Breeders' Cup series, Wayne Lukas's chances of scoring a sweep of the 2-year-old races got an unexpected boost today when a fever forced the withdrawal of Call Now, his chief threat in the Juvenile Fillies.
Nobody gets rich giving an edge to Lukas, especially this year when he comes roaring into the Breeders' Cup with a full deck: favorites in the two races for juveniles, including Flanders in the fillies and Timber Country in the colts; Chimes Band and Harlan in the Sprint, and Tabasco Cat in the Classic.
And the jockey on all his favorites will be Pat Day, the king of Churchill Downs.


BOXING: Moorer Shaky Slipping Barbs; Foreman's Witticisms Keep the Champion Tied Up
The heavyweight champion of the world is undefeated, 26 years old, about to fight a 45-year-old fat man who hasn't been in the ring for 17 months.
So why does Michael Moorer need to be protected from George Foreman's burning wit at a news conference, to be guarded from prying questions?


Value Health Inc.(VH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CBI Industries Inc.(CBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Count on Little-Known Candidate for 'Insurance' in Senate Edge
The Democrats desperately need an insurance policy for next Tuesday's midterm elections, and they think they may have found one in Ann Wynia, their little-known Senate candidate in Minnesota.
She alone among the 13 Democrats who are running for Republican-held Senate seats this fall seems to have a real chance of winning.
The party's hopes in Wyoming, Delaware and Montana have withered in recent weeks, but if Ms.
Wynia can knock off her Republican rival, Representative Rod Grams, the Republicans will need to pick up eight Democratic seats, not seven, to take control of the Senate.


At the Bar; New television stars in the O. J. Simpson case galaxy: the lawyer-commentators.
One day not long ago, a local lawyer, Jay Jaffe, approached Roger Cossack, another member of the bar, in Nate and Al's, the venerable Beverly Hills delicatessen and agora.
"Rog, my ratings are higher than yours," Mr.
Jaffe declared.
"Nationally, but not internationally," Mr. Cossack replied.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Placed Pervis Ellison, forward, and Tony Harris, guard, on the injured list.
Waived David Dean, center.


Reviews/Fashion; 'Tasteful' Comes in Many Colors
There is a certain woman in America who places her trust in two designers: Bill Blass and Oscar de la Renta.
She believes they will dress her in the latest styles without making her look foolish.
She knows that if the current craze is for bras or transparency, those designers will give her tasteful bras and discreet transparency.


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FHP International (FHPC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At Transit Ceremony, the Subject Was Gratitude


Schools in Paterson Lagging On Standards, Report Says
Three years after the state took control of the ailing Paterson school district, student achievement still lags far behind state standards, according to a report by independent auditors released today.
The report, by the accounting firm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, found that in two of the district's three high schools fewer than 75 percent of the students passed the state high school proficiency test.
The report also found that attendance figures in the district were low, while the dropout rate was 17.6 percent.


Saluting -- or Doing In -- the Suburban Muse
There were actually a lot of women in her era that despised the notion of Laura Petrie, the highly saluted muse of this season.
So what if she wore pants?
She never used foul language or double-entendres.
She wasn't sexy or dangerous.
She certainly never wore anything provocative; she and her husband even slept in twin beds.
It seems that everyone, from Isaac Mizrahi, hawking dresses on the Nick at Nite cable channel, to the young design team of Finis, have had something to say about Laura Petrie.


Horsham Corp.(HSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coach at Iowa State (0-7-1) Will Resign
JIM WALDEN, whose Iowa State football team is likely to face its first season without a victory since 1930, said last night that he will resign after the season.
Walden, in his eighth season as coach of the Ames, Iowa, university, said he was making the announcement to give the university a jump on finding a replacement.
Iowa State (0-7-1) finishes the season against Kansas State, Nebraska and Colorado -- all ranked in the nation's polls.


Williams Grand Jury to Review Blood Test
Grand jurors investigating an automobile accident involving a Cowboys offensive lineman, ERIK WILLIAMS, will be allowed to review a blood-alcohol test that was given after his admission to a hospital.
State District Judge MIKE KEASLER on Wednesday denied a request from Williams's attorneys to throw out the grand jury's subpoena for the test results.


The Race That Invective Forgot
Without a calendar, one could hardly guess that an election was in the offing.
On this brilliant autumn afternoon in the russet foothills of the Appalachians, Senator Robert C. Byrd was doing what he does best: waxing poetic about the glories of his state while he inaugurated something else in his name, the Robert C. Byrd Highway.


Unpaid Bills Hinder Work Of N.A.A.C.P.
The finances of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People are so fragile, several members of its board of directors have disclosed, that the association still owes hotels in Chicago and Indianapolis for its last two national conventions.
As a result of its poor credit, these board members say, the association is being forced to pay major expenses, like hotel room charges and air fares, in advance.
But because it cannot make these payments, they say, the 64-member board cannot even consider meeting to discuss a proposal to dismiss the group's chairman, Dr.
William F. Gibson.


Indonesia's Phony Cleanup
Indonesia's rulers see this month's Asia-Pacific economic summit meeting as a terrific opportunity to improve an international image stained by repression in East Timor and other serious human rights abuses.
How much more flattering to display a statesman-like President Suharto playing host to his counterparts from the U.S., China, Japan and a dozen other countries and touting the opportunities of the world's fourth-most-populous nation and one of its most vibrant economies.
Both images of Indonesia are true.
But its crude effort to shove all human rights problems out of camera range only highlights the repressive character of the regime.


Warm Weather Slowed Retail Sales in October
Mother Nature seems determined to keep merchants guessing about their prospects for the all-important holiday sales season, which officially begins the day after Thanksgiving.
The nation's chain stores said unseasonally balmy weather in several parts of the country contributed to slowing sales in October, the same reason they gave for September's weak performance.


Candidates Lament Tone, But Attack Just the Same
They lamented the bitter tone of the campaign and insisted that they wanted to talk more about issues, but the two candidates for New York State comptroller fired off a steady stream of personal attacks tonight in the last of six televised debates.
H.
Carl McCall, the Democratic incumbent who three days ago appeared with supporters accusing the Republican, Herbert London, of engaging in racial attacks, was silent on that issue tonight.
But he opted instead to rip into his opponent for what he portrayed as Mr.
London's stand against abortion rights and gun control.


Newman's Early Steps On the Path to Maturity
Sometimes it seems that no decade of American art has been as thoroughly excavated as the 1940's, that famously halcyon time when Abstract Expressionism was on the rise and the tiny New York art world crackled with excitement.
Some of these excavations -- like the illuminating exhibition devoted to the Indian Space Painters held at Baruch College a few years ago -- add new information and broaden the sense of artistic participation.
Others rehearse the progress of the artists most frequently associated with the period, reinforcing the notion that this sea change was the work of a handful of geniuses.
"Barnett Newman: The Sublime Is Now," the beautiful exhibition of Newman's early work at the Pace Gallery, presents more than 50 drawings and small paintings dating from 1944 to 1949, and falls somewhere between the two types.
The show, organized in collaboration with the Walker Art Center and the St.
Louis Art Museum, follows one of the movement's giants as he clears the path to his mature style, those planes of flat, saturated color broken by hard-eged bands or feather-edged zips that we call Newmans.


The Eyes Have It: It Was a Lovely Day


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A long-awaited personal computer standard will be announced by Apple Computer, Motorola and I.B.M. on Monday.
A single hardware standard based on the Power PC chip could begin to challenge the dominance of Intel and Microsoft.  [ Page D1. ]
Eli Lilly's $4 billion purchase of PCS Health Systems was cleared by the F.T.C.
Lilly agreed to keep the PCS system open to drugs made by competitors.
And the agency made clear that it would watch similar deals for possible antitrust violations.  [ D1. ]


Yes on the Nassau Charter
Of all the choices facing Nassau County voters next Tuesday, none bears more directly on their future than Proposal No. 1 -- a charter revision that would create a new 19-member legislature to replace the six-member Board of Supervisors, which has held sway in the county for almost 100 years.
A switch to a county legislature was made inevitable more than a year ago when a Federal judge declared the Board of Supervisors and its weighted voting system an unconstitutional violation of the principle of one person one vote.
If Proposal No. 1 fails, the court will impose its own, possibly more expensive plan -- throwing out not only the proposed 19-member legislature but also other reforms proposed by the bipartisan Charter Revision Commission.
These include an independent budget review office, a line-item veto for the County Executive and a stricter county ethics code.


Bally Entertainment Corp.(BLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hear Ye! Hear Ye! Four Days of Talks Scheduled
Negotiators for baseball's striking players and owners agreed yesterday to the most ambitious schedule of bargaining sessions since they began working toward resolving their labor differences.
In a joint scheduling session with Bill Usery Jr., the mediator, in Washington, representatives of the two sides agreed to meet in the Capital next Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.


A Jury Is Selected In the Simpson Case
After weeks of often tedious questioning, 12 jurors -- eight black, two Hispanic, one white and one identified as half white and half American Indian -- were selected for the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Although lawyers repeatedly told prospects that race was not an issue in the case, it was clearly a compelling concern during jury selection.
Article, page A18.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  DEATH TOLL RISES IN EGYPT  Survivors searched the smoldering remains of a village in southern Egypt a day after floods spread burning fuel from a damaged depot there.
Officials said at least 400 died in the disaster and that about 200 might be buried under mud.
A1


A Brain on Ice, a Dead Toad and Voila!
DESPITE the chivalry of its title, "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" will not strike anyone as chiefly Mary Shelley's invention.
Its principal architect is Kenneth Branagh, who does not hide his light under bushels, not even bushels of classic literary stature.
In a dazzling display of hubris, Mr.
Branagh takes on the godlike, idealistic young scientist's role while also directing this "Frankenstein" as an overheated romantic fable.
For a film of such lavishness and chaotic sprawl, creating-a-monster quips are obvious but inevitable.
"Frankenstein" is a cogent reminder that Mr.
Branagh's reputation as a film maker rests primarily on seductive popularizations of Shakespeare ("Henry V" and especially the star-studded, visually glamorous "Much Ado About Nothing").
An extravagant entertainer, Mr.
Branagh has a flair for capturing the mass appeal of familiar texts, so "Frankenstein" sounds reasonably well suited to his talents.
But this material is easily caricatured and dauntingly overexposed.
The monstrousness of "Frankenstein" extends to nearly 30 other films, not to mention a permanent place in the pantheon of Halloween masks and pop-cultural archetypes.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.67
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.09
5.07
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.53
5.52
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.95
7.95
5.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.10
8.09
6.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.92
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.05
7.03
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Immigration Issue Flares Anew in Senate Race
The California Senate race, already in turmoil over the issue of illegal immigration, was thrown into even greater confusion today by a case of mistaken identity.
A report by a San Francisco newspaper said that Government records indicated that Senator Dianne Feinstein, locked in a neck-and-neck re-election race with Representative Michael Huffington, apparently employed a Guatemalan housekeeper in the early 1980's who was in the United States illegally.


Redistricting Heats Up Election Races; 2 Margins of Error
To the Editor:
In this final week of the 1994 election campaign I would beg the media to stop using two misleading phrases when presenting poll results.
(1) Do not talk about "a statistical dead heat" if the gap between the candidates is 2 percent or more.
The phrase implies that a two- or three-point lead is the same as no lead.
Not true.
If a well-conducted poll shows one candidate two points ahead, the probability (not the certainty) is that he or she is ahead.


In Their Own Words
JOHN G. ROWLAND
An appearance on a radio talk show yesterday gave Mr.
Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor of Connecticut, a chance to talk about his efforts to suppress a police report on a domestic dispute with his former wife.


Ivaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


14 Latin Artists Exist Separately In a Bronx Show With Light Touches
"Cartographies" at the Bronx Museum of the Arts is a frustrating exhibition with decent ingredients but no center.
The show, organized by the Winnipeg Art Gallery in Manitoba, brings together 14 Latin American artists, several of whom have shown in New York.
They are an eclectic bunch, often thought-provoking, in one case genuinely exciting.
But neither the specific works nor the essays in the show's vague, buzzword-filled catalogue suggests why they were deemed suitable company.
Given the lack of a unifying theme, one is left to judge the artists one by one, and generally speaking, the lighter their touch the better they look.
It's refreshing to encounter a political metaphor as understated as Maria Fernanda Cardoso's "Flag," a checkerboard pattern of guava candies forming an emblem both sweet and insubstantial, or to find gender issues as deftly explored as they are in the work of Jose Leonilson, whose crudely sewn dresses and wall hangings stitched with provocative inscriptions are "women's work" quietly in revolt.


Diner's Journal
What's Sauce for the Guests. . . .
Why leave all the great New York experiences to the tourists?
That's what I thought as I sat by the window at the Sea Grill, watching a little girl with golden curls attempt a figure eight in the middle of the Rockefeller Center ice-skating rink.
The Sea Grill is one of those restaurants that New Yorkers tend to visit only when they have out-of-town guests in tow.
That's a shame.
The service is extremely solicitous: "Would you like some more of the lovely cheese toast?" our waiter kept asking. (Yes, we would.) The busboy replenished the water in the glasses each time we took a sip.
The seats are commodious and comfortable.
The sound level is civilized.
And the menu, as retooled by the new executive chef, Edward Brown, is impressive.


Nevada Power Co.(NVP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Bosnian Army and Croats Drive Serbs Out of a Town
In their most significant military success since the war here began, Bosnian Army and Croatian military units captured the town of Kupres today, driving out the Bosnian Serb forces who overran it in April 1992 with the help of the Serb-dominated Yugoslav Army, local news reports said.
Croatia's official news agency reported tonight that units of the Bosnian Croat militia, the Croatian Defense Council, had advanced northeastward into Kupres along a main highway, overrunning Serbian defensive positions and reaping significant quantities of abandoned Serbian weapons and ammunition.


Art in Review
Luc Tuymans
David Zwirner Gallery  43 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 3
Appealing as they sometimes are, Luc Tuymans's small, beautifully made paintings leave a lot to be desired.
One problem is the air of Conceptual reticence and rather pretentious humility that hangs over these greenish, grisaille works, which, invariably, seem based on appropriated photographs whose sources or whose import never quite come into focus.
Far more tenderly and sincerely painted than the works of Gerhard Richter, they still have some of Richter's chilly you-figure-it-out nonchalance, although the discrepancy between a "felt" surface and a more distanced image may be one of Mr.
Tuymans's goals.


BRISTOL-MYERS TO BUY CALGON VESTAL FOR $261.5 MILLION
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company agreed yesterday to buy Calgon Vestal Laboratories, which makes skin care and infection control products, from Merck &amp; Company for $261.5 million.
The deal is valued at about two and half times Calgon Vestal's 1993 sales of $105 million, spokesmen for the two companies said.
Bristol-Myers Squibb said Calgon, which is based in St.
Louis, would be combined with its Convatec unit, based in Skillman, N.J.
The announcement followed the sale in June 1993 of Calgon Water Management to English China Clays P.L.C. of Britain for $307.5 million.


Purolator Products (PFIL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Redistricting Heats Up Election Races
To the Editor:
The competitiveness of next week's Congressional elections reflects, in part, the results of the 1991-92 redistricting, as is well known.
Unsurprisingly but importantly, how much competition each state experiences reflects whether, when the redistricting statutes were passed, that state was a one-party monopoly or had divided government.


2 Shops Resign Footwear Accounts
Two New York agencies said yesterday that they had resigned the accounts of two marketers of casual footwear and apparel.
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas resigned the Boks casual footwear and apparel division of Reebok International Ltd. because, the agency said, it wants to concentrate on "core accounts" like Burger King.
Billings on the Boks account were estimated at $1 million, although when a predecessor agency, Ammirati &amp; Puris, was awarded the account in March 1993, billings were estimated at $9 million.


Legal Vacuum in Haiti Is Testing U.S. Policy
Two weeks after 20,000 American troops arrived here, soldiers raided a warehouse looking for a suspected arms cache and took the Haitian owner of the business, Gerry Mourra, prisoner.
That was on Oct. 2.
Patrick Woolley, Mr.
Mourra's lawyer, said the American military authorities did not allow him to see his client until Oct. 17.
Even now, a month after his arrest, Mr.
Mourra has not been taken before a judge.


Vallone Sends a Message In Ouster of a Panel Chief
The City Council voted yesterday to punish one of its members who defied Speaker Peter F. Vallone by voting against the $31.6 billion budget that the Council negotiated with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani four months ago.
At Mr.
Vallone's request, the Council voted overwhelmingly to remove Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge of Manhattan as chairwoman of the Council's Contracts Committee and to strip her of the $5,500 stipend that goes with the position.


MCA's Impatience With Wary Parent
The top two executives of MCA Inc. arrived in Japan with a bold proposal to invest in an American television broadcast network.
They left feeling, to use the words of one of them, as if they had been "treated as children" by their corporate parent, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.
And the bad feelings persist nearly two months later.
MCA's 81-year-old chairman and chief executive, Lew R. Wasserman, and 59-year-old president and chief operating officer, Sidney J. Sheinberg, had made the 14-hour flight to Osaka on Sept. 17 for the meeting.
They were appalled by the welcome they received the next morning.
Matsushita's president, Yoichi Morishita, appeared two hours late -- and only after lower-level Matsushita executives had made clear that they would not consider the proposal.


What Rebound, Stupid?
Despite steady growth and low inflation, polls show that voters, especially the middle class, are unhappy and may not reward the Democrats.
Have they forgotten economic growth?
No, but higher interest rates have spoiled the benefits of growth for many Americans.
Contrary to the prevailing consensus, the growth record in this period of expansion is poor.
Total real growth in the first three years after recessions in 1970, 1974 and 1982 averaged nearly 16 percent.
But from 1991-94, total growth will barely reach 10 percent.
Expansions have been rewarded at the polls in years of high growth: 5.3 percent in 1964, 5.4 percent in 1972, 7.8 percent in 1984.
No such good year has occurred this time.


A Papal Best Seller -- and One That Wasn't
Mark Twain discovered the hard way that the Pope doesn't sell in America.
With his usual blindness in business matters, Twain decided in the late 1880's that a memoir of Leo XIII, the current Pope, would be a natural best seller.
There were 20 million Catholic Americans; how could they not buy a book that the Pope implied -- and his supernumeraries proclaimed -- was required reading for every Catholic?
Twain was feeling cocky.


John Whitwell, 84, Princeton Professor
John Colman Whitwell, who in 42 years at Princeton University became an expert in applying statistical methods to chemical engineering problems, died Oct. 28 at Applewood, a retirement and nursing home in Freehold, N.J.
He was 84.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, said his lawyer, Kester Pierson, of Mason, Griffin &amp; Pierson in Princeton, N.J.


Edward Wardwell, 90, Lawyer and Arts Patron
Edward Rogers Wardwell, a retired New York lawyer and patron of the arts, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 and also had a home in Lawrence, L.I.
He died after a brief illness, said a partner in his old firm, Francis J. Morison.


Clinicom
Shares of Clinicom Inc. fell 39 percent to a 52-week low of $8.25 yesterday before recovering somewhat.
The Boulder, Colo., company, a developer of computer software for hospitals, on Wednesday posted third-quarter profit of 3 cents a share, compared with 12 cents a share a year earlier.


No Headline
" I have prayed to the Lord every day. It's just so sad that someone could take such beautiful children. I have put all my trust and faith in the Lord that He will bring them home to us." SUSAN SMITH, hours before she was arrested in the death of her children.  [ A1:1. ]


A Warning Sign Surfaces Between Reeves and Young
His brutal honesty is what makes everyone around Dan Reeves respect and admire him.
Honesty is a priceless commodity but sometimes it can be painful to endure.
Now Reeves's trademark has put the Giants in this predicament: For the first time, someone in the Giants' organization has publicly criticized the job General Manager George Young has done with free agency.
And, for the first time, there are signs of a certain amount of incompatibility between Reeves and Young that many in professional football thought would eventually surface.


Restaurants
Most restaurants stumble through their opening days like people who have been forced out of bed too early in the morning: grumpy and uncoordinated, they act as if they wish you would just go away.
Monkey Bar was different.
The restaurant landed on East 54th Street so smoothly that in its first week it already felt as if it had been there forever.
The patrons that filled both the raucous bar and the sedate dining room also had a possessive air, as if they had always been there.
They seemed to have moved in en masse overnight, and it was impossible not to speculate that a nearby restaurant was sitting empty, wondering where all its customers had gone.


Abroad at Home; Change Of Character
If you liked the 1992 Republican National Convention, with its bashing of the un-Christian and the un-straight, you'll love the 1996 convention.
Assuming, that is, that the party wins as big as it expects in the upcoming midterm elections.
Last time we had Pat Robertson and Pat Buchanan.
We had the Republican Chairman, Rich Bond, warning that if Bill Clinton was elected, Jane Fonda would be sleeping in the White House "as guest of honor at a state dinner for Fidel Castro."


Police Say Woman Admits to Killings as Bodies of 2 Children Are Found Inside Her Car
In a turn of events that some people in her town expected but few wanted to believe, a South Carolina woman who reported that her two little boys had been abducted by a carjacker was arrested and charged today with two counts of murder in their deaths.
According to the arrest warrant, 23-year-old Susan V. Smith confessed to the murders of her sons -- 3-year-old Michael Smith and his 14-month-old brother, Alexander.


Branagh Brings Cagney to the Streets of Belfast
When Tommy Black (Paul Ronan), an unemployed young man from a Protestant neighborhood in Belfast, opens his mouth, what often comes out is dialogue lifted intact from the James Cagney movies he spends his spare time studying on home video.
Tommy, who lives with his widowed mother (Patti Allison) and dour brother (Neal Jones) in a working-class neighborhood, is the highly symbolic main character in Kenneth Branagh's socially pointed melodrama "Public Enemy," which is having its American premiere at the Irish Arts Center.
The play, which predates the films directed by Mr.
Branagh, takes place in the mid-1980's, when the strife in Belfast was worse than it is today.
One way Tommy has avoided being caught up in the warfare that divides the city is by spinning a fantasy of himself as a latter-day Cagney character.
In the play's opening scene, he wins a talent contest in a bar by doing an impersonation of the Hollywood legend singing and dancing "Yankee Doodle Dandy." But it quickly becomes clear that Tommy's identification with Cagney is more than a crowd-pleasing daydream.
It is an obsession that has spun dangerously out of control.


Air Force One 1, Pataki 0
State Senator George E. Pataki wanted to be in the state capital this morning to kick off a barnstorming trip upstate and win back some of the media attention from President Clinton, who was at a rally with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo at the state university across town.
But Albany airport was going to be closed to commercial air traffic for much of the morning to accommodate Mr.
Clinton's arrival.
So Mr.
Pataki, his wife, Libby, and several aides packed into the campaign's Chevrolet Suburban Wednesday night and made the roughly two-hour drive from his Putnam County home.


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc.(JEC,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Rem Koolhaas's New York State of Mind
NEW YORK CITY'S most inspiring architect lives in London, works in Rotterdam and has yet to build a thing on the North American continent.
But for the next three months, Rem Koolhaas has the stage at the Museum of Modern Art, where New Yorkers can see for themselves how their city continues to shape the world even as their own architecture has slipped below world-class standards.
Considering all the fanfare this show has generated, including lavish spreads in the fashion glossies, "O.M.A. at MOMA: Rem Koolhaas and the Place of Public Architecture" turns out to be relatively modest in scale.
Confined to one top-floor gallery in the Modern's department of architecture and design, the show presents models and drawings for five projects designed in the last five years by Mr.
Koolhaas and his Office for Metropolitan Architecture (O.M.A.).
Three additional models, depicting urban plans, are displayed on the landing outside. (Models for three private houses are on view in the museum's Education Center on the ground floor.)


Help Russian Workers Get Their Back Wages
To the Editor:
Despite growing unemployment in Russia and the widespread practice of companies not paying their workers for long periods, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia has called for a "more rigorous policy of economic reform to insure stability" (news article, Oct. 28).
What this means is that impoverished working people and pensioners will be expected to tighten their belts even further.


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, to Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago, as the first international agency of record.
The agency already handles campaigns in this country for several Miller brands.
Billings were not disclosed. *
French World Cup Organization Committee, Paris, to DDB Needham France, Paris, to handle marketing communications for the 1998 World Cup soccer tournament.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
And Axa, Paris, named DDB Needham International, Paris, to handle the insurance company's account in 16 countries, previously handled by various local agencies.
DDB Needham France will serve as the lead agency.
Billings were estimated at $9 million.


Critic's Choice/Film; Still Scary, Now in Mint Condition
Sometimes a cigar isn't just a cigar: for instance, when Stanley Kubrick's camera gazes up at the face of Gen.
Jack D. Ripper (Sterling Hayden), the militaristic madman obsessed with "precious bodily fluids" and casually responsible for having triggered Armageddon in "Dr. Strangelove." The cigar-chomping general offers a hilarious if unsubtle image of masculine paranoia, which took on epic proportions in Mr.
Kubrick's scathing doomsday comedy.
In a post-cold war climate, "Dr. Strangelove" remains a supremely scary classic.
Thirty years have done little to date its rogues' gallery of guided missiles and misguided commanders, all of them conspiring to destroy the world in the most businesslike possible fashion.
Kubrick's chilliness remains every bit as disturbing as the threat of nuclear war, but it also inspires awe.
So does the fact that with a fastidiousness some of his own characters might have appreciated, Mr.
Kubrick has rephotographed every frame of this film with a Nikon camera to create a mint-condition print for its 30th anniversary.


Greyhound Will Resist Bankruptcy Action
Greyhound Lines Inc. said today that it would "vigorously oppose and resist" a move by dissident bondholders to try to force the struggling company into bankruptcy protection.
A small group of bondholders, who say they hold at least 25 percent of Greyhound's convertible subordinated debt, filed a petition for involuntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy late Wednesday night in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Dallas, where Greyhound is based.
The filing came a day after bondholders rejected the company's latest proposal to restructure its debt.


U.S. Bonds Fairly Steady On New Data
Prices of Treasury securities were reasonably steady yesterday, although the yield on the long bond edged up to a two-and-a-half-year high.
Investors remain concerned that inflation could accelerate, causing them to lose value on fixed-income investments.
Yesterday's report showing new- home sales in September were the highest in six months, even as mortgage rates climbed to two-year highs, added to their concerns.


Art in Review
Hugh Steers
Richard Anderson Gallery  475 Broome Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 3
Hugh Steers' earlier paintings had two very different types of images: male couples tenderly helping each other dress or bathe, and a single male figure, wearing women's clothes and examining his body for signs of illness, shut alone in a room as if terrified of discovery.


Corrections
A fashion review on Wednesday about the Seventh on Sixth designer shows in New York misstated the name of a new band that plays cocktail party music.
It is Combustible Edison, not Consolidated Edison.


Leslie Fay's Lawyers Deny Wrongdoing
The law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges vigorously denied allegations yesterday of impropriety in its representation of the Leslie Fay Companies in the apparel maker's bankruptcy-law proceedings.
At the same time, the firm urged the Federal bankruptcy judge, Tina L. Brozman, to deny a motion that it be disqualified as the company's counsel and be forced to forfeit part of the $5.3 million in fees it has billed.
In a written response to a motion filed last month by the Federal bankruptcy trustee, Arthur J. Gonzalez, the firm said the charges were "premised on mere speculation."


Nazi Executioner and Jew Reunited
Genghis Cohn is a comic ventriloquist in Germany in the 1930's.
He asks his audience, "How do you kill a Jewish comedian?" Answer: "Same as any comedian. You don't laugh at his jokes." Not quite.
Cohn, whose act has died in many a seedy club, finally dies himself at Dachau.
Jump to 1958 and a picturesque village in Bavaria with a new civic center offering special programs of American musical films.
The police chief, proud of the lowest crime rate in Bavaria, is Otto Schatz, who is not eager to recall his war years in Hitler's SS.
As it happens, Schatz was Cohn's executioner.
Suddenly the police chief is confronted with a series of local murders, the male victims invariably having died with a smile on their faces immediately after sexual intercourse.
Schatz is nonplused.
Then, when the ghost of Cohn visits him to offer sardonic assistance, he goes positively, as Cohn would have it, meshuga.


Run-In Will Cost Jet $10,000
The National Football League fined Donald Evans, a Jets defensive tackle, $10,000 today for a run-in with the referee Bernie Kukar during Sunday's game against the Indianapolis Colts.
First offenses for abusing a referee usually draw a maximum fine of $5,000, but Greg Aiello, the N.F.L.'s director of information, said of Evans, "He verbally abused the referee and shoved him away and then continued and charged the referee and further abused him verbally."


McCaughey, the G.O.P. Stealth Candidate
It was 9:30 A.M. and Elizabeth P. McCaughey, the Republican candidate for lieutenant governor, had already downed a hamburger and two bagels and given the family chihuahua a bath.
This was, after all, a big day.
The woman billed as her ticket's policy expert said she is usually buried in documents.
"Do you ever look at this one?" she said at one point, holding up the Annual Statistical Report from 1992 of the New York State Department of Social Services.
"It's a gold mine."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "RENT," New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A rock musical by Jonathan Larson based on Puccini's "Boheme" and set in the East Village of today; directed by Michael Greif.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
All shows are sold out; there is a waiting list for returned tickets.
Information: (212) 302-6989.


Richfood Holdings (RCHF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 15


Home Video
Texas' as a Mini-Series
A mini-series -- "Lonesome Dove," say -- normally begins on television and later turns up on videocassette.
On Wednesday, though, a mini-series called "Texas," based on the novel by James A. Michener, will get its start not on a network but in video stores.
Only after at least 90 days as a rental title will it be shown on ABC, home video's partner in the enterprise.


Jury Recommends Death Penalty for Abortion Foe Convicted in 2 Killings in Florida
A jury recommended today that Paul J. Hill die in Florida's electric chair for killing an abortion clinic doctor and an escort.
The verdict came just a few hours after the defendant, in his first words to the panel, said, "You may mix my blood with the blood of the unborn and those who have fought to defend the oppressed."
The six men and six women on the jury took four hours to decide whether the crimes warranted the death penalty or life imprisonment without the possibility of parole.
They convicted Mr.
Hill of the murders on Wednesday after only 20 minutes of deliberation.


Family Values and Love In Vietnam Aftermath
Set in a small Mississippi town and centered on a children's battle over a tree house, "The War" is an allegory about love, death, pacifism, family values and the spiritual and physical wounds of Vietnam.
To no small degree it is also about movie stars, who have the power to transform platitudes into warm, affecting insights when they make their presence sufficiently persuasive on screen.
"The War" has the benefit of two such presences: Kevin Costner, who is at his most disarming in the role of Stephen Simmons, a Vietnam veteran having trouble returning to his wife and children (the year is 1970), and Elijah Wood, who plays his son.
Mr.
Costner's folksy sincerity is enough to lure the Spanish moss right off the live oaks, and he works hard in the potato fields the way only a major movie star can.
He's effortlessly appealing, and Mr.
Wood holds up his end of the story with equal assurance.


SHL Systemhouse (SHKIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
When MERCEDES ELLINGTON walked into the Apollo Theater recently, she wondered whether it was really the same place where she had heard her grandfather Duke Ellington in the 1950's.
"When I came up here to see my grandfather, we would convene around the stage door and then be taken to the dressing room area," she said yesterday during rehearsals of the show she is directing there.
"It looked so much bigger than it does now."


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Turner Broadcasting System Inc. (TBS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Isabel Munoz
Julie Saul Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Nov. 12
With her stylized close-ups of tango and flamenco dancers, Isabel Munoz, a young Spanish photographer, seems to aim at evoking the spirit of the dances as much as their actual steps.
In many of her photographs the dancers' faces and even most of their bodies are not visible; instead, Ms.
Munoz concentrates on details, like a cocked hand or an arrogantly pointed toe.


Cineplex Odeon (CPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warnaco Group Inc.(WAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 8


Two Bruised Jets Tailbacks Try to Heal for Bills
Johnny Johnson is feeling better.
So is Anthony Johnson.
But the Jets' battered tailbacks again sat out practice today and remained questionable for Sunday's game against the Buffalo Bills at Giants Stadium.
On the sidelines, Johnny Johnson, normally the starter, strode 100 yards at a time, and his strained right hamstring held up.
He said he would try to play Sunday.
Anthony Johnson, recovering from a slight separation of the left shoulder, said the same.
Adrian Murrell, the other tailback, will miss the game because of a sprained knee.


Wendy's International (WEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Jazz Opens N.B.A. Season Without Wright
A day before its season opener, the Utah Jazz yesterday waived LUTHER WRIGHT, the 23-year-old center whose National Basketball Association promise has never been realized.
The 7-foot-2-inch Wright, who starred in high school in Elizabeth, N.J., and who had a solid college career in his three years at Seton Hall under Coach P. J. CARLESIMO, was a first-round draft choice (18th over all) by the Jazz in 1993.
He has had health problems and trouble keeping his weight under 300 pounds since entering the N.B.A.


A Jury Is Chosen to Hear The Simpson Murder Case
Nearly five months after he was charged with murdering his former wife and her friend, O. J. Simpson finally came face to face today with the 12 men and women who will judge him.
The selection of the jury was completed with a burst of speed late in the afternoon on what was to have been only the first of a number of days of peremptory challenges, in which lawyers for the opposing sides may exclude prospective jurors without stating a reason.


Lawyers Defend Billing System That Got Colleague in Trouble
After a Federal jury convicted a lawyer on mail-fraud charges connected to billing practices that are common throughout the profession, the legal community trembled.
So when a Federal appeals court reversed the conviction earlier this week, lawyers sighed with relief, then sought to explain how a generalized bill on a fake letterhead could be in a client's best interests.
The lawyer in question, Armand P. D'Amato of Long Island had been retained in the mid-1980's by the Unisys Corporation, a military contractor, to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, and others.
At Unisys's request, the lawyer submitted bills over two years totaling $120,000 that were vague and on stationery with a letterhead naming one of his partners, but not himself.


Crash Inquiry Focuses on Ice And Steering
The American Eagle airliner that crashed here on Monday, killing all 68 people aboard, took just 36 seconds to fall out of the sky from more than a mile and a quarter above the ground, first tipping 77 degrees to the right, recovering to 59 degrees, then flipping upside down and plunging at a 45-degree angle, a Federal safety official said tonight.
With the cause of the rollover still not clear, James E. Hall, the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, also announced that American Eagle had ordered its pilots flying the kind of plane that crashed, a twin-engine turboprop, to stop using the autopilot in weather conditions like those on Monday afternoon, when ice can build up on the wings.


Hasidic Students Describe Brooklyn Bridge Nightmare
Testifying in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday, three passengers described in harrowing detail the terror, chaos and shock when a van carrying 15 Hasidic students across the Brooklyn Bridge came under gunfire in March.
The students were returning to Brooklyn from a Manhattan hospital where their religious leader, the late Lubavitcher Rebbe, Menachem Schneerson, had just undergone successful eye surgery.
But in what the prosecution says was a sudden and unprovoked burst of gunfire, their joy and relief turned into a nightmare, as the windows in the van were shattered and a rain of bullets smashed through it, killing one student and wounding three others.


Art in Review
Jane Hammond
Jose Freire Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
For the last six years Jane Hammond has made paintings using a repertory of 276 appropriated images and six predetermined colors, with mostly deadly results, but her recent paintings are starting to shed their visual stiffness.
Her compositions are looser and more casually layered, her surfaces brushier, her palette less emphatically limited.
Her images, often used more sparsely or on canvases shaped (a little like Elizabeth Murray's) to suggest hands, feet or open books, interact more suggestively.


Clinton Campaigns Upstate With an Eye on the Nation
President Clinton, making his fourth campaign trip for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his first to upstate New York, cast Tuesday's gubernatorial election and similar races around the country as contests between forward-looking Democrats and negativist Republicans who, he said, want Americans to "vote your anger."
"Yes, there is frustration in the electorate," Mr.
Clinton acknowledged at a clamorous, partisan rally on the Albany campus of the State University of New York.
"But you know, the first thing you try to teach your children as a parent, once they really begin to be aware of the world, is not to make an important decision when you're mad.


Spare the Rod When Treating Troubled Youth
To the Editor:
It is troubling that you would devote so little space to the youth sentenced to eight years in the California Youth Authority for defacing property with graffiti (news article, Nov. 1).
Michael Faye, the young American sentenced to caning in Singapore, received front-page coverage day after day, and Singapore was admonished for its inhumane punishments.
While I share in the disdain for Singapore's methods, Michael Faye is free today, while the California boy has eight more years of incarceration.
Where is the front-page article on that, and why are we so afraid to examine and criticize our own methods?


Corrections
An article yesterday about Rwanda misstated the United Nations' estimate of the number of people displaced by violence there.
It is 1.8 million, not 11.8 million.


Spare the Rod When Treating Troubled Youth; Prisons Don't Work
To the Editor:
Washington and the state governments are falling all over each other to approve billions of additional dollars for more prisons and police, even though 74 percent of all prison space in the United States was built in the last 10 years.
The march toward more prisons and longer sentences is truly bizarre in the face of its clear lack of effectiveness.


Young &amp; Rubicam Gets Teflon Account
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company has selected Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York to handle its Teflon finishes business in North America and Mexico, with billings estimated at $7 million.
For more than 20 years, N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners in New York handled the account, which includes the Silverstone and Silverstone Xtra brands of nonstick cookware, in North America.
Y.&amp; R., which already handles Du Pont brands like Lycra, was awarded the Teflon account Wednesday after a two-month review that also included Ayer and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi/Rumrill Hoyt in Rochester.


Rural Social Commentary With a Difference
The images that Doris Ulmann made in the South in the 1920's and 30's occupy a curious position in the history of documentary photography.
Ulmann's subjects, among them the mountain people of Appalachia and the blacks of the Gullah region of South Carolina, were staples of socially concerned photography during the New Deal era, whether Margaret Bourke-White's sensationalist reportage for Life magazine or the more measured documentary work of Walker Evans and other photographers working for the Farm Security Administration.
But Ulmann's soft-focus portraits, presented in richly expressive prints made using the platinum process, are distinctly unlike the sharp, detailed images favored by her contemporaries.
A diverse selection of Ulmann's powerful but rarely seen images, at the 292 Gallery in SoHo, is a pleasure to see for its own sake, and also valuable as a challenge to the widespread notion that only the sharp-focus approach of Modernism is appropriate for social analysis and critique.


U.N. Envoy Pessimistic About Holding Orderly Election in Haiti
A United Nations envoy to Haiti reported today that the security and the political stability of the country were still shaky and might remain that way for some time.
While civil unrest has declined markedly since United States troops landed two months ago, police and paramilitary forces might be inadequate to oversee elections, said the envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi.
Elections for 2,000 local officials, 9 of the 27 Senators and all 83 Deputies are to take place by late January but no date has been set.


Lee Enterprises Inc.(LEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





A 14-Year-Old Provides Taste of Things to Come
The grand entrance was short-lived, but plenty auspicious.
A little behind on her biology homework but a lot wiser about the permutations of life in the tennis limelight, 14-year-old Venus Williams was wide-eyed but dry-eyed last night after she received an unsympathetic second-round censure from Arantxa Sanchez Vicario.


Breast Cancer as a Political Issue
When the members of 1 in 9, a Long Island advocacy group for breast-cancer victims, sponsored a meet-the-candidates night recently at the Nassau County Medical Center, they were flabbergasted by the response.
Not from the voters; from the politicians.
Thirty-six candidates, Republicans and Democrats seeking Congressional and State Senate and Assembly seats from every corner of the Island, showed up.


Mercantile Stores Co.(MST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Art in Review
Nicholas Nixon
Zabriskie Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue, at 56th Street  Through Nov. 26
The good news is that most of the pictures in Nicholas Nixon's latest project are portraits, a genre in which he is particularly strong.
Working with an 8-by-10-inch camera, Mr.
Nixon spent a year photographing his son's combined fifth- and sixth-grade class at the Tobin School in Cambridge, Mass., and came up with affecting images of many of the children, alone or in small groups.


Where Houdini Made His Great Escapes
To the Editor:
As both a New Yorker and a biographer of Harry Houdini, I was happy to see your Oct. 28 article on Houdini's New York, but I was put off by its mythologizing, errors and omissions.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Close Races Are Turning More Jittery
How would you expect a jittery campaign year to end?
With a bad case of the jitters, of course.
It isn't only that candidates seem to be jumping out of their skins.
Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida, a rather dignified Democrat, stuck out his tongue at a heckler.
John Marty, the Democratic challenger for the statehouse in Minnesota, still searching for the right message, is on his fourth campaign manager.


INSIDE
In Trade, Looking Past Japan
Both the Clinton Administration and some American companies are paying less attention to Japan, while trying to build up trade elsewhere in Asia and in Latin America.
Page D1.
Weapon Against Brown Tide
A new discovery may help Long Island fishermen plagued for years by brown tide, a mysterious, troublesome algae growth.
Page B1.
N.A.A.C.P.
Not Paying Bills
The civil rights group is so financially strained that it still has not paid hotels the bills it ran up for its last two national conventions.
Page A31.
Death Penalty Is Sought
A jury recommended execution for an abortion foe convicted of murdering two clinic workers.
Page A20.


Sally A. Knapp; Singer and Actress, 68
Sally A. Knapp, a singer and actress who appeared in numerous productions of Gilbert and Sullivan operettas, died on Tuesday at Gwinett County Hospital in Georgia.
She was 68 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was an aneurism, said Tedi Dreiser Godard, a friend.
Miss Knapp was a leading actress with Dorothy Raedler's Masque and Lyre Light Opera Company, which later became the American Savoyards.
She starred in many of its productions, as well as in television commercials.


Accord Reached on L.I. To Save Pine Barrens
New York State has reached agreements on the first land purchases in the Long Island pine barrens under a 1993 law intended to preserve a 50,000-acre core area and regulate development in the surrounding 50,000 acres.
Under an agreement negotiated for the state by the Long Island chapter of the Nature Conservancy, the state will pay $1.4 million for 141 acres in Westhampton.
The owner, a developer, was seeking final approval to build a clustered housing development on the property.


U.N. Assembly Approves Call for End to Bosnian Arms Embargo
The General Assembly adopted a resolution today urging the Security Council to lift an arms embargo on the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The resolution, which passed by a vote of 97 to 0, with 61 abstentions, also asks member states of the United Nations to help Bosnia exercise its "inherent right of individual and collective self-defense." Because of misgivings that lifting the embargo could itensify the war, the resolution did not get as much support as its backers hoped.


U.S. Is Shifting Trade Emphasis Away from Japan; More Growth Predicted for New Markets
Suffering battle fatigue after two years of fighting Japan over trade issues, the Clinton Administration is putting a new emphasis on the emerging markets in the rest of Asia and Latin America -- areas that it believes will greatly outstrip Japan as consumers of American exports.
The change in emphasis will become evident over the next month, as Mr.
Clinton flies off to two trade meetings, first with Asian leaders in Jakarta, Indonesia, and then with Latin American leaders in Miami.
Already, Mr.
Clinton's top economic aides are brandishing charts and graphs to prove their point that growth in American exports to those regions will dwarf exports to Japan over the next 15 years.
This should be the case even if every trade barrier the United States has complained about in Japan is dismantled.


METRO DIGEST
CANDIDATES CONTINUE TO SPAR
Returning to his base of support with his paramount campaign message, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, swept through four upstate cities with an entourage of Republican candidates and county executives who reaffirmed his call for tax cuts and reduced state spending.
A1.
President Clinton, campaigning for Governor Cuomo, said Republicans want Americans to "vote your anger." B4.


U.S. Is Shifting Trade Emphasis Away From Japan; A Focus on Rest of Asia, Latin Nations
When Edgar S. Woolard Jr., chairman and chief executive of E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, delivered a speech by satellite to the company's Asian offices recently, not once did he mention Japan, which accounts for half of the chemical giant's Asian sales.
Mr.
Woolard instead gushed on about new opportunities in China and elsewhere in the Far East, to the annoyance of company employees in Japan.
More and more, American companies seem to be less mindful of Japan, lured instead by faster-growing, less-developed markets in China and elsewhere in Asia.
Japan is perceived as an already mature market in which it is expensive to operate, with strong domestic competitors and numerous regulations and other barriers.


Perot to Back Lautenberg Over Republican Candidate
Ross Perot will endorse Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey, the Democrat seeking re-election, and will campaign with him this weekend, advisers to both men said early today.
A Perot endorsement could give the incumbent a boost with an independent bloc of voters that he and his Republican challenger, Chuck Haytaian, have avidly courted.
David Eichenbaum, Mr.
Lautenberg's campaign manager, said that Mr.
Perot would endorse the Senator and join him on the stump, though specific arrangements had not yet been made.
A senior official in the New Jersey branch of United We Stand, America, the organization founded by Mr.
Perot, confirmed that there would be an endorsement of Mr.
Lautenberg.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that "only the time and place have to be confirmed."


A Papal Best Seller -- and One That Wasn't
Last month Alfred A. Knopf published Pope John Paul II's "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," a question-and-answer book for which it paid nearly $9 million and which soon showed up on the best-seller list.
The huge sum has made the book's commercial fate the latest measure of the Pope's popularity, and that of his papacy -- a state of affairs that sends disquieting signals about the Roman Catholic Church today.
Even as polls of American Catholics show deep dissent from his positions -- a 1992 poll, for example, showed that 67 percent favor opening the priesthood to women -- John Paul II remains hugely popular.
Why?
Various explanations have been offered.
He is charismatic, and a master of the world tour and the vast open-air Mass.
In a culture of mendacious politicians and instant celebrities, he is appealingly countercultural: this world leader is no floating waffle.
And many people believe his worldview is the true one.


Natural Virus Said to Check Brown Tide
A discovery by scientists may help Long Island fishermen who have been plagued for nearly a decade by brown tide, a mysterious, troublesome algae growth that turns sea water the color of coffee and chokes the life out of waterways where shellfish once thrived.
The scientists report that they have isolated a number of viruses that live in the sea water and can destroy the microscopic brown tide algae.
While the results are preliminary, the scientists say the discovery may lead to the use of the viruses to help prevent the spread of brown tide.


In a Bus Depot, Labor Tensions and a Mysterious Death
Kim Man Tseung had a reputation around the Fresh Pond Depot in Brooklyn as a master mechanic and a stickler for safety.
He even wore paper masks to filter exhaust fumes as he worked on Transit Authority buses.
So it was a great surprise to some of his colleagues when Mr.
Tsueng, a 47-year-old assistant union shop steward, was found crushed under a 12-ton bus on Sunday afternoon.
A folding knife was found beside him.
An air bag in the bus's suspension system had been punctured.


Art in Review
Susan Rothenberg
Sperone Westwater  142 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 17
These are the latest of Susan Rothenberg's nominally abstracted paintings inspired by New Mexico, where she has lived for several years.
Their palette is mostly red, yellow and white -- bone-dry colors -- and the objects that float in them, like astronauts drifting in space, include a hawk, a skull, rocks and horses.
As always with Ms.
Rothenberg, the surfaces consist of heavily scumbled lines that can occasionally seem like so much wasted energy but that mostly give the paintings an all-over buzz and a certain raw beauty that evokes the raw beauty of the landscape.


PATAKI REVISITS BASE OF SUPPORT IN UPSTATE CITIES
Returning to his base of support with his paramount campaign message, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, swept through four upstate cities today with an entourage of Republican candidates and county executives who reaffirmed his call for deep tax cuts and reduced state spending.
"Mario Cuomo's politics, the politics of higher taxes and fewer jobs, is the politics of the past," Mr.
Pataki said on the sunwashed steps of the State Capitol this morning, seeking to present a vision of hope even as he slashed at Governor Cuomo.
"Our politics, our politics of lower taxes and more jobs, is the politics of the future."


Johnson's Return Is a Definite Maybe
The National Football League's worst franchise might offer the kind of challenge that would coax JIMMY JOHNSON back to the sideline.
In the Tampa Bay area, the Buccaneers' 2-6 record has fueled speculation -- and hope -- that Johnson, an analyst for Fox Sports this season, will replace SAM WYCHE as the coach next year.


After 3 Years, a PC Alliance Is Ready to Fight
Consolidating a three-year-old alliance that had seemed to be faltering, Apple Computer, I.B.M. and Motorola will announce on Monday a new personal computer design with the backing of several other big computer makers.
The alliance is considered by many in the industry to be the companies' last best hope of breaking the domination of the PC market by machines using chips from the Intel Corporation and software from the Microsoft Corporation.


Gergen Has Given White House Formal Resignation, Aides Say
David R. Gergen, the Republican who joined the Clinton Administration last year to help pull it out of chaos, has submitted a letter of resignation to the White House, formalizing his previously disclosed plans to leave his post as special adviser to the President and Secretary of State, officials at the White House and State Department said today.
Mr.
Gergen, who has been at the State Department for four months, will announce over the next few days that he plans to leave on Jan. 1 to teach a political science course at Duke University, the officials said.
Mr.
Gergen declined to comment.


Consolidated Natural Gas Co.  (CNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Webb (Del) Corp.(WBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Lyrical Search for Joy in Russia at Its Bleakest
The sloped, snowy, trap-door-riddled stage now in the Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where the extraordinary Maly Drama Theater of St.
Petersburg has arrived, is a magical and dangerous thing.
It can devour men whole and regurgitate them in unrecognizable forms.
Beneath it, we are told, lurks an infinitude of human feces; yet it also coughs up a wonder-inspiring host of multi-color balloons.
In "Gaudeamus," a singular combination of scatological satire and exquisite lyricism with which the legendary Russian company is now touring the United States, the director Lev Dodin and his set designer, Aleksei Porai-Koshits, have created a mesmerizing portrait of a corrupt, rotting world redeemed, however fleetingly, by fantasy.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova Fights Back  Martina Navratilova, overcoming careless errors and the power of Amy Frazier, rallied for a 2-6, 6-4, 6-1 victory last night to reach the semifinals of the Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif.
Navratilova, the No. 2 seed playing in her next-to-last tournament, made repeated mistakes in the first set and was within two games of losing the match at 4-4 in the second.
At one point, she turned to Coach Craig Kardon and spread her arms, palms upward, as if to say, "What can I do?" But she suddenly turned those errors into winning shots and Frazier fell apart, losing eight of the last nine games, including her last four service games. (AP) Becker's Serve Dominant: Boris Becker, thundering aces from the start, beat Guy Forget, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the $2.25 million Paris Open.
Becker, a three-time champion, produced 22 aces, including his first 7 service points.
Also winning third-round matches were the top-seeded Pete Sampras, the defending champion; Goran Ivanisevic, and Andre Agassi. (AP)


Continental Can Co. (CAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomas Nelson (TNEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'Ancient Khmer Sculpture'
The Chinese Porcelain Company  475 Park Avenue, at 58th Street  Through Nov. 12
After quietly doing business for a decade on the Upper East Side, the Chinese Porcelain Company has inaugurated its new Park Avenue showroom with an astonishing show of Cambodian Khmer sculpture.


Zap! Futuristic Fighter Show Is Alien to Canada's Culture
Alien-battling guardians of the planet have just taken a body blow from a national broadcasters' regulatory body that ruled that "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers," the popular Los Angeles-produced children's show viewed in more than 30 countries, is too violent for Canadian television.
As a result of the decision by the Canadian Broadcast Standards Council, YTV, a youth cable channel, has canceled the series and Global Television, a commercial television network, says it's talking with the producer about ways to make the show conform to Canadian criteria.


Knicks' Title Quest Starts With Questions
The Knicks are eager to begin their season with a victory and end their season with a championship.
The journey begins Friday night, when the Knicks and the Boston Celtics play the final regular-season opener at Boston Garden, one of 12 games Friday that will kick off a highly anticipated National Basketball Association season.


St. Joe Paper (SJP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.(REY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Live Action Inspired By Video
It is the year 2007, and what was once Los Angeles is now a gruesome post-earthquake trash heap rechristened New Angeles.
Seven years earlier, the Big One struck, reducing the city to rubble.
The Capitol Records tower sags like a twisted accordion.
Hollywood Boulevard has become the highly flammable Hollywood River, and curbside oxygen booths provide the only relief from the suffocating smog.
Although order has been partially restored, by night the city is ruled by outlaw gangs of punkish monsters pumped up on steroids.
Each day's horrors are reported on television by the smiling news anchors Vanna White and George Hamilton.
Madonna has just left Tom Arnold and moved to Paris, they report: "She wants to be alone."


These Marathon Men Are Keeping It Safe
The New York City Marathon is a small business.
So small that its big decisions have been made from a rear table at the Brasserie restaurant on East 53d Street by Fred Lebow, the soul of the race, who died of brain cancer on Oct. 9; Charles McCabe, a banker; Jack Rudin, a real-estate magnate, and Allan Steinfeld, Lebow's former assistant and now his successor.
The "Good Taste Committee," a kind of informal board of directors, has ruled since 1976 on the propriety of potential sponsors, and labored to cut red tape with city agencies in order to ease the marathon's five-borough path.


A Race for 25 Winners Finishing a Few Short
Twenty-two of the 30 men and women who have won the New York City Marathon had lunch at Chemical Bank's headquarters yesterday, and two more are expected for ceremonial events today.
But the goal of having 25 at the 25th marathon on Sunday seems beyond reach, partly because two winners of early women's races could not get time off from work, and partly because Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya, the 1987 winner, seems to have dropped off the face of the earth, or at least the world of running.


For Children
Rollerbasketball
Tompkins Square Park  10th Street at Avenue B  Lower East Side  Recommended for all ages  Saturdays and Sundays
Tom La Garde is tall, even taller with Rollerblades on.
At 6 feet 10 inches, he is a former professional basketball player for the Denver Nuggets, Seattle Supersonics and Dallas Mavericks.
And he played in the 1976 Olympics.
But what does that have to do with children?
They can watch him from the sidelines as he and others play rollerbasketball, his baby, which he named the National In-Line Basketball League, or Nibbl.


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns across the country.
VIRGINIA -- Two new polls show that the race for Senate in Virginia is still unsettled in the final days and Senator Charles S. Robb may be gaining ground.
Both suggest that the Democratic incumbent has overtaken his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North, but the leads are within the statistical margin of sampling error.
The surveys were conducted by the Mason-Dixon Political/Media Research company and the Virginia Commonwealth University.
Scott Keeter, a director of the Virginia Commonwealth poll, said that the most notable difference in the last two polls was a decline in the percentage of voters who said they trust Mr.
North to tell the truth -- from 37 percent last month to 26 percent this time.
One explanation, Dr.
Keeter said, could be Nancy Reagan's comment last week that Mr.
North "lied to my husband and lied about him." MICHIGAN -- Detroit's largest black-owned newspaper, The Michigan Chronicle, has sent shock waves through state political circles by endorsing Gov.
John Engler, a conservative Republican, for re-election on its front page.
While polls have shown Mr.
Engler far ahead of his challenger, former Representative Howard Wolpe, the Governor has been even less popular than most Republicans among black voters.
Indeed, he received only 13 percent of the vote in Detroit in 1990.
The Chronicle, which has historically endorsed Democratic candidates, described Governor Engler as having shown a lack of "compassion" toward blacks, but said Mr.
Wolpe had failed to describe how he would improve Michigan's economy.
The editorial said black Americans want "our civil rights recognized, but we also want to see a better return on our tax dollars."


Gazans Eject P.L.O. Leader From Funeral
Gazans poured into the streets today for the funeral of an Islamic militant leader killed in a car bombing on Wednesday, accusing Israel of assassinating him but also venting their rage against Yasir Arafat.
They denounced the leader of the new Palestinian Authority as a collaborator with the Israelis and shoved him out of a mosque as he tried to join the religious service.
According to some reports, Mr.
Arafat was treated so roughly by angry Muslims at the Omari Mosque in Gaza City that they knocked off his trademark head scarf.
"This is your peace, Arafat!" people shouted at him.
"It's all liquidations and assassinations!"


Playful Aretha Franklin Plumbs Roots of Soul
Every so often during Aretha Franklin's Thursday evening concert at Carnegie Hall, a voice from the audience would call out, "Take your time, Aretha." The 52-year-old singer responded to the cues.
The music would slow and a space would be opened for her to seize a phrase and take it to church with sassy shouts and gospel melismas, as a rumbling piano and backup vocals buoyed her shivering cries.
At such rare moments, the gospel roots of the queen of soul took the musical reins.
Ms.
Franklin's concerts are notoriously uneven, but on Thursday she was in fine voice and in high spirits.
Early in the show, which was presented by the Hard Rock Cafe of New York, with the proceeds benefiting several of Ms.
Franklin's favorite charities, she joked of having given up smoking and of controlling her weight through a combination of "Slim Fast and young men."


Royal Appliance Manufacturing Co.(RAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Executives and Their Spouses Killed in Crash of a Helicopter; William F. Emswiler, Barbara White Emswiler
William F. Emswiler, an executive of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation, and his wife, Barbara, were among those killed in a helicopter crash in Mexico on Tuesday.
They were residents of Fairfield, Conn.
Their deaths were confirmed by the State Department yesterday.


Spreckels Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Recital Debut for Pianist
Mark Anderson, a pianist, is to play works by Brahms, Liszt, Debussy and Bartok in his New York recital debut at Alice Tully Hall next Saturday at 8 P.M.
Mr.
Anderson, 30, won the engagement and a cash award of $20,000 as first prize in the University of Maryland International William Kapell Piano Competition in July.
The pianist also won prizes at the 1993 Leeds International Pianoforte Competition in England, the Busoni Competition in 1992 and in competitions in Washington and Dublin.
Tickets, at $12, are available at the box office or through Center Charge, (212) 721-6500.


Sun Energy Partners L.P.(SLP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ROCK
Telling Big Stories In a Big Way  Irving Plaza


Jobs Figuring Large in Diplomacy
In a pre-election bid to show that its strategy of commercial diplomacy is paying off for American workers, the Clinton Administration announced today that the McDonnell Douglas Corporation would manufacture 20 commercial aircraft for China at its plant in Long Beach, Calif. -- rather than let the Chinese produce the aircraft themselves in Shanghai.
President Clinton made the formal announcement at a campaign stop in front of hundreds of McDonnell Douglas employees near the aircraft maker's plant this afternoon.
He appeared with California's two Democratic Senators, Dianne Feinstein, who is in a tight race for re-election, and Barbara Boxer.


Starting a Child-Care Business
Melissa A. Kassel, 25, with $10,000 in savings and a desire to work with children, opened the Learning Zone this summer.
She expects to generate a tidy profit in her first year of operation.
She serves as teacher and chief administrator of the child-care center, which is in an office building in the Fort Point Channel neighborhood in Boston.


As Beach Areas Become Populated, a Debate on Hunting Intensifies
Duck and goose hunting season has arrived in Connecticut and with it an increasingly heated debate over whether the state's shoreline has become too densely populated to allow hunters to shoot waterfowl on or near public beaches.
Many shoreline residents and year-round beachgoers say laws permitting duck and goose hunting along Long Island Sound are antiquated, established decades ago when the beaches became virtual ghost towns after Labor Day.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
BANKERS TRUST CO., New York, named Timothy F. Keaney a managing director.
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK, New York, named Mark D. Abrams global marketing executive for the global private banking sector.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DEL WEBB CORP., Phoenix, a retirement community housing developer, has been authorized by its board to buy back up to 1 million, or 6.7 percent, of its 15 million common shares.
FOXMEYER CORP., Carrollton, Tex., a health and beauty products and services concern, has agreed to sell its 15 percent stake in Perfumania, Inc., Miami, a perfume retail and wholesale concern, for $6 million, to Perfumania's former chairman.


American Re Corp.(ARN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Time Warner Seeking Cable Joint Venture
Time Warner Inc., looking aggressively to expand its cable television operations, is discussing a joint venture with Cablevision Industries, the country's ninth-largest cable operator.
Such a venture would give Time Warner access to more homes in several areas of the country, especially New York State, David Testa, a Cablevision vice president, said yesterday.
Mr.
Testa said his company had been "in talks for the better part of a year with different companies" looking for a joint venture "to make us stronger for the future."


Pope Visits Sicily Amid Alarm Over the Mafia
On his first trip since poor health forced him to cancel a journey to the United States, Pope John Paul II tonight began a weekend visit to Sicily, where alarm is growing over threats to priests from the Mafia.
The 74-year-old Pope, who broke a thigh bone in a bathroom fall in April, emerged unaided from his plane here, without the cane he has often used since his fall.
But he seemed uncertain of his footing as he descended the few steps to the tarmac.
As is usually the case on papal trips inside Italy, he did not kneel to kiss the ground.


F. J. Bell, 91, Rear Admiral And Minister
Frederick Jackson Bell, a decorated admiral who wrote several books about the Navy, represented an automobile industry group and eventually became an Episcopal minister, died last Saturday at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Miami.
He was 91 and lived in Miami.
His family said the cause of death was respiratory failure.


Battle Mountain Gold Co.  (BMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Liberal 14th, Rivals Target the Right
In New York City's hottest Congressional race, the man to beat -- or beat up on -- is not Bill Clinton, whom Republicans across the country are running against and Democrats are running away from.
Here in the 14th District, it is Newt Gingrich, the Georgia conservative who will likely become Speaker of the House if his party gains control.
The old Silk Stocking district on Manhattan's East Side, redrawn two years ago to include heavily Democratic chunks of Queens and Brooklyn and a finger of the Upper West Side, has a liberal tradition that was only strengthened by the reshaping.
And Representative Carolyn B. Maloney regularly reminds voters there that her Republican opponent could help hand Mr.
Gingrich a promotion.


Russia's Economics Minister Quits, Clouding Policy
Confidence in Russia's economic policy took another blow today when the market-minded Economics Minister resigned in response to the appointment of a new Finance Minister.
Aleksandr N. Shokhin, the Economics Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, stepped down after President Boris N. Yeltsin gave the finance post to Vladimir G. Panskov, a Soviet-era budget specialist who spent several months in prison before bribery charges against him were dropped this year.


Pittston Minerals Group (PZM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ARMS TRAFFICKING TO BOSNIA GOES ON DESPITE EMBARGO
Even as the United Nations discusses lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the embargo appears to have become largely a fiction, openly flouted.
Helped by the ready availability of arms and military components in the former Soviet bloc countries and by an apparent American readiness to turn a blind eye, Croatia is now building or assembling everything from battle tanks to MIG-21 fighter aircraft and acting as the main conduit for the flood of weapons reaching Bosnia.


Complaints To Review Unit About Police Increase 46%
The Civilian Complaint Review Board yesterday reported a 46 percent increase in complaints of police brutality and other abuses in the first six months of this year compared with the same period in 1993.
The board and the Police Department received 2,190 complaints through June, including reports of 220 beatings, 24 uses of flashlights as clubs, 15 pistol-whippings and 153 threats of force.
At the same time, reports of offensive language by the police, like ethnic or racial slurs, decreased 9 percent, to 255 incidents from 281, the board said.


Town, Feeling Betrayed, Reviles Woman Accused of Killing Sons
To cries of "Murderer!" and "Baby killer!" rising from an angry crowd, the woman who said a carjacker had abducted her two little boys was ushered away to jail today after being formally charged with their murders.
The woman, Susan V. Smith, had waived her right to appear before a judge inside the vaulted, turn-of-the-century Union County courthouse to hear the charges read.
She waited instead inside the sheriff's office next door.
But as Mrs.
Smith was driven away, her head buried in her lap, she could not escape the jeers and epithets hurled at her by about 200 townspeople who had gathered to condemn her.


Plains Resources Inc.(PLX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge in White House Attack Weighing Curbs on Remarks
Federal prosecutors argued today that there was no need for an order to restrict public comment in the case of a man accused of raking the White House with semiautomatic rifle fire a week ago.
The order is being sought by lawyers for the man, Francisco M. Duran.
They had asked a Federal magistrate-judge, Deborah A. Robinson, to stop Government officials from making any comment about the case to reporters.
Leigh A. Kenny, Mr.
Duran's lead lawyer, said in legal papers filed today that news accounts about the case could hamper her client's ability to get a fair trial.
She bolstered her argument with 250 pages of photocopied news accounts about the shooting.


In Their Own Words
ROSS PEROT  The former Presidential candidate released a letter endorsing Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the incumbent Democrat, for re-election in New Jersey.
Here is an excerpt:
"You and I have known each other for a long time, back to the days when we were both working to build a fledgling industry. I know that politics has not been your career, and that you chose to serve in order to provide a better future for all of our people and to give something back to your state and country. You are one of the few members of the Senate who knows how the real world works and we need to keep you there working for us."  A HAYTAIAN SPOKESMAN
Larry Purpuro, a spokesman for Chuck Haytaian, the Republican candidate for Senate, offered this response to the Perot endorsement.
"Senator Lautenberg has called Mr. Perot an 'autocrat' who is 'unfit' for office and now he seeks the man's support. Mr. Lautenberg's solicitation of Perot's endorsement is consistent with the rest of his duplicitous election-year tactics."


Harris Chemical North America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc.(FCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Owen Harvey Nichols, Commodities Trading Official, 68
Owen Harvey Nichols, the founding chairman of the Chicago Board Options Exchange, died on Tuesday at his home in Golf, Fla.
He was 68.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Carol.


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns across the country.
GEORGIA A funny thing has happened to Newt Gingrich on his way to becoming House Speaker, minority leader or whatever position of power he expects to hold after the election.
Amid indications that the race against his Democratic challenger, Ben Jones, is closer than he might have liked, Mr.
Gingrich, the House Republican whip, has canceled a planned trip to campaign for candidates in California tomorrow; he will instead concentrate on his own re-election campaign in Georgia's Sixth Congressional District.
Mr.
Gingrich says he is comfortably ahead in the largely Republican district, north of Atlanta.
But Mr.
Jones says Mr.
Gingrich's decision to spend more time at home is evidence that the challenger's low-budget campaign has caught on.


JOBLESS RATE FELL AGAIN IN OCTOBER TO A 4-YEAR LOW
The job market improved in October as the unemployment rate eased to 5.8 percent, another four-year low, and hourly wages rose by the largest amount in more than a decade, the Labor Department reported today.
Payroll gains were relatively modest, though, with the economy adding 194,000 jobs last month, well below the quarter of a million jobs added during a typical month this year.
California, which has lagged far behind the rest of the country, was particularly impressive, with unemployment dropping to 7.7 percent from 8.3 percent.
Employment in New York and New Jersey was virtually flat.


Cuomo Unveils An Infomercial
Call him "Gov of Steel."
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign began its final weekend yesterday by broadcasting a glossy 30-minute video appeal in selected television markets around the state.
To produce it, the Governor turned to his new son-in-law, Howard S. Maier, founder of the "Buns of Steel" fitness home video series.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW -- Because of the New York City Marathon, several streets will be closed for much of the day, including, in Manhattan, First Avenue from 59th Street north to the Willis Avenue Bridge; Fifth Avenue from 102d to 120th Street, and Central Park South from Fifth Avenue to Columbus Circle.
In Brooklyn, part of Fourth Avenue from 84th Street to Flatbush Avenue will be closed.
In addition, some lanes on the Queensboro, Willis Avenue, Pulaski and Madison Avenue bridges will be closed for parts of the day.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the meeting of two wounded New York City transit police officers at an awards ceremony described the awards incorrectly and misstated the timing of the meeting in some editions.
The two men, Officer Desmond Robinson and Sgt.
Louis Cosentino, presented awards to their doctors; they did not receive awards themselves.
Their conversation took place after the presentation, not before.


CHRONICLE
Book parties tend to be celebratory affairs, but even so, there was an unusually strong sense of camaraderie at a party on Thursday at the Greenwich Village house of the artist JENNIFER BARTLETT.
The talk of the evening, along with Ms.
Bartlett's candlelighted rooftop swimming pool, was the book "The Power of Feminist Art: The American Movement of the 1970's, History and Impact," published by Harry N. Abrams.


A Revival With Early Minimalism
In "Marimba," which the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company revived on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), Mr.
Lubovitch seeks variety within unity.
Mr.
Lubovitch was one of the first choreographers to be attracted by the music of the composers who came to be known as Minimalists.
The recorded accompaniment for "Marimba," which dates from 1976, is Steve Reich's "Music for Mallet Instruments, Voices and Organ," an entrancingly crystalline piece but one that develops at its own unhurried pace.
Mr.
Lubovitch respects its formal structure yet is never enslaved by it.
The dancers are first seen in a huddle, from which they step forward in slow motion.
As they progress, they cling to one another at times, only to disentangle themselves.


Test Score Rise Had Nothing to Do With Race
To the Editor:
Re "Good Genes, Bad Schools" by E. D. Hirsch Jr. (Op-Ed, Oct. 29): I agree that the better the education students receive, the better they do on standardized tests, whatever their background.
The College Board's own studies of the relationship of academic preparation to Scholastic Assessment Test scores demonstrate this fact: scores go higher as academic study increases, across all racial lines.


A Cashless Economy Would Make Larger Tax Cuts Possible
To the Editor:
In elections throughout the country, and particularly in New York, the most contested issue is which candidate can propose the most generous and feasible tax cuts.


Western Beef Inc.(BEEF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Rockets' Party Nearly Spoiled By the Nets
The Dream wasn't about to scream.
But he was miffed.
"What do you expect," Hakeem Olajuwon said, "for us to win by 40?"
One might surmise that the Nets got under the world champions' skin tonight, nearly stealing away a perfect Houston evening before falling, 90-86, in front of a loud crowd of 16,611 at the Summit.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI CRITICIZES CUOMO AT MURDER SITE Seeking to regain the initiative with a dramatic offensive on crime, State Senator George E. Pataki took his gubernatorial campaign to the Staten Island boarding house where Thomas Grasso strangled 81-year-old Leslie Holtz in 1991, a murder that the Republicans have used to ridicule Governor Cuomo's resolute opposition to the death penalty.
Page 1.
LAUTENBERG ASSAILED ON FAMILIAR THEMES In his first race for the United States Senate 12 years ago, Frank R. Lautenberg raised the question of whether his 72-year-old opponent, Congresswoman Millicent Fenwick, was past her political prime, questioning "her ability to do the job." Six years later, he sought to convince voters that his rival, Pete Dawkins, was out of touch.
Now, as Mr.
Lautenberg seeks a third term, those issues are again a part of the race, only they have now been turned against the 70-year-old Democratic incumbent.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  IN BRONX, CHRISTMAS TREE SELLER IS SLAIN The day after last Thanksgiving, as Glenn Walker set up Christmas trees for sale in the Bronx, two men in leather coats demanded $3,000 to let him stay in business.
When he refused, firebombs were hurled into his lot and $6,000 in trees went up in smoke.
On Wednesday, two men in leather jackets strode into his Hunts Point office, told his secretary to lie on the floor and threw him on a couch.
Then, one put a gun to his left temple and shot him to death.
Page 27.
RIVALS BOTH RUN AGAINST THE RIGHT In New York City's hottest Congressional race, the man to beat -- or beat up on -- is not Bill Clinton, whom Republicans across the country are running against and Democrats are running away from.
In the 14th District, it is Newt Gingrich, the Georgia conservative who will likely become Speaker of the House if his party gains control.
Representative Carolyn B. Maloney regularly reminds voters there that her Republican opponent could help hand Mr.
Gingrich a promotion.
Page 28.
A surprise warming trend brings a breath of summer to the metropolitan region.
Page 27.
REGION  HUNTING DEBATE IN CONNECTICUT Duck and goose hunting season has arrived in Connecticut, and with it a heated debate over whether the state's shoreline has become too densely populated to allow hunters to shoot waterfowl on or near public beaches.
Page 26.
NEW VILLAINS?
NO, JUST THE CANDIDATES Villains and misfits parade across the television screen, each with a tale of dishonesty, greed and ineptitude more terrifying than the last.
Is it the latest episode of "Oprah"?
No.
A cliffhanger on "All My Children?" Guess again.
It's campaign '94.
Page 29.
REPORT ON CANDIDATE STAYS SECRET The Middlebury police do not have to make public a report on a domestic incident between John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor of Connecticut, and his former wife because it contains uncorroborated allegations of criminal actions that she made against him, a Superior Court judge ruled.
Page 29.
Two G.O.P. officials withdrew support for the party's choice for state comptroller.
Page 29.
A constitutional amendment gets lost in New Jersey.
Page 30.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27 Traffic Alert.....26


Wajax Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's a Lack of Control For Penn State in Polls
The process goes on, week by week, as Penn State attempts to build a case for a national championship.
The Nittany Lions are schooled to concentrate on the opponents across the line of scrimmage, but with just one serious challenge left on their schedule, they are aware of another competition.
Penn State will meet Indiana here on Saturday and will then contend with Nebraska on Sunday.
That is how the next few weekends should go for the teams that share the No. 1 positions in the two polls that attempt to determine a national championship in the absence of a playoff.


Bills' Revenge? Teams Scoff
The word from Buffalo was that the Bills were out for revenge against the Jets on Sunday.
"Revenge?" said Bobby Houston, the Jets' outside linebacker.
"Revenge for what? They beat us twice a year every year and we beat them once and they want revenge?"


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Showy Repertory From the Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall


Union Planters Corp.(UPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS: The McCaw Mystery; Billionaire, 45, Seeks A Future. No Hurry.
Craig O. McCaw, who became both a billionaire and unemployed when he sold his cellular telephone company in September to the AT&amp;T Corporation, says he is browsing for new ventures but still does not know what to do with the rest of his life.
Mr.
McCaw, who is 45, caused a stir last week by applying to bid in the Federal Communications Commission's December auction of new licenses for wireless telephone and data services.


Pataki, Backing Executions, Assails Cuomo at Murder Site
Seeking to regain the initiative with a dramatic offensive on crime, State Senator George E. Pataki yesterday took his gubernatorial campaign to the Staten Island boarding house where Thomas Grasso strangled 81-year-old Leslie Holtz in 1991, a murder that the Republicans have used to ridicule Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's resolute opposition to the death penalty.
As the tightly contested race entered its final weekend, the Cuomo campaign was preparing for the possibility of a final onslaught of television advertising about Mr.
Grasso, a double murderer whose request to be executed in Oklahoma has been thwarted by Mr.
Cuomo.


Pratt Hotel Corp.(PHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NPC Int'l.(NPCIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Gaullist Finally Declares Presidential Candidacy
Stealing a march on his rivals, France's Gaullist party leader, Jacques Chirac, tried to breathe life into his flagging campaign for the presidency today by formally declaring that he would be a candidate next spring.
The announcement, in an interview with a provincial newspaper, La Voix du Nord, came as no surprise.
Mr.
Chirac, 61, a former Prime Minister who sought the presidency in 1981 and 1988, has long been preparing for the race to succeed President Francois Mitterrand.
Until 18 months ago, he was even the clear front-runner.


Hamish Munro, 79; Studied Nutrition of Elderly
Hamish N. Munro, a nutrition scientist and doctor who was the first director of the Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, died on Oct. 28 in a nursing home in Glasgow, Scotland.
He was 79.
He had suffered from Parkinson's disease for eight years, the university said.


American Water Works Co.  (AWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Fatal Plunge Has Cornell Asking Whether Gorge Inspires Suicides


Israelis Say Slain Arab Was Planning New Attack
An Islamic militant leader who was killed by a car bomb in the Gaza Strip this week was himself planning a car-bomb attack inside Israel, the Israeli press reported today.
In the most detailed article, the newspaper Haaretz identified the bomb victim, Hani Abed, as leader of the military wing of the Islamic Holy War group and an organizer of past attacks in which Israelis were killed.


America Online Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Creating a Park for the Community in the Bronx


F.A.A. Warns Airlines on Autopilot Use in Ice
The Federal Aviation Administration today advised operators of 150 airplanes like the American Eagle plane that crashed near here on Monday to stop using the autopilot in icy conditions and to retract the flaps while in a holding pattern.
The agency issued those instructions as advice only, noting that the National Transportation Safety Board was still in the early stages of its investigation of the crash and that no cause had been established.
But the recommendation shows the agency is seriously considering the possibility that icing was a factor in the crash.
"We want to err on the side of safety," said Sondra Allen, an agency spokeswoman.
"These are procedures that make sense at this point in the investigation."


Job Report Jolts Bonds; Rates Rise
Solid gains in jobs and wages jolted the Treasury market yesterday, driving long-term interest rates to their highest level in more than three years.
A decline in the nation's unemployment rate and a sharp rise in hourly wages rekindled concerns that inflation would accelerate and that the Federal Reserve would respond by raising short-term interest rates aggressively to slow growth.


Gains Seen for Japanese In Auto Parts Efficiency
Despite the recession in Japan, auto parts manufacturers there are improving their already superior quality and productivity faster than their competitors in North America, according to a study of 71 component plants in nine countries.
Auto sales are booming in the United States, automatically conferring productivity gains on manufacturers here as they use more of their plant capacity.
As a result, the survey's results imply that domestic manufacturers may not be competitive when the market turns down.


CHRONICLE
It was a sight to turn the head of the most jaded commuter: Neptune, god of the seas, riding the Staten Island ferry.
A sculpture of Neptune that is part of a fountain at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Staten Island had needed some sprucing up, so it went to the Modern Art Foundry in Long Island City, Queens, for restoration.
Yesterday morning, the seven-and-a-half-foot-tall, 1,500-pound bronze sculpture went home, accompanied by a group of Snug Harbor officials.
It rode the ferry on a flatbed truck.


Tops Appliance City Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


DANCE
Passion Seemingly Unspent And a Love Affair Gone Amiss
Ohio Theater


Livery-Cab Driver Killing Is 20th This Year
A livery-cab driver was shot in the chest and killed yesterday in Jamaica, Queens, apparently in a robbery attempt, the police said.
The body of the driver, Sega Sissoka, 36 years old, was found slumped behind the wheel of a 1984 blue four-door Buick just after 3 P.M. at the corner of 156th Street and 113th Avenue, said Officer Rosa Atamyildiz, a police spokeswoman.


Psychological Pitfalls Can Trap the Unwary
WHERE does Charles Munger, friend and partner of the fabled investor Warren E. Buffett, get his financial insights?
From his dog, for one.
Mostly friendly, the animal shows a rare ferocity if someone pulls an item from its mouth.
This "take-away syndrome" arises in investors, too -- as a costly resistance to selling at a loss, Mr.
Munger says.
Mr.
Munger, vice chairman of Mr.
Buffett's company, Berkshire Hathaway, is a student of such foibles.
"The mind has certain standard inanities," he said, and investor patterns prove the point.


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Musicians Take On the Challenge of Old Age
The trumpeter Jonah Jones didn't show up for the Highlights in Jazz concert at Pace University on Thursday night, so the trombonist Al Grey, who was there to listen, took his place.
Mr.
Grey, playing a borrowed bass trombone (he usually plays a tenor trombone) and, using a clear plastic cup as his plunger, put together a solo on "C-Jam Blues" that was a miracle of blues ideas, bent and throttled notes and vocalizations.
It was as if he had sung his solo.
In its casualness and its willingness to lead the audience through its adventure, the music seemed communal, the audience and performers like old friends.
The concert was meant to feature some of the older musicians in jazz, and Doc Cheatham, the irrepressible and formidable 89-year-old trumpeter, opened the concert, aiming his trumpet at the ceiling as if he were thanking some higher power.
He performed lightly brushed and delicate solos, which he interrupted with his coy singing.
Backed by Chuck Folds on piano, Bucky Calabrese on bass and Jackie Williams on drums, he worked his way through "Rosetta," "I'm in the Market for You" and "Miss Brown to You."


Sports of The Times; Pandora's Little Box Of Drugs
WHERE did Doc Gooden's problems begin?
Where did Jennifer Capriati's?
Somehow I see them as one and the same: perpetrators of their own disasters but wealthy victims as well.
What was Doc's undoing?
Was it a drag of marijuana as a teen-ager?
Or was it that first line of cocaine in the big city?
Or maybe it was that first shot of painkiller to make the arm stop hurting.
Maybe it was the ritual beer drinking in the clubhouse after each game, drugs at night, then painkillers, then beer, then drugs, then painkillers until it all ran together and suddenly he couldn't tell day from night.


Roadmaster Industries(RDM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


2 Executives and Their Spouses Killed in Crash of a Helicopter; William F. Emswiler, Barbara White Emswiler
William F. Emswiler, an executive of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation, and his wife, Barbara, were among those killed in a helicopter crash in Mexico on Tuesday.
They were residents of Fairfield, Conn.
Their deaths were confirmed by the State Department yesterday.


Wide Impact On the Land Is Seen in Vote On Property
In a vote that may influence environmental policy across the country, Arizonans will decide on a ballot proposition on Tuesday that would require the state to consider whether any proposed health, safety or environmental regulation violated a resident's private property rights.
The measure would give every Arizona government agency the authority to prevent state safety or environmental rules from going into effect if officials found that the restrictions would reduce the value of private property or unfairly block the use of it.
Federal statutes would not be affected.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Spanishness Sublimated In Two Piano Sonatas  Carnegie Hall


United Illuminating (UIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


VWR Corp.(VWRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boxed Into A Corner
Phillippi Sparks, the Giants' starting cornerback, will probably miss Monday night's game against the Cowboys because of a groin injury.
His replacement, Thomas Randolph, is a rookie with a bad toe.
The other cornerback, Corey Raymond, has had a rough season.
So how are the Giants going to stop the Pro Bowl receiver Michael Irvin and the talented Alvin Harper?
You don't.
Well, most people haven't, anyway.
But the Giants' defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, isn't ready to give up.
He has been studying films of the Lions' victory over the Cowboys on Sept. 17.


Public &amp; Private; Apologies To Anita
Like one of those fun-house mirrors that shows splintered reflections at crazy and confusing angles, the Clarence Thomas in a new book titled "Strange Justice" is many different men.
There is the man who said not long ago that he really would have liked to run a small business or drive a truck, as though his elevation were a martyrdom.
And there is the young lawyer who, in 1981, was telling acquaintances he intended someday to sit on the Supreme Court.


Wellman Inc.(WLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith, Ewing &amp; Co. Make Tracks on Parquet Floor
Whatever questions the Knicks had entering their season opener tonight were answered -- loudly and impressively.
Charles Smith played one of his most forceful games in a Knick uniform.
Patrick Ewing proved that missing the preseason helped his knee, without hurting his game.
And the Knicks, expected to make another run at a title, used an improved, up-tempo attack that left tread marks on the Boston Garden parquet floor.


Police Report On Rowland And Ex-Wife Is Kept Secret
The Middlebury police do not have to make public a report on a domestic incident between John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, and his former wife, a Superior Court judge ruled today, because it contains uncorroborated allegations of criminal actions that she made against him.
In saying the police did not have to comply immediately with a Freedom of Information Commission order to release the three-page report, Judge Christine S. Vertefeuille made it all but certain that the document's contents will remain secret until after the election on Tuesday, in which most polls show Mr.
Rowland to be the front-runner.


Review/Fashion; Learning From Las Vegas and Show World
Any sociologist preparing an essay on America's complex yearning for a little nastiness would have found plenty of material in Thursday's fashion shows.
What was a nice girl like Cynthia Rowley doing playing craps in Las Vegas?
And what messages were the models sending who refused to pole dance in Tracy Feith's presentation at Show World's Big Top?
What were they saying about the stripper fashion so many designers on both sides of the Atlantic are offering ?
And what does it mean when a young designer like Victor Alfaro forsakes the cha-cha flash and trash of his first seasons for sophisticated and tasteful styles?


Newcomers With Varied Strategies
Albert H. Elfner 3d, president of the Keystone Group, sees great potential in emerging markets, which the World Bank projects will grow 4.8 percent during the next decade.
"Keystone Strategic Development Fund is intended to benefit from this worldwide growth -- particularly in emerging nations -- by investing in natural resources and infrastructure development companies that we believe will be feeding the growth," Mr.
Elfner said.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Composers String Quartet In a Night of Iconoclasm  Miller Theater


In Their Own Words
WILLIAM E. CURRY JR.
Mr.
Curry, the Democratic candidate for governor of Connecticut, was asked on a radio talk show yesterday about a poll in The Day of New London and The Journal-Inquirer of Manchester, the first poll to show him leading the race, with 31 percent compared with 28 percent for the Republican, John G. Rowland.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about a proposed sale of the retailing operations of the Petrie Stores Corporation misstated the price.
It is $190 million, not $180 million.


A Very New York Day
The City of New York warms up on a Sunday in early November like no other day of the year.
The weather may be hot or cold, but the day belongs to the New York City Marathon -- a 26.2-mile exhilaration.
The riveting event is a grueling exertion by some 28,000 runners.
Supporting them are more than a million cheering spectators, maybe two million, rooting for a relative or a friend somewhere in the pack, or just rooting for the pack.
Momentarily, a supercharged city is mellow.
The mass of marathoners is stunning in itself, streaming through the streets and struggling across the bridges.
But the mass of spectators -- fans, family and friends from near and far -- is key.
Ask any runner.
When exhaustion strikes, the cheers keep coming, lifting the dead-tired another block and then another mile and finally to the finish line.
"I've never seen people cheer like that," said Kenya's Ibrahim Hussein when he won in 1987.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8  EMBARGO IN NAME ONLY
The embargo against Bosnia and Croatia has become largely a fiction and is openly violated even as the United Nations debates lifting it.  1


3 Suspended For Groping At West Point
The United States Military Academy announced yesterday that three West Point football players who had groped female cadets at an October pep rally would be suspended from the team for the rest of the season.
But Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, criticized the punishment as too lenient and a Pentagon official said many more players must have been involved.
In addition to the suspension from the team, the three cadets were restricted to academy grounds for 90 days and given 80 hours of marching discipline.


Galey &amp; Lord (GANL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


INSIDE
3 Suspended at West Point
Three West Point football players who groped female cadets at a rally will be suspended from the team for the rest of the season.
Page 25.
More Confusion in California
Further muddying state politics, officials said a housekeeper once employed by Senator Dianne Feinstein was in the country illegally.
Page 11.
Pilots Given New Guidelines
Federal officials advised pilots of the type of commuter plane that crashed on Monday to adopt new procedures for icy weather.
Page 12.
Fast Food, Faster
McDonald's will make home and office deliveries from 40 of its Manhattan restaurants, with orders phoned in to a computerized center.
Page 25.


On More and More Routes, Only Propeller Planes Fly
Although many passengers express concern over flying in propeller-driven planes -- and some liken such flights to "riding on the back of a mosquito" -- a growing number of people are finding that propeller aircraft are the only type of planes flying to their destinations.
Major airlines are replacing jets with propeller planes on more and more routes as a way to cut costs in an industry that lost $12.8 billion over the last four years.


Terrifying New Villains? No, It's Just the Candidates
Villains and misfits parade across the television screen, each with a tale of dishonesty, greed and ineptitude more terrifying than the last.
Is it the latest episode of "Oprah"?
No.
A cliffhanger on "All My Children?" Guess again.


Grey Advertising Inc.(GREY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Viking Office Products (VKNG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peter Bonanni, 62, Magazine Publisher
Peter A. Bonanni, the publisher of Golf Magazine, died on Thursday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
He was 62 and lived in Armonk.
His family said the cause of death was cancer.


Russian Emigres Inundate Musical Life in Israel
In 1991 Avner Biron, a flutist and conductor of a small orchestra of friends and semi-professional musicians in the town of Rehovot not far from here, regretfully dismissed most of the ensemble's players.
There was an opportunity to improve the group significantly by using first-chair players from major orchestras: specifically, the Russians were coming.
Now the 33-member Israel Camerata of Rehovot, as Mr.
Biron's ensemble is called, is 90 percent Russian and is one of the most highly regarded orchestras in Israel.
Not far away, in Ramat Hasharon, a suburb of Tel Aviv, another chamber orchestra was formed four years ago, entirely composed of women.
Only one of the 13 string players -- the concert master, Vera Vaidman -- is not a recent Russian emigre.


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
NEW YORK  Governor State Senator George E. Pataki sought to regain the initiative with a visit to the Staten Island boarding house where Thomas Grasso strangled an 81-year-old man in 1991, a murder the Republicans have used to ridicule Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's opposition to the death penalty.
Mr.
Cuomo, meanwhile, assembled on the same stage three New York City mayors who may not agree on any other issue except their support for the Governor's re-election.
Comptroller Two more moderate Republican officials withdrew their support for Herbert London, their party's candidate for comptroller, accusing him of running a racially divisive and inflammatory campaign against the Democrat incumbent, H. Carl McCall.
City Councilmen Charles Millard and Andrew S. Eristoff joined the Republican county leader, State Senator Roy M. Goodman, in denouncing Mr.
London.
CONNECTICUT  Governor A state judge ruled that the Middlebury Police Department did not have to release a report on a domestic incident between John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, and his former wife.
The reason, the judge said, was that his former wife made allegations of criminal conduct that have not been corroborated.
NEW JERSEY  United States Senate Senator Frank Lautenberg denounced the National Rifle Association for mailing out endorsements of his Republican opponent, Chuck Haytaian, as Mr.
Haytaian accused his rival of accepting $2 million in contributions from other special interest groups.
Mr.
Lautenberg also said his endorsement from Ross Perot, the former Presidential candidate, proved he was an independent voice.


Two Brothers Share A Quest but Not a Style
At first glance, and perhaps even second, Jeb Bush of Florida and George W. Bush of Texas seem like two peas in a political pod.
Neither brother has ever held elective office, and both were brash enough to shoot right for the top: the governor's mansion.
Both face wily Democratic incumbents, Lawton Chiles of Florida and Ann W. Richards of Texas, and both are in neck-and-neck races just four days before the elections.


United Insurance Cos.(UICI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





Models, Cameras, Makeup, Saran Wrap and Even Clothes
As the paparazzi waited on West 42d Street for the celebrities to arrive at Calvin Klein's show yesterday morning, Kalima Asano managed to upstage Lauren Hutton (who arrived carrying the best shiny red accessory in a season of shiny red accessories -- a motorcycle helmet.)
Ms.
Asano, a fledgling designer, hired seven statuesque models to strut up and down the sidewalk in her evening gowns.
"I didn't have the money to stage a show, so I decided to crash the party," she said as the photographers gathered around and the security guards asked her models to stop blocking the entrance.


Gooden Suspended for 1995 After Additional Drug Tests
Dwight Gooden, continuing to test positive for cocaine use, received a career-jeopardizing penalty yesterday.
A free agent who is no longer a member of the Mets, Gooden was suspended for the entire 1995 season.
The pitcher, whose career has been in decline, has 15 days left of a 60-day drug-related suspension that was interrupted by the players' strike and will serve an additional 168 days, the balance of the 1995 season, on the suspended list.


Two Tourists Found a More Helpful Italy
To the Editor:
Re "Gangsters and Bureaucrats" (Op-Ed, Oct. 28): In no way would I make light of the terrible experience Dante Scaccia describes in dealing with the police and bureaucracy in Italy.
But I had a similar experience with a totally different outcome.


When Books Were Part Of Soldiers' Knapsacks
To the Editor:
You report that young American soldiers in Kuwait have learned what every veteran knows: soldiers go through "long droughts of boredom" (Kuwait Journal, Oct. 28).


When It's Post Time, Oakley Is on His Toes
It's just like Charles Oakley's luck.
It hurts him to so much as walk, so Pat Riley orders the Knicks to run.
Naturally, because he can't himself when it comes to following coach's orders, Oakley sprinted up and down the Boston Garden court, a human version of the bus from the movie "Speed."


Mother Nature Reminds Us Old Man Winter Is Not Here
In what forecasters described as a sort of early Christmas present to New York from the South, gentle southeasterly winds delivered a summerlike day to the metropolitan region yesterday, breaking a temperature record in Newark.
The surprise warming trend is expected to continue at least through tomorrow's New York Marathon, after which a mild cold front, also from the South, will take its place.


Death of an Aviator
"I want to be an astronaut," Lieut.
Kara S. Hultgreen told The Miami Herald last year.
"Most of the astronauts are Navy jet test pilots first. If you're not given the same opportunities, you can't compete on the same level."
Lieutenant Hultgreen earned the same opportunities.
She also incurred the same risks.
On Oct. 25 she was killed in a crash off Southern California, the 10th F-14 aviator to die in a training accident in that notoriously ungainly aircraft since 1992.
The cause is not yet known, but some of her fellow aviators offered a quick, unfounded and appallingly insensitive opinion.
Lieutenant Hultgreen died, they said in faxes to several California news organizations, because she was a woman -- and as such not up to playing on their team.


Kerkorian Is Reviewing His Big Chrysler Stake
Kirk Kerkorian, the largest individual investor in the Chrysler Corporation, is reviewing his stake in the company, a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission showed today.
It is not clear what Mr.
Kerkorian, who holds 32 million shares, or 9.2 percent of Chrysler's common stock, intends to do.
An executive with Mr.
Kerkorian's wholly owned company, the Tracinda Corporation, said the filing grew out of a routine portfolio review.


Lighting Up Dark Ages, And Education Itself
WHEN the trustees of City University invited Theofilo Ruiz to their monthly meeting, to congratulate him for being named one of four outstanding college teachers by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, he had to turn them down.
"It was very nice of the trustees," Professor Ruiz, of Brooklyn College, said, "but it is Halloween and I have to teach my course on witches and wizards."


Corrections
The "How They Do It" chart in Your Money last Saturday referred incorrectly to the rules on how much an employer can reimburse employees for medical expenses.
There is no limit on the amount that sole proprietors can reimburse employees for medical expenses.


Mine Safety Appliances Co.(MNES,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M. M. Cohen, 89, Dentistry Professor
Dr.
M.
Michael Cohen, an expert in pediatric dentistry, died on Oct. 17 at a nursing home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 89 and lived in Cambridge.
Dr.
Cohen had suffered a long illness, said his son, Dr.
M.
Michael Cohen Jr. of Halifax, Nova Scotia.


KinderCare Learning Centers Inc.(KCLC,NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


A Safer Russian Army
The Clinton Administration has made remarkable headway in its efforts to help Russia dismantle its nuclear forces.
Washington's engagement in this enterprise has reached levels that would have been unthinkable just a few years ago.
The U.S. has built housing for former Soviet missile controllers; Pentagon officials now give virtually the same briefing on U.S. nuclear policy to Russia's Parliament as they give to Congress.
Unfortunately, Washington has not yet given equal attention to the need to downsize Moscow's non-nuclear forces.
U.S. cooperation is essential to reduce Russia's army to a level that Russia and its neighbors can live with.


Domtar Inc.(DTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Experts on Juries Debate Composition of the Simpson Panel
Now that a jury has been chosen, the great question looming over O. J. Simpson's trial on murder charges is which side will ultimately benefit from the mostly black, mostly female, panel.
Lawyers for Mr.
Simpson were clearly relieved when the eight women and four men were sworn in on Thursday, and many lawyers and jury consultants interviewed today said they had good reason to feel confident.


Novacare Inc.(NOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beliefs
All right, so Franz Bibfeldt isn't exactly a household name.
Still when the American Academy of Religion and the Society of Biblical Literature hold their annual convention in Chicago in two weeks, a select group of scholars will celebrate the publication of "The Relieved Paradox: Studies in the Theology of Franz Bibfeldt," edited by Martin E. Marty and Jerald C. Brauer, two eminences of the University of Chicago Divinity School.


Consoltex reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Serbs Attack Muslim Town With Antiaircraft Missiles
Apparently retaliating for an offensive by Muslim-led Government troops, Bosnian Serb forces attacked the town of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia with two surface-to-air missiles, a United Nations spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Thant Myint-U said the two SA-2 missiles landed near a school in Bihac on Thursday, damaging 30 to 40 buildings and wounding seven people, including one child who was seriously hurt.


No Headline
"All of us who love this man urge him to get the help he needs, put God into his life and exhibit the same tenacity he showed on the mound, especially in the early years of his career, when a lead in the seventh inning meant a victory in the ninth." -- JOE McILVAINE of the Mets, referring to Dwight Gooden.  [ 35:5. ]


Pratt &amp; Lambert United Inc.(PM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Rescue for 3 Georgia Plants as Sara Lee Exits
Diane Barnette scudded across the factory's maple floorboards, sewing machines buzzing like a swarm of hornets, stopped to scrutinize some T-shirts and spoke of the day the factory was to shut.
"It was a very, very traumatic day," she said, her blond hair bobbing above the din.
"They said that if they didn't find a buyer or some other arrangement, they would close it on Sept. 6. It hit us pretty hard. I guess we were in denial that this would happen." And it didn't, thanks to a local bank and a group of entrepreneurs.
For Ms.
Barnette, who rose from a sewing machine operator earning $1 an hour 24 years ago to plant manager today, and for the 200 seamstresses here who start at $4.25 an hour, the impending shutdown bordered on the apocalyptic.
"Everybody in this town has some connection with this place," she said.
"Really, you had a certain group of people here, this is what they do. This is what they know."
But the incessant drumbeat of international competition and the imperatives of the plant's owner, the Sara Lee Corporation in Chicago, signaled that the old mill in this north Georgia town of 12,000 was no longer needed, and that another small factory had to go.
Last June, Sara Lee, considered one of the best-managed consumer products companies, announced that to improve profits it would cut the number of plants making knitwear, fleecewear and men's and women's underwear.
"We were getting out of private label apparel manufacture, things like sweatshirts for the Gap, active wear." said Nancy Young, a spokeswoman.
"We decided to get out and announced this closing in August."
For the 230, mostly women, employees at the Cartersville factory of Spring City Knitting, a Winston-Salem, N.C., subsidiary of Sara Lee, and the 110 workers at a sister factory in Milledgeville about 120 miles away, unemployment seemed as inevitable as a rushing thunderstorm.
Jerry Kemp, a lean 45-year-old Kentuckian who moved to Cartersville years ago as a Sara Lee vice president, had other ideas.
The year before Mr.
Kemp and three partners formed Springtown Inc., which bought a former Sara Lee plant in Wrightsville, Ga., where 350 workers made men's underwear.
When news of the closing hit here and at a more modern plant in Midgeville, he agreed to buy them and to try to make a go of all three former Sara Lee plants.
"I like this area and wanted to raise my family here," said Mr.
Kemp, the father of two teen-agers.
"I wanted to get into business by myself."
He approached some friends, who had also spent their careers in the apparel business, and they poured their savings into the company.
Mr.
Kemp became its president.
"We all had a good understanding of what it would take to make this work," he said, "but probably the hardest part was putting together the financial package and making this competitive internationally." He sees tough times ahead for the apparel industry in the United States, particularly as global trade is liberalized.
Indeed, apparel industry employment has fallen 18 percent in the last decade, from 1.185 million workers in 1984 to 970,000 today, according to the American Apparel Manufacturers Association.
And over the same period, the association says, apparel imports climbed 159 percent, to $28.2 billion, not including foreign fur, rubber, leather and plastic apparel.
Under an unusual agreement, not yet final, Sara Lee donated the three factories to the state, which plans to enter into a lease-purchase agreement with Mr.
Kemp's company, Springtown Inc.
Eventually Springtown will own the factories and keep the local workers on the job.
Mr.
Kemp and his partners had some misgivings.
The Milledgeville plant could quickly make small batches of a wide range of knitwear and active wear and could be profitable.
But in Cartersville, "we decided to take a gamble," Mr.
Kemp said.
"This is a high-cost operation to run," he added.
"It's old. It's not automated. But because of the management, the people, and because we ourselves were here, we decided it was worth taking a chance."
David Dautel, Springtown's chief financial officer, said that the company had applied for two loans from the state for $250,000 each for the Milledgeville and Cartersville plants.
The state grants the money to the localities, which, in turn, lend to the company at below-market rates.
The loans are repaid over five to seven years to the localities, which can then relend the money to others.
Putting the deal together involved persuading a nearby bank, the Trust Company Bank of Northwest Georgia, in Rome, that he and his partners could make a go of Sara Lee's old plants.
David Johnson, the bank's senior loan officer, said: "I'd say the first question we asked was 'If they couldn't do it, why can you?' " After all, Sara Lee had a reputation for knowing how to run plants efficiently.
But the bank, Mr.
Johnson said, was encouraged because Mr.
Kemp and his partners had spent their working lives in the business, Sara Lee's existing contracts were inherited by Springtown, the market and cost projections looked good, and interviews with Springtown customers were positive.
"We asked them who is their primary market," Mr.
Johnson said.
"If they are making for Russell, that's a pretty strong company. If they're making for Jockey, that's a pretty strong company. We will call the company and ask how comfortable they are with the company -- can they produce a quality product at a competitive price?"
He said that the fact the bank was lending to Springtown in Cartersville, which is on the fringe of its usual business territory, was an expression of confidence.
"Our interest is in Cartersville," he said.
"It is a viable employer. It has great potential and is important to the community there."
While Mr.
Kemp wants plants that can produce garments that were not being made by others, he said he was also determined to save jobs, even if it appeared risky.
"They're good people here, and a lot of these jobs are in towns where there's not a lot of opportunity," he said.
"Just writing this off is just not right."
In starting an apparel company, Mr.
Kemp and his partners, like mice scampering between the legs of elephants, are trying to find niches in the market and to compete aggressively.
It is not easy, he admitted.
"First," he continued, "our niche is in active wear and underwear, mostly contract manufacture," for other labels.
"We want people like the Gap or Jockey or Calvin Klein. When they want a lounge or a fashion kind of underwear, we're the people who come to mind."
Mr.
Dautel, the financial officer, said that the company's expectations for the Cartersville plant hinged on transforming it into an efficient headquarters with a computerized inventory system and into the central distribution point for the company's other two factories.
And while the Georgia plants are the core of his company, Mr.
Kemp acknowledged that it needed lower-cost foreign operations to survive.
For that, Springtown recently bought a small plant in Honduras.
"Our thinking is long term, we wanted to be both domestic and offshore," he said.
Although it is yet early, the company is off to a good start, Mr.
Kemp said.
"Business is strong," he said.
"We hit it on an upswing. We have a good reputation, and we try to service the business we have well. We've been fortunate. We have people who believe we'll be successful."
And, he said, the company is depending as well on the strength of its work force.
"The folks in all these plants have been very supportive," he said.
"They've hung in there. I wouldn't have even considered it without having them. They're really what makes it happen."
Ms.
Barnette finished her whirl through the factory, from sewing room to inspection tables, to bundling and packaging.
"All in all, it's not a bad place to work, or I wouldn't have stuck around for 24 years," she said.
"If this had closed, it would never have opened again."


Reno Air reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prague Journal; Czechs Turning a Colder Eye on the U.S. Emigres
From a cobblestoned block away, the raucous chatter of a packed saloon booms out, the noise of drinkers downing cocktails like "Greyhound," "Orgasm" and "B-52." At Jo's Bar, where burritos and burgers are menu staples, young Americans gather to celebrate being expatriates in a city that for them is cheap and chic.
But to the citizens of Prague, who for the last five years have watched Americans settle in to make money, dispense advice and in the case of the 20-somethings have a good time, the novelty of the newcomers is wearing off.


Questions on Legality but Few on Popularity
Amid fierce criticism of career politicians, eight states will vote on term limits for members of Congress next week.
And if the measures pass, as expected, nearly half the states will have such limits.
Even where the question is not on the ballot, many candidates for Congress are pledging support for term limits.
With few exceptions, incumbents and other candidates who dislike the limits soft-pedal their opposition, for fear of alienating voters.


Bronx Group Is Challenging A Planned Merger by Chase
A Bronx community group has challenged an unusual application by the Chase Manhattan Corporation to merge its bank in Connecticut into its lead bank in New York City.
The group, Inner City Press/Community on the Move, said in a filing with Federal bank regulators that the merger should be denied because Chase does not lend enough in minority and low-income areas of the Bronx and upper Manhattan.
The Federal Community Reinvestment Act requires banks to meet the credit needs of communities they serve and allows regulators to block mergers for banks that do not comply.
The challenge by Inner City Press could delay Chase's plans if the Government sees merits in the group's claims.


CAE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Radio Technology Was Used Before War
To the Editor:
In "The Public Citizen" (column, Oct. 28), Anthony Lewis pays tribute to Jerome B. Wiesner for his lifetime of dedicated service as a scientist and educator but errs when he attributes to Dr.
Wiesner the development of ionospheric bounce communication during World War II.


Information on Voting
Election Day is Tuesday.
Polling places will be open 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York State; 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey, and 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. in Connecticut.
For polling-place information, call the Voter Information Hot Line of the New York City Board of Elections, (212) 868-3692, or the New York Public Interest Research Group, (212) 349-6986.
The line for the hearing-impaired is (212) 487-5496.


A New York State Tax Amnesty, but Not for New Yorkers
In a little-publicized program that expires at the end of this month, New York State is taking a carrot-and-stick approach to tax amnesty.
The carrot: penalties will be forgiven for those who confess and file delinquent returns for 1986 through 1993.
The stick: new computer prowess makes it possible to catch nonfilers who could escape notice a decade ago.
And when the state succeeds, it is assessing hefty penalties and interest, tax professionals say.


Business Digest
The Economy  The nation's unemployment rate eased to a four-year low of 5.8 percent and hourly wages rose by the largest amount in more than a decade.
The report confirmed that the economy was in a robust recovery.
But signs of accelerating inflation were also seen, and bonds and stocks fell sharply.  [ Page 1. ]  The New York region lagged behind the nation in job gains.
The unemployment rate jumped in New York City, rose slightly in the state and remained level in New Jersey.  [ 54. ] Markets  Long-term interest rates jumped to their highest level in more than three years after the Treasury market was unnerved by the Labor Department's employment report.  [ 41. ] Stocks tumbled after the employment report heightened fears of an inflation rate that would hurt the value of stocks and bonds.
Late computerized selling also weighed on prices.  [ 42. ] The dollar weakened after the United States refrained from intervening in the foreign-exchange markets.  [ 53. ] Copper prices rose to a four-year high on a report of low inventory.
Crude oil prices fell after an early jump.  [ 53. ] Companies  McDonnell Douglas will manufacture 20 commercial aircraft for China at its plant in Long Beach, Calif. -- rather than let the Chinese produce the aircraft themselves in Shanghai.  [ 41. ]
Time Warner is talking with Cablevision Industries about a possible joint venture.
Such an alliance would give Time Warner access to more homes in areas like New York State.  [ 41. ] Three former Sara Lee plants in Georgia are getting a second chance thanks to a local bank and a group of entrepreneurs.  [ 41. ]
Chase Manhattan has been challenged by a Bronx community group on an unusual application to merge its bank in Connecticut into its lead bank in New York City.  [ 41. ] General Motors slashed 27,000 vehicles from its worldwide fourth-quarter production schedules.  [ 43. ] Kirk Kerkorian is reviewing his 9.2 percent stake in Chrysler.
It is unclear what Mr.
Kerkorian, the auto maker's largest individual investor, plans to do with his shares.  [ 43. ] Japan's auto parts makers are improving efficiency.  [ 43. ] Airlines are using propeller-driven planes to replace jets on more and more routes as a way to cut costs and help stem losses.  [ 12. ] What's next for Craig O. McCaw?
Some of the biggest brokerage firms and banks are offering investments that link returns to market gains but that guarantee the principal will be returned -- even if markets decline.
There is, however, an image problem: these investments are derivatives.  [ 38. ] Investing is never a completely rational science.
Being aware of one's own foibles can help an investor avoid pitfalls.  [ 38. ] New York State is offering a tax amnesty until the end of this month, but only to out-of-state residents.  [ 38. ]


2 Executives and Their Spouses Killed in Crash of a Helicopter; Roy Howard Pollack, Linda Perrin Taber
Roy Howard Pollack, a former executive vice president and board member of the RCA Corporation in New York, and his wife, Linda Perrin Taber, a communications specialist, died in a helicopter crash in Mexico on Tuesday, the State Department said yesterday.
They were residents of the Upper East Side of Manhattan and Princeton, N.J.
Mr.
Pollack was 66 and Ms.
Taber 53.


A Warm Homecoming on Russian Ice
They called themselves a dream team, and to the 5,000 screaming, cheering fans in Sokolniki Stadium, the Russian stars of the National Hockey League did in fact glide in like the ghosts of Soviet glories past.
Tonight, as the Russian national anthem wafted across the ice, each N.H.L. player received a giant bouquet of roses wrapped in cellophane -- a custom usually reserved for visiting stars at the Bolshoi.
"They are our guests now," a ticket taker explained with a sad smile.


Barnard's President
To the Editor:
I wish you had covered Judith R. Shapiro's inauguration last week as Barnard College's sixth president.


NEW YORK 25th MARATHON; If Temperature's Up, So Is Rousseau's Time
Early yesterday morning, Vincent Rousseau of Belgium began his nervous ritual, flipping on the television for Sunday's forecast, scanning the newspapers, juggling Fahrenheit and Celsius, worrying that his chances of winning the New York City Marathon would decrease as the temperature increases.
"He checked five or six times," Rene Devos, who is Rousseau's agent, said with a nervous laugh yesterday at noon.


Scherer (R.P.) Corp.(SHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Software Spectrum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dow Plunges 38.36 After Jobs Report
Once again Wall Street took fright at news that Main Street was doing well.
The Government's report yesterday that the unemployment rate had fallen to a four-year low rekindled fears that a too-strong economy would produce an inflation rate that would hurt stocks and bonds.
Stocks dropped even though the dollar stabilized and the earnings season was coming to a close with a surprising number of companies reporting results that beat Wall Street's expectations.


Reviews/Fashion; Klein and Karan: Clothes That Do the Job
Runway shows in their current incarnation could borrow the title from Dorothy Parker's anthology of fiction, "Here Lies." Many women will never wear those clothes.
But Calvin Klein and Donna Karan represent a certain truth: that working women need to be taken seriously, and that they need clothes that will do the job.
On the closing day of the New York collections, the two designers demonstrated why women have turned to them for relief from a cacophony of fashion messages.
Clanking discordant music shrieked like a cat being plucked at Mr.
Klein's show.
Even Fran Lebowitz, his good friend, winced and plugged one ear as Kate Moss emerged in a stern black suit.
But even though the music went on throbbing, Ms.
Lebowitz dropped her hand eventually.
The ears, of course, adjust.


Dreaminess Just Behind The Twang
Nanci Griffith may be the closest thing to a figure from a Eudora Welty novel that pop music has produced.
Born and reared in western Texas, this 40-year-old singer and songwriter has the aura of a homespun farm girl with poetry in her soul and wanderlust in her eyes.
While her voice has a hard Texan twang that evokes a stubborn willfulness and true grit, behind that twang is a childlike dreaminess.
That quality comes to the fore in ballads like "There's a Light Beyond These Woods (Mary Margaret)," Ms.
Griffith's plaintive reminiscence of an adolescent friendship.


Observer; O Rare Newt Gingrich
Republicans last ran both houses of Congress during the two-year term 1953-55.
Before that they had one other two-year term: 1947-49.
Before that?
You'd have to search back in the Bronze Age when most Americans knew who Herbert Hoover and Al Smith were.
Sixty years of losing tends to lower politicians' hopes.
This is why there is real excitement about the Republicans' chances of winning both Senate and House next Tuesday.


ECI Telecom Ltd.  (ECILF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, Leading Economist, Dies at 88
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, a grand old man of economics who fled to the United States after Communists came to power in Romania, died on Sunday at the Vanderbilt University hospital in Nashville.
He was 88.
Professor Georgescu-Roegen suffered complications of diabetes and had been ill for some time, said Anthony Tang, a member of the Vanderbilt economics faculty and a close friend of his family.
Professor Georgescu-Roegen was on the economics faculty of Vanderbilt for more than 25 years, until he retired in 1976.


Murdered Children: In Most Cases, a Parent Did It
It seems an unthinkable crime: mothers killing their children.
But statistics show that in the United States, when young children are slain, the parents are usually their murderers.
And in the past two weeks alone, three mothers have been charged either with killing their children or conspiring with the men in their lives to do so.
In Union, S.C., Susan V. Smith's tearful pleas to the man she said had driven away with her two young sons brought national publicity, but the local police said on Thursday that she had confessed to killing them.
Yesterday she was charged with their murder.


Investors Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Unemployment Is Higher in New York City and State
The October unemployment rate darted up in New York City, rose slightly in the state and remained level in New Jersey, according to figures released yesterday by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Labor Department.
While the national unemployment rate was dropping to 5.8 percent, from 5.9 in September, the rate in New York City climbed to 8.2 percent, from 7.2.
The New York State rate rose to 6.5 percent, from 6.2, and New Jersey's rate hovered at 6.7 percent.


U.N. Troops to Leave Somalia by March 31
The Security Council voted unanimously today to withdraw the remaining 17,000 United Nations troops from Somalia by March 31.
The action effectively ends the United Nations effort to stop the country's civil war.


Maybelline Inc.(MAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Remembering Megan
Children are more apt to be sexually abused in the home than outside it.
Even so, the threat posed by an unknown predator terrifies American families the most.
That is the reason for the community-notification provision that is now part of Federal law -- and for the New Jersey bills that inspired it.
The nine-bill package known as Megan's law, signed by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey this week, contains some of the nation's most stringent restrictions on sex offenders.
Community-notification laws have been struck down as unconstitutional in five states, but upheld in Washington State.
Perhaps New Jersey's can surmount any legal challenges that are almost certain to come its way.
But however much it appeases the genuinely righteous anger of those appalled by the death of 7-year-old Megan Kanka last summer, allegedly at the hands of a twice-convicted sex offender named Jesse Timmendequas, Megan's law may not be the protection its supporters think it is.


Lautenberg Attacked on Age and Incumbency
In his first race for the United States Senate 12 years ago, Frank R. Lautenberg raised the question of whether his 72-year-old opponent, Representative Millicent Fenwick, was past her political prime, questioning her "fitness" and "her ability to do the job."
Six years later, in one of the most acrimonious political campaigns in New Jersey history, he sought to convince voters that his rival, Pete Dawkins, was out of touch.


Let Me Tell You
Last year, I invited students at the Alternative Junior/ Senior High School here to participate in a writing project called "Let Me Tell You." Founded 24 years ago for teen-agers with severe learning and behavior problems, the school accepts students who are unwanted by their home school districts or have failed at other institutions.
More than 30 young men and women took part in the writing group, and for our final project I asked them to discuss issues that directly affect their lives.
Here are some excerpts.
Keep Positive I am 90 percent African-American.
My desires and my goals are to be a choreographer, an actor, a singer, a writer, a model, an African-American activist.
To keep myself motivated, I pick role models.
I put inspiring themes on my bedroom wall.
To be positive, you have to think positively.
I am determined.
I know times are going to be hard.
I know I have strikes against me.
I have come a long way.
I want to take further steps.
Being a teen-ager and black in the world today is very hard.
You never know what's going to happen.
We live in a world of racism, hate, prejudice and other problems.
Today for me and for others we need more racial pride and more racial identity.
You Can't Win P eople think that because I take Ritalin my brain is messed up.
Just because I handle things differently and my thoughts might be on another cloud from yours does not mean I'm messed up in the head.
To me life is just a game you can't win.
Why can't you win?
The answer is clear to me: you are not supposed to win because the object is not to win.
The object is just to play for fun.
I could never express myself very well through words -- that's why I turned to music to show other people how I feel.
Other people never really get my ideas though.
When I look at the world today, I see hunger, pain, misery, drugs and crime.
Making a Future People call me C-Dog.
I have been to hell and back.
I have been shot in the leg.
I could have died.
I have been to every school in Rochester.
My mother and I have been through some tragic things.
My father died when I was 11 months.
My life was going downhill, but I'm in a comfortable school now, and I'm about to try and turn my life around.
My mother works two jobs.
I'm still alive.
I want to go to college.
The real issues in the world today are crime, guns, us, our community.
I know why people are killing each other.
People are killing each other because they don't have a future.
People live on the streets today, and no one cares about them.
Ever since I was in third grade I was a follower, but now that I have seen what is going on in the world I strongly believe I can be a leader.
It's hard.
I have to keep on pushing myself.
I want to graduate and make my family proud, and most important I want to make myself proud.
-- Collice, 17 I Prefer Animals I am a very polite person.
I like to practice different languages.
My favorite music is jazz.
I like pop and blues, too.
I spend most of my time working at my house.
I like to play basketball in my backyard or play football in the street.
I am not a perfect person, but who is?
I like animals better than humans.
At times an animal is my best friend.
My favorite subjects in school are science and social studies.
I like everything that is natural.
Lately I have been thinking about the way drugs go around.
I think people should go to church and put their money in church instead of drugs or cigarettes.
Most people today are greedy, and that's why I do not care for money.
Animals are not greedy.
Animals are not wasteful.  -- Patrick, 15 One Dream I want to make it in the world.
Maybe I can be an actor or a singer.
I want to be somebody for my people.
When I get older I want to do something that nobody can do but me.
This is my one dream.
I have learned that if you want something in this world you have to take the initiative and work to the best of your ability.
One other thing I have learned is that I am no different from a grain of sand on the beach.
Attitude I could care less about being on an honor roll.
At this school before lunch we have 10 minutes of free reading.
I have started a book.
I have enjoyed reading the book.
I am getting toward the end, and I don't like the thought of coming to the end of the book.
My favorite kind of music is heavy metal.
My favorite group is Slayer.
I think a lot of my attitude comes from the music I listen to.
I'm not saying music gives me a bad attitude -- just sometimes music goes with the mood.
The most important thing in my life is my family.
At this time in my life my family is having a lot of problems.
My family puts a lot of pressure on me, and right now I'm trying not to let that bother me too much.
Childhood Walking through the outside air, the cold spring is all in my hair.
It is dark.
It is wet.
It is gloomy.
The ground is wet and soggy.
It is like I am dark and secluded, not in a violent sense, in a sad sense.
I like to sleep.
Sometimes I wish I would never wake up.
I want to sleep under water.
My wish is to be blind and deaf so I could never see or hear the wrong doing.
Childhood brings memories.
I lost my childhood the day I was born.
I was always on my own.
Maybe in some way I was happy as a child, not in the sense of anyone being nice, but in the sense of so much happened.
-- Jason, 16 Face It Drugs, crime, drugs are everywhere today.
People fight and kill and hurt others for a buck.
It is hard trying to make it in this lifetime.
I don't believe drugs and crime will stop.
Today we have to learn to live with murder, rape, robberies, fights.
We have to learn to deal with them.
We have to stop turning our heads the other way.
We have to face the facts of life.  -- John, 19


SKATING
Snow White as Ice Maiden: It's All an Open Book  Madison Square Garden


Mayor's Future? It's Ahead
Ever since Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani crossed party lines and endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, some Republicans have speculated about his political ambitions.
Mr.
Giuliani confronted the subject yesterday on his weekly radio show on WABC-AM (770) when a caller named Mark asked him to state his intentions for higher office.
"So what I've always followed in my career is: You do not rule things out that you can't speculate about at this point. So the fact is, the choice I made for governor was made based on the job that I have to do for the next three to three and half years as Mayor of New York City. I was elected to take care of the interests of the people of New York City, to do the best that I can to do that. . . .
"I'd like to be a successful mayor. And I'm not thinking beyond that."


Senator's Employee Lacked Work Papers, Agency Says
Clearing the official record but further muddying the political scene, the Immigration and Naturalization Service reported today that a Guatemalan woman was in the country illegally when she was employed as a housekeeper by Senator Dianne Feinstein from 1980 to 1982.
Immigration officials said a search of the records of the housekeeper, Annabella del Rosario Legrand-Cabrera Realegeno, showed that during much, if not all, of the two years that she had worked for Ms.
Feinstein, a Democrat who was the Mayor of San Francisco at the time, she held no visa or work permit.


Reviews/Fashion; The V-Shaped Jacket of the 1940's Makes a U-Turn
Richard Tyler was born in Australia, his headquarters are in Los Angeles and his heart is in Hollywood.
He made his name by designing for entertainers, and his love of the movies really came through in the spring collection he showed Thursday night
He was thinking about 1940's Hollywood, he said before the show, about a time when actresses like Katharine Hepburn and Marlene Dietrich wore broad-shouldered, narrow-waisted jackets.


Gooden Suspended for 1995 After Additional Drug Tests
Dwight Gooden, continuing to test positive for cocaine use, received a career-jeopardizing penalty yesterday.
A free agent who is no longer a member of the Mets, Gooden was suspended for the entire 1995 season.
The pitcher, whose career has been in decline, has 15 days left of a 60-day drug-related suspension that was interrupted by the players' strike and will serve an additional 168 days, the balance of the 1995 season, on the suspended list.


In Search of the First 'Pumpion-Pye'
To the Editor:
Re "Consider the Pumpkin" (editorial, Oct. 31):


Voters Agree They're Tired of Being Taxed, and Congress Gets the Blame
Along the highways of southeastern Pennsylvania, from the multiethnic blue-collar subdivisions of industrial Norristown, Allentown and Bethlehem to the malls and living rooms in the tonier villages of the Lehigh Valley and the Main Line, people who plan to vote in next week's elections are peeved about one issue above all others: taxes.
Property taxes, income taxes, Social Security and Medicare taxes, cigarette and alcohol taxes, trash collection taxes -- all are on the rise, the result of budgetary strains from City Hall to the White House.
So ubiquitous are tax increases that the issue has emerged as the common, largely nonpartisan denominator of voter discontent and the root of the anti-incumbent fervor evident in many polls.


United States Leather Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Not Guilty Verdict for Taylor
Brien Taylor, once the blue-chip pitcher of the Yankee farm system, is hoping that the injuries clouding his future will be resolved as favorably and decisively as the criminal proceeding against him was on Thursday.
District Judge Horton Rountree of Carteret County in North Carolina found Taylor not guilty of two misdemeanor charges relating to a scuffle the left-hander was involved in last Dec. 18 near his home in Beaufort, N.C.
Taylor, who turns 23 next month, is recovering from arthroscopic surgery to the left shoulder he injured in the incident and is not expected to pitch in a game until at least February.
He was baseball's top draft pick in 1991, when he received a record bonus of $1.55 million.


Picasso X Has Puissance Pizazz
McLain Ward and his magnificent mount, Golo 63, were gunning for a world record and their second Puissance victory in two weeks tonight.
They got neither.
Picasso X, a 9-year-old Hanoverian bay gelding ridden by Thomas Buholzer of Switzerland, was the only one of the five horses remaining in the second jumpoff to clear the winning height of 7 feet 2 inches at the 111th National Horse Show.


Bronx Christmas Tree Seller Is Fatally Shot in His Office
The day after last Thanksgiving, as Glenn Walker set up Christmas trees for sale on a Bronx lot, two men in leather coats strode up and demanded $3,000 to let him stay in business.
A week after he refused, firebombs on successive days were hurled into his lot and $6,000 in trees went up in smoke.
Mr.
Walker, who lived in Florida but had come to New York for years to sell watermelons in summer, pumpkins in the fall and trees at Christmas, declined to cooperate with police and fire investigators and the case, widely publicized and featured on a national television program, went unsolved.


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Fugitive Appears in Mexican Ads
A fugitive Mexican banker who has eluded an international manhunt for almost two months re-emerged this week, but only in Mexican newspapers.
Though he remains on the run, Carlos Cabal Peniche declared in an audacious "open letter to public opinion" published in full-page ads in several Mexico City papers Thursday that he was retaining control of his businesses, including the Del Monte Fresh Produce Company of Florida.
Mexican officials promptly dismissed the claim as impossible.


Lesson for Teen-Agers: Facts of Credit-Card Life
TEEN-AGERS' junk mail is looking remarkably like their parents' in at least one way -- credit card offers are multiplying.
Whether to build a good credit record, gain a money source for emergencies or carry a status symbol, people are getting their first credit cards at younger ages.


College Is Returning Statue to Okinawa
A statue taken from Okinawa by victorious American marines at the close of World War II will be returned by Rollins College, a small liberal arts school in Florida to which an alumnus donated the work in 1946, the college's president said on Thursday.
In March, Shizuo Kishaba, president of the Ryukyu-America Historical Research Society in Okinawa, visited Rollins and asked for the return of the three-foot bronze.


Keep It Clean, or Answer To Moorer
Michael Moorer's camp today put George Foreman on notice that it would be on the lookout for low blows -- to the groin and even to the kneecaps -- in their heavyweight championship fight Saturday night.
Teddy Atlas, who trains Moorer, the champion, said he would raise the issue with the boxing commission when he met with it tonight.
Referee Joe Cortez and the three judges are all Nevadans.


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Republican Candidate Loses Officials' Support
Accusing him of running a racially divisive campaign for state comptroller, two more Republican officials from Manhattan yesterday withdrew their support for their party's candidate, Herbert London.
The officials -- City Councilmen Charles Millard and Andrew S. Eristoff -- joined the Republican county leader, State Senator Roy M. Goodman in criticizing Mr.
London's campaign against the Democratic incumbent, H. Carl McCall.
In particular, they criticized a recent newspaper ad placed by London supporters calling Mr.
McCall "non-Kosher" and a television commercial, which was prepared but never broadcast, that began with the words "Kill the Jews?" followed by pictures of Mr.
McCall, who is black.


Bridge
The first National Par Contest was played Sunday night, with 301 entrants playing in their own homes, eyes glued to computer screens.
It was organized by Ron Small of Ocean City, N.J., who will now have to consider making it an annual event.
The standings were: 1st, Peter Sun of Sunnyvale, Calif.; 2d, Robb Gordon of Manhattan; 3d, Barry Rigal of Manhattan.


The Breeders' Cup Is Now a World Cup
From Lure, who has won two Breeders' Cup races in a row without winning a championship, to Best Pal, who has paid more than $1 million in supplemental fees without getting anything back, 91 horses were primed today for the 11th Breeders' Cup series at Churchill Downs.
In seven races with $10 million in purses, and with betting that will exceed $80 million in 46 countries, they will run for the honors already claimed by the vacationing Holy Bull.
He is in residence at Gulfstream Park in Florida, the winner of 8 races in 10 starts this year and the pre-emptor of the title Horse of the Year.
But in his place will come a herd of star horses from the United States, Canada, England, Ireland and France.


Should Allen Ginsberg Want to Starve?
To the Editor:
Re "Allen Ginsberg, Millionaire?" by Michael Blumenthal (Op-Ed, Oct. 29): The implicit assumption that artists should starve, indeed should want to starve, is an outdated, punitive notion held over from the 19th century, when capitalists supplanted the aristocracy and the church as patrons of art.


Should Allen Ginsberg Want to Starve?
To the Editor:
Michael Blumenthal asserts falsely that Allen Ginsberg "made friends with Castro" (Op-Ed, Oct. 29).
In 1965 Mr.
Ginsberg visited Cuba and was shortly expelled because of his un-Communist behavior.


Another Fatal Plunge Has Cornell Asking Whether Its Gorges Inspire Student Suicides
Despondency is common at American universities at final exam time, or just when the cold fall weather sets in, or even when the new semester gets under way, bringing with it the fear of failure, the sense of isolation or just the peculiar hopelessness that sometimes grips young people who would appear, otherwise, to have everything to live for.
And so, when a 21-year-old former student at Cornell University took his own life yesterday morning, it was not a very uncommon occurence.
Campus officials said the young man, Dustin D. Klingbergs of Chardon, Ohio, died when he leapt into a steep, rocky gorge that runs the entire length of the hilly Cornell campus.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.71
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.09
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.53
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
7.95
5.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.15
8.10
6.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.93
7.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.10
7.05
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Tennessee Campaign Is Central To Republicans' Senate Hopes
Republican hopes of winning control of the Senate rest heavily in Tennessee.
The party needs to take at least seven seats now held by Democrats to win a majority in the Senate, and two are at stake here, notably the one held by Jim Sasser.


Accusations At U.A.W.
The Labor Department is investigating accusations that the leading candidate for president of the United Automobile Workers union may have improperly influenced the awarding of contracts for workers' eye-care benefits, The Detroit Free Press reported today.
An investigator for the department's racketeering section in Detroit, Craig Woodhouse, declined to confirm whether an investigation was in progress.
But The Free Press reported that at least 11 people had been questioned by investigators about possible ties between Stephen Yokich, the candidate who is now a union vice president, and Avery Sterling Jr., owner of Sterling Vision Shoppes Inc. of Mount Clemons, Mich.
The Free Press said that the 11 people spoke to it on the condition of anonymity.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(BKLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


And Now, McDelivery; Latest in Un-Home Cooking
What was once the ultimate convenience food could now be a little more convenient, it turns out.
Accelerating down the fast-food superhighway, McDonald's is about to begin making home and office deliveries from 40 of its Manhattan restaurants, with orders taken over the phone at a single computerized clearinghouse.
Starting next week, it will be possible to call in to a sort of burger hot line -- the number is 337-FAST -- and have a bacon double cheeseburger or a fish sandwich delivered to your door from whatever McDonald's is closest.


American Publishing Co.  (AMPC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rio Algom Ltd. (ROM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Pressed to Disarm Opponents of Aristide
With shooting incidents still being reported and officials hostile to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide still wielding power in many rural areas, American military forces here are increasingly pressed to act more aggressively to disarm the still-dangerous remnants of the previous Government's paramilitary apparatus.
In the last week, both the Government of President Aristide and the United Nations, which authorized the American military intervention in Haiti that began on Sept. 19, have expressed dismay at the lack of security around the country.


Barefoot in the Bronx


Quantum Health Resources Inc.(QHRI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moore Medical Corp.(MMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Samuel Rosenthal, Chicago Lawyer, 95
Samuel R. Rosenthal, a Chicago lawyer and philanthropist, died on Tuesday at his home in Chicago.
He was 95.
The cause was a heart attack, said Larry Mandel, the chapel manager at Furth Funeral Direction in Chicago.


Coherent Inc.(COHR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about Chuck Haytaian, the Republican candidate for United States Senate in New Jersey, misstated his current positon and referred incorrectly to a campaign event in Iselin, N.J.
Mr.
Haytaian is Speaker of the State Assembly, not majority leader of the State Senate.
At Iselin, he spoke from his campaign bus, not from a train.
In some editions, because of an editing error, the related article misstated Mr.
Haytaian's tenure as Speaker.
He has held the post for three and a half years, not seven.


Robinson Signs, Plays And Shows Some Rust
Bucks 97, Lakers 96
After finally signing a 10-year, $68.15 million contract, Glenn Robinson made his National Basketball Association debut in the Milwaukee home opener last night.
The top pick of the draft sat out the first and fourth quarters, but finished with 8 points.


BEHIND THE WHEEL: Nissan 300ZX Turbo; No Age Restrictions Apply
IT'S a big country, and Americans are big people.
We like Big Macs, Big Gulps and Biggie Fries.
We like our cars big, too -- even the small ones.
This poses a challenge in building a "world car," a vehicle that can be made and sold globally with only small concessions to local tastes.
The Japanese are masters at this, but Detroit has never been able to make Americans fall in love with Opels adored by Germans, or set foreigners swooning over the Pinto or the Chevette.


A Hot Investment Entices, But It's Not Always Wise
Do you pay too much in taxes?
You bet.


Pamela B. Glick, John M. Swing
Pamela Belle Glick and John Mead Swing, artists in New York, were married yesterday evening in Lake Tahoe, Calif.
Rabbi Yitzchak Nadler performed the ceremony at the North Tahoe Conference Center.
Mrs.
Swing, 38, is a painter.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
She is the daughter of Margot and Alvin Glick of Buffalo.
Her father is the senior partner in Falk &amp; Siemer, a law firm in Buffalo.


When Drugs and Terror Stalk a Housing Complex
Her apartment door was blown off by a firebomb.
One car was stolen, another was torn apart.
A third was burned.
Fifteen of her tires have been slashed.
Then there are the death threats -- not to be taken lightly considering the random gunfire, shootings and killings in the neighborhood last year.
"My life is threatened several times a week, but I'm still here," said Millie Poblador.
"I will not let them chase me out of my home."


Crash Investigators Struggle With an Unpleasant Puzzle
One wall of a meeting room at the National Guard armory here is covered with brown paper that has been divided with ruler and pen into 68 neat squares, and in each square is the name of a person who was on board American Eagle Flight 4184.
Beneath the names, researchers have written whatever details about each person they have gleaned from the families.
This man had a Casio wristwatch; that one had a mustache.
This woman had an oval face; that one a scar from an appendectomy.


Ms. Sullivan And Mr. Parker
Elizabeth Sullivan, the European correspondent of The Plain Dealer of Cleveland, and Jim Parker, a writer, were married yesterday in Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Frank Hall, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Riverside Yacht Club.
Ms.
Sullivan, 41, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, from which she also received a master's degree in Russian and East European studies.
She is a daughter of Mary and Walter Sullivan of Riverside.
Her father retired as the science editor of The New York Times.
Her mother was a member of the executive committee of the Democratic National Committee from 1980 to 1988.


Kohl's Narrow Majority Is Giving His Opponents Hope
In Germany's complex political landscape, elections rarely settle anything for long.
The main result of the national vote on Oct. 16 was a war of nerves.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's opposition hopes that it will snap the brittle coalition between Mr.
Kohl's Christian Democratic alliance and Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel's Free Democrats well before the end of the legislative term four years from now.


In a Glum Election Season, Politics as Unusual
FOR at least 25 years, since he won the vice presidency of the Bronx High School of Science's student body in a hot election, Arthur Z. Schwartz has been passionately interested in politics.
The next few days are his World Series.
But this season, the fan in Mr.
Schwartz is struggling with the player; he must decide whether to run, once again, for office himself.
"I'm a boomer," said Mr.
Schwartz, who is 41 years old.
"My wife and I are both professionals. We have two kids I love to play with and a house I hate to leave. It would be disruptive to my family and my law practice. And I'm just as shy as I was in high school about walking up to people and asking them to vote for me. And yet . . ."


Patricia Cardello, Robert Mastellone
Patricia Cardello, a daughter of Helen and August A. Cardello of Cranston, R.I., and Robert Mastellone, the son of Elizabeth Mastellone of South Ozone Park, Queens, and the late Ralph Mastellone, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Duane Meyer, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the James Burden Mansion.
The bride is an actress who is known professionally as Patricia Cardell.
She is a graduate of the University of Rhode Island.


Winning at the Transition Game
After one game, one victory and 120 points, the Knicks believe they can become a more explosive offensive team.
New York's running game was in high gear during Friday's 120-107 season-opening victory against the Boston Celtics at the Boston Garden.
The Knicks scored 54 points on either dunks or layups, using a transition game that looked far more potent than the methodical New York offense that averaged 98.5 points last season.


4th-Down Pass Sends Utah to Its First Defeat
New Mexico 23, Utah 21
Stoney Case hit Gavin Pearlman with a 56-yard pass on fourth down to set up Nathan Vail's 22-yard field goal with 32 seconds left as New Mexico stunned previously unbeaten Utah, 23-21, yesterday in Albuquerque, N.M.


Answers
1.
The oldest known fossil of a birdlike animal, dating back 150 million years, is that of an archaeopteryx, a reptile with two incontrovertibly avian features -- feathers and a wishbone.
2. Ornithology.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: PATAKI In a Fury of Campaigning, Candidates Pursue Last-Minute Votes; Pataki and His Party, From L.I. to Albany, Show a United Front
Trying to restore order within the Republicans' discordant house, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, campaigned in Manhattan and on Long Island yesterday, flanked at every turn by Republicans who had feuded with him or chastised him in recent months, but who have now come around in the final days of the race.
In his Manhattan headquarters yesterday morning, Mr.
Pataki appeared with Herbert London, the Republican candidate for State Comptroller, who has accused Mr.
Pataki of lacking substance.
Yesterday he warmly praised Mr.
Pataki's plan to cut personal income tax rates by 25 percent.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Virginia  The Last Weekend: Senate Races Where the Battle Has Been Intense; You Needn't Ask: North Is Confident
Throughout the turbulent Senate race in Virginia, Oliver L. North has usually let his confidence speak for itself.
But with a new poll that shows him trailing the Democratic incumbent, Charles S. Robb, by 39 percent to 31, Mr.
North called a news conference today, three days before the election, to say how confident he felt and predict that he would win by at least three points.


Lara A. Hopfl, L. I. Holzman
Lara Anne Hopfl, a daughter of Dena and Charles Hopfl of New York, is to be married today to Laurence Ira Holzman, a son of Myrna and Bernard Holzman of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Cantor Matthew Axelrod is to officiate at the Fifth Avenue Ballroom in New York.
The bride, 28, is an associate at Kane, Dalsimer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisele &amp; Richard, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Columbia University.
Her father is the general counsel to Panavision in New York.


What a Soap Opera: Buddy Ryan, the Eagles and a Basin of Water
A day before his Cardinals team was to take the field against his former Eagles team, Buddy Ryan sat in an overstuffed chair in a meeting room of an airport hotel today getting his feet washed by a local sportscaster who vilified Ryan during his tenure in Philadelphia.
It wasn't an act of subservience that Howard Eskins was performing, but more like an act of charity.
Eskins, who works at KYW Channel 3 in Philadelphia, was fulfilling the sports fantasy of a man who donated $800 to the Eagles' fund-raiser for leukemia and Ryan, for agreeing to having his feet washed, was receiving a free pair of boots.
Eskins also had to apologize for all the negative things that he had said about Ryan in the past.


Ann McK. Farrell, Eric D. Thoroman
Ann McKay Farrell, a daughter of Mrs.
Henry M. Farrell of New Vernon, N.J., and the late Mr.
Farrell, was married yesterday to Eric Donald Thoroman, a son of G. Paige Thoroman of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late Donald G. Thoroman.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Thoroman is an assistant editor at St.
Martin's Press in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Kenyon College.
Her mother, Epsey C. Farrell, is a writer.
The bride's father was a vice president and a senior portfolio manager at Citibank in New York.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
GRAMERCY PARK Works of Black Artists On Display and on Sale
An exhibition and sale of the works of more than 75 African-American artists will begin Saturday at The National Arts Club in The Samuel Tilden Mansion on Gramercy Park.


U.S. Tightens Rules On Hawaii Air Tours
New rules took effect last month tightening safety requirements for air tour operators in Hawaii, where a recent spate of crashes has alarmed Federal safety officials.
The Hawaiian air tour industry carries about 400,000 sightseers over the islands and near their volcanoes each year.
In the past three years 24 passengers have been killed on such flights, most recently when a helicopter crashed in July.
That accident, which killed three people, was one of two helicopter crashes in a single week, and the 11th crash in just six months in which people were killed or injured while touring Hawaii by air.


Beth Estreicher, Lawrence Farkas
Beth Elane Estreicher, a daughter of Sandy and Albert Estreicher of Willowbrook, S.I., was married last evening to Lawrence William Farkas, a son of Sylvia and Sidney Farkas of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Sholom Stern officiated at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Corrections
A front-page headline on Oct. 23 about two historic church buildings in Europe referred incorrectly to Westminster Abbey.
It is not a cathedral -- that is, not the main church of a bishop's see.


Ride the R Train, See Semper Fi
Pity Sgt. Ariel Carty's feet.
Squeezed just so into black patent-leather shoes, they stomp along the terrain of the N and R subway platform in the Pacific Street station, where he ferrets out young riders to serve in the United States Marine Corps.


Helen C. Graves, M. L. Sturchio 2d
Helen Cole Graves, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Graves 3d of Glen Rose, Tex., was married yesterday to Malcolm Louis Sturchio 2d, a son of Dr.
Marianne Delia of Glendora, Calif., and Prof.
Malcolm L. Sturchio of Maplewood, N.J.
The Rev.
George W. Brandt Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Graves, 35, is keeping her name.
She is the director of development for the Academy of American Poets in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the author of "Goodbye to a River," "Hard Scrabble" and "From a Limestone Ledge." Her mother, Jane C. Graves, is a stylist and designer in Glen Rose.


Illness Linked to Ice Cream Appears in 28 States
The outbreak of salmonella linked to ice cream from Minnesota has spread to at least 28 states, officials of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported this week.
The Federal health agency, based here, said laboratory analysis has confirmed 489 cases of salmonella linked to ice cream products produced by Schwan's Sales Enterprises of Marshall, Minn.
Officials have said the ice cream might have been contaminated when it was carried in a tanker truck that previously held raw eggs, a common source of the bacteria that cause salmonella.


Dengue Fever
To the Editor: The report about dengue fever (Travel Advisory: "Dengue Fever Cases Rise in Puerto Rico," Oct. 16) omitted facts vital to anyone considering a trip to Puerto Rico: Neither the local government of Puerto Rico nor the Federal agencies based here sees the need for travelers to avoid Puerto Rico because of dengue fever.
For that reason, no travel advisory has been issued.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have stated quite clearly that the chances of a traveler's contracting the disease is very remote.


Oct.2-Nov.5: 36-Second Plunge; A Storm, a Plane Crash And 68 People Dead
Why American Eagle flight 4184 to Chicago dropped out of a stormy sky and plowed into an Indiana soybean field Monday may not be known for months.
But a buildup of ice on the wings of the twin-engine turbo-prop aircraft is an early suspect in the crash, which killed all 68 people on board.
Another area of inquiry is the plane's autopilot system, which was on just before the doomed aircraft began rolling to the right in the freezing temperatures, flipped over on its back and plunged to earth in 36 seconds.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.45
97.28
108.25
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5145
1.5108
1.6850
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3560
1.3515
1.2916
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6160
1.6235
1.4834
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$383.50
$387.30
$376.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about the reduction in traffic on major Long Island roads included incorrect data.


Taking A Stroll Down 'Sunset Boulevard'
THAT SOUND YOU HEAR is the whoosh of tickets along the route of "Sunset Boulevard." With a $32 million advance sale and more publicity than its producers probably even wanted (starting with the first lawsuit), it has finally reached Broadway.
Now in previews at the Minskoff Theater, it opens on Nov. 17 with Glenn Close as the haunted Norma Desmond, the role she stamped her own in Los Angeles late last year.
The Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, based on the 1950 Billy Wilder film with Gloria Swanson, also stars George Hearn, as Max von Mayerling, Norma's major-domo; Alan Campbell as Joe Gillis, the 30-ish screenwriter the aging actress falls in love with; Alice Ripley as the young woman he is drawn to, and Alan Oppenheimer as Cecil B. DeMille.


Interested Party Defends Filmmaking in New York
To the Editor:
As a Screen Actors Guild member, I'm glad that Robert Lipsyte in his Oct. 30 Coping column, "Fall, and the Smell of Frying Fat Is in the Air," decided to tolerate filmmaking around town.
And I, too, am sick to death of street fairs.


Such Bad Friends
WEDGE The Secret War Between the FBI and CIA.
By Mark Riebling. 563 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


New York, New York


Janice Braverman, Clifford Kaplan
Janice Braverman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monte Braverman of Tenafly, N.J., was married last evening to Clifford Laurence Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Kaplan of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Stephen H. Pinsky performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Kaplan was until recently a manager in the affiliate-relations department of MJI Broadcasting, a radio production company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Bringing Home Bacon Isn't Protecting Veterans
His big hands strangling the steering wheel of a rented white Bonneville, Representative Jack Brooks tooled down the byways of his hometown and its surrounding flatlands this week, past fire-spewing refineries and antebellum mansions and stands of scrub pine, demonstrating why people here have sent him to Congress for 42 uninterrupted years.
"St. Elizabeth's Hospital," he said, jabbing a finger over the dashboard at a brick structure hardly a block from his campaign headquarters.
"Got them the first million they ever got."


The Oversold Society
A NATION OF SALESMEN The Tyranny of the Market and the Subversion of Culture.
By Earl Shorris. 352 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $23.


Accentuating the Positives Of Public Access Television
To the Editor:
The Oct. 30 article, "Vox Pop Video: A Public Access TV Guide," with its glib, condescending tone, does a disservice to public access and to your readers.


A City-Cool Foursome Groovin' to the Beat
WHEN IT COMES TO LIFE in an average American city, most current pop sends a fairly consistent message: Stay away or get caught in the crossfire.
Whether it's the turf wars depicted in gangster rap or the suffocating tension heard in urban metal bands, cities are grim, soul-depleting battlefields; earplugs and bulletproof vests are as vital to survival as a Walkman.
Pop musicians are often right, of course; city life can be a wearying, disconcerting grind.
But just as often a city's mix of styles and sounds -- and the joyful mess that results when they clash -- can be as invigorating as a sudden breeze on a hot day, which is where the all-female quartet Luscious Jackson comes in.
The cover of the band's first album, "Natural Ingredients" (Grand Royal/Capitol CDP 7243-8-28356; all three formats), is crammed with graffiti -- in particular, the fat-lettered Day-Glo style that sprang up during the early day of hip-hop.
There's no better starting place for music that -- hard as it is to believe these days -- actually celebrates the idea of living and surviving in a city.


The Barnstorming of New York Candidates
From the Brooklyn waterfront to Brookhaven, L.I., to a rally in Rochester, the man who wants a fourth term as Governor and the men who would succeed him sped into the last weekend of an election campaign that will test the power of anti-incumbent anger and perhaps reshape New York politics.
With the towers of lower Manhattan looming behind him, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, one of this year's tallest Democratic targets, announced the creation of a task force to oversee a long-planned redevelopment of decrepit piers into a commercial and recreational complex, then went off to a rally in the Bronx aimed at inspiring the high urban turnout he needs to win.


Nicole D. Galli, Charles Goodwin
Nicole Dominique Galli, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Galli of Massapequa Park, L.I., and Charles Pearsall Goodwin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allison P. Goodwin of Lexington, Mass., were married yesterday in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul S. Johnson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of Princeton.
Ms.
Galli, 26, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Dewey Ballantine, the New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband also received their law degrees there.
Her father is an assistant principal at Seward Park High School in New York.
Her mother, Diane Galli, is a science teacher at Alfred J. Berner Junior High School in Massapequa, L.I.


Kuwait's Oil Industry Rises From the Ashes of War
OUT in the glaring desert south of here, Bill Decker of New Glarus, Wis., was up on a 19-story drilling rig, pushing steel pipe through soft sandstone and shale in search of more of the black gold that has made Kuwait one of the world's richest nations.
Mr.
Decker was not in Kuwait nearly four years ago when the retreating Iraqi army turned the oil fields into flaming ruins, belching millions of gallons of oil through dynamited wells and spewing so much poisonous black smoke that noon seemed like midnight.


'In Defense of Elitism'
To the Editor:
Although it is so obvious one hates to take the bait, one is nevertheless forced to ask what William Henry and Roger Kimball -- upholders of "the ideal of disinterested judgment" -- make of George Eliot.
Despite Mr.
Kimball's protestations of how "painful" it is to admit certain "home truths," we should keep in mind exactly whose nose the bone is being shoved through.
JAY KAPLAN  New York


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
As professionally employed baby boomer homeowners without children, we reject the suggestion that it is somehow unfair for people like us to be expected to share in the cost of public education through our property taxes.
To view this as discriminatory is merely an example of how far the "Me-First Generation" will go to foster a whining culture of victimization in which virtually anyone can claim membership in an oppressed minority group and rationalize the shirking of one's basic social responsibilities.
We all benefit from a healthy democratic society, but its well being depends on a strong public education system.
BOHDAN and KAREN KUKIL  Easthampton, Mass., Oct. 18


Western-Style Scramble for Students
For decades the Japanese have criticized but done virtually nothing about an education system that produces one of the most literate and disciplined work forces on earth, yet stifles creativity and limits diversity among its students.
Now, after years of fruitless debate, a solution may have arrived: A growing shortage of applicants is forcing the country's universities to consider the most farreaching changes since their founding.
Demographics rather than a shift in values is behind the new thinking.
The birth rate is tumbling and Japanese society is aging with remarkable speed.
Within 30 years the number of people over 65 will soar to 25 percent of the population, from the current 12 percent.
The number of 18-year-olds peaked in 1992, and is expected to drop steadily in coming years.
Yoshiya Abe, an expert on education policy at Aichi Gakiun University, near Nagoya, said there would be 20 percent fewer university applicants in the year 2000, a figure that is sending shock waves through Japan's educational factories.
Now universities, which traditionally accepted only the students they wanted after putting them through a battery of mind-numbing exams, are changing their standards as they compete for students.
They are accepting students based on recommendations or skill in sports like rugby.
In other words, students are slowly finding their outside interests encouraged rather than regarded as distractions from the tasks of memorizing dates and facts.
In another change, universities have begun to trim costs.
Up to now, parents have paid vast sums to insure their children spots at good universities because diplomas from the right schools -- rather than the student's academic record -- have been the most important criteria for jobs at the best companies and government ministries.
In a startling report issued earlier this year, the Government found that Japanese parents with two children spent nearly 16 percent of their incomes on education -- with much of it on cram schools to prepare youngsters for the rigorous and minutely detailed entrance exams at middle schools, high schools and universities.
By contrast, the survey found, American parents spend on average less than 3 percent of their income on their children's education.
JAMES STERNGOLD


The World; Japan Asks Why A Prophet Bothers
EXCEPT for a brief period during the 1960's, Kenzaburo Oe has been the sort of intellectual, left-leaning author who was well known among brooding Japanese undergraduates and scholars, but was not particularly widely read.
Still, when he became the surprise choice for the Nobel Prize in Literature last month, most Japanese, even if they could not name any of his books, took pride in this affirmation of the richness of their culture.
And they left the matter at that.
But Mr.
Oe has not let them off so lightly.
This owlish, fidgety man, who loves to talk in excited bursts, toss out French phrases and explicate "Moby Dick," caused outrage by doing something dangerously unfashionable here: He took a stand on principle.


Take an Appetite. You'll Surely Need It.
ONE might have questions about a restaurant that calls itself Zero Zero, but at this amiable spot in Stamford, near the Greenwich line, the only question should be, how long to fast before a visit?
Zero Zero, whose name bears no relation to the upbeat decor -- walls and floor hand-painted with stylized flowers, every tabletop painted in different colors with an individualized, cheery motif -- offers a somewhat different concept in dining: not less is more, but more is more.
Every item except dessert bears two prices, the larger one for a family-size portion, the smaller for a single serving.
In fact, the so-called single serving can often accommodate two healthy appetites.


The School of Resentment
To the Editor:
I teach from the point of view espoused by feminism and New Historicism, and am dedicated to re-creating the "canon," if such a thing is really possible.
I confess to calling Shakespeare et al.
"dead white European males," but I don't confess to disparaging the talent and verbosity of these authors.
However, I recognize that while Shakespeare and his peers were published with great acclaim, women and many other minorities were ignored.


School Boards: Manhattan And the Bronx
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1 Lower East Side.
Next meeting: Thursday, 7 P.M.; location: P.S. 34, 730 East 12th Street, between Avenues C and D. Superintendent: Dori Collazo-Baker; President/Chairwoman: Dolores Schaefer; (212) 602-9765.
Agenda: Discussion on effect of budget cuts.


'I Never Seen Nothing Like That'
THE HEROES OF THE THIRD PLATOON FUMBLE TOWARD history with canteens full of grape Kool-Aid, scanning the rooftops for snipers and trying hard not to run over their admirers.
Their deep-green Humvees weave along streets packed with ragged but cheering people who believe these young men have delivered them from evil.
From high in his machine-gun turret, Pfc.
Matthew Gunn of Houston waves to the people below like Miss Texas from a float in the Cotton Bowl Parade.
On the filthy street, a bone-thin old Haitian woman blows him a kiss, then stretches both arms to him, eyes closed, head thrown back, face alight with a wide and beatific smile.
If he never gets any closer to love and adoration for the rest of his life, he has seen it on this garbage-strewn sidewalk in Port-au-Prince.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the feud between Harrison and Wallace McCain over the future management of McCain Foods Ltd., a large Canadian company they founded, referred incorrectly to some holdings of another family, the Hafts, who are involved in a similar dispute.
The Hafts are not the outright owners of Dart Drugs and the Crown Books Corporation.
Dart Drugs was sold to its employees in 1984.
Crown Books is 51 percent owned by the Dart Group Corporation of Landover, Md., of which the Hafts are the major stockholders.


Foreman Flattens Moorer With Blast From the Past
A right hand thrown from about 1973 tonight returned to 45-year-old George Foreman the heavyweight title he had lost 20 years ago.
With that heavy, short blow to the previously undefeated Michael Moorer in the 10th round, Foreman became the oldest heavyweight champion in history.


At Wind River, Cautious Steps Toward Capitalism
WHEN Patrick Goggles sees tourists streaming through the Wind River Indian Reservation to Yellowstone National Park, he sees money -- money that isn't flowing to his Northern Arapaho tribe.
Tourists spend $1.6 billion a year in Wyoming, and the Arapaho are moving only belatedly to extract the tourist gold that Anglo businesses just outside the reservation have mined for generations.
As general manager of the Northern Arapaho Trust, which manages the tribe's investments, Mr.
Goggles oversees a venture that includes a small group of retail and service businesses that serve tourists and tribal members alike.
These enterprises sometimes lure tourists traveling to and from Wyoming's biggest draws -- Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks -- but not often enough, and Mr.
Goggles wants to lure more.


Western-Style Scramble for Students
For decades the Japanese have criticized but done virtually nothing about an education system that produces one of the most literate and disciplined work forces on earth, yet stifles creativity and limits diversity among its students.
Now, after years of fruitless debate, a solution may have arrived: A growing shortage of applicants is forcing the country's universities to consider the most farreaching changes since their founding.
Demographics rather than a shift in values is behind the new thinking.
The birth rate is tumbling and Japanese society is aging with remarkable speed.
Within 30 years the number of people over 65 will soar to 25 percent of the population, from the current 12 percent.
The number of 18-year-olds peaked in 1992, and is expected to drop steadily in coming years.
Yoshiya Abe, an expert on education policy at Aichi Gakiun University, near Nagoya, said there would be 20 percent fewer university applicants in the year 2000, a figure that is sending shock waves through Japan's educational factories.
Now universities, which traditionally accepted only the students they wanted after putting them through a battery of mind-numbing exams, are changing their standards as they compete for students.
They are accepting students based on recommendations or skill in sports like rugby.
In other words, students are slowly finding their outside interests encouraged rather than regarded as distractions from the tasks of memorizing dates and facts.
In another change, universities have begun to trim costs.
Up to now, parents have paid vast sums to insure their children spots at good universities because diplomas from the right schools -- rather than the student's academic record -- have been the most important criteria for jobs at the best companies and government ministries.
In a startling report issued earlier this year, the Government found that Japanese parents with two children spent nearly 16 percent of their incomes on education -- with much of it on cram schools to prepare youngsters for the rigorous and minutely detailed entrance exams at middle schools, high schools and universities.
By contrast, the survey found, American parents spend on average less than 3 percent of their income on their children's education.
JAMES STERNGOLD


Geography Put Back In the Future
CLARK UNIVERSITY in Worcester, Mass., has seen the future and it is geography.
Long ago abandoned as a separate discipline by many colleges, which incorporated it into subjects like global studies, geography has a new life in the new age.
"Environmental issues are becoming dominant on the heels of the cold war," said Dr.
Roger Kasperson, the Clark provost -- and a geographer by training.
Clark is creating an Environmental School "to reconcile economic development and economic growth with environmental issues," he said.


Hail and Farewell
The other day, I telephoned my friend Allison with devastating news: a mutual friend of ours had died the night before.
His name was Franco Moschino.
That neither of us had ever met him didn't matter.
He was the designer whose creations made us happiest.
And right now, all over the world, women who knew him no better than we did are grieving with us, because Moschino was more than a label; he was a sister under the skin.
I used to think Moschino was pronounced mo-SHEEN-o.
Actually, it sounds like "mosquito," and indeed Franco was a nimble bug on the nose of high fashion, a prankster with a rebel yell: "Stop the Fashion System!" What so endeared him to his customers was his take-no-prisoners wit.
How could you not love this crew-cut guy who appeared in his own hosiery ads wearing fish-net stockings?
His zany stunts -- i.e., sending Miss Piggy down the runway as the bride -- turned high fashion into high comedy.
Depending on your perspective, that was either a source of amusement or consternation.
Yet who could resist a scarf with the "designer" logo "Moscalvin Klino"?
Or a coat trimmed with teddy bears?
That he lived modestly and divided his earnings among a pediatric AIDS hospice and other charities made Moschino popular even among his critics.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Because of the New York City Marathon, several streets will be closed for much of the day, including, in Manhattan, First Avenue from 59th Street north to the Willis Avenue Bridge; Fifth Avenue from 102d to 120th Street, and Central Park South from Fifth Avenue to Columbus Circle.
In Brooklyn, part of Fourth Avenue from 84th Street to Flatbush Avenue will be closed.
In addition, some lanes on the Queensboro, Willis Avenue, Pulaski and Madison Avenue bridges will be closed for parts of the day.
The upper level of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge will be closed in both directions from midnight to 2 P.M.
All Staten Island-bound traffic on the bridge will be halted from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. and the bridge will be completely closed from 9 A.M. to about 11:20.
The race begins at 10:47 A.M.


Ideas &amp; Trends; When a Woman Earns Like a Man
From the day laborer to the millionaire, the wife's worn dress or flashing jewels, her low roof or her lordly one, her weary feet or her rich equipage -- those speak of the economic ability of the husband.  -- Charlotte Perkins Gilman, 1898 HUSBAND, the noun, was orginally a management title: it meant the manager of a household.
The verb means to manage economically.
Wife, the noun, was no title at all: in its obscure Germanic roots it meant simply "woman." Its spousal connotation came later.
Which may help explain why the small but growing number of women who earn more than men are leading society into uncharted territory.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $987,500  840 Broadway (13th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. penthouse in a loft building; private elevator, dining area, exposed-brick walls, 13-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,000, 50% tax deductible, listed at $1.075 million, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Eychner/Village; Halstead Property Co.)


Lawsuits Against Tobacco Companies May Be Consolidated
After 40 years and 400 unsuccessful lawsuits, smokers suing tobacco companies have won the chance to consolidate millions of cases into a few or possibly a single anti-tobacco case.
In the past, tobacco trials have taken up to 10 years and cost several million dollars each, and even the one case in which a plaintiff won a jury award, of $400,000 -- Cipollone v.
Liggett Group -- the plaintiff was forced to abandon the case in the end, when faced with further appeals and millions of dollars in legal action before the award could be claimed.
Plaintiffs' lawyers see the class action suit as a way of combating the strength of many tobacco companies, which can make liability cases long and expensive.


Seeker


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
There can be no question that childless people should be treated with the same dignity and consideration as others in the work place; it does not follow, however, that fairness dictates equal financial treatment for all employees or taxpayers.


The Executive Life; Making a Difference With Hollywood Might
"KATHLEEN BROWN will win on Nov. 8 with the help of the women in this room," declared Hillary Rodham Clinton at a Hollywood Women's Political Committee fund-raising luncheon just over a week ago as campaigns nationwide entered their final furious stretch.
The First Lady knows where her party's bread is buttered; she had hopped a 20-hour flight from the Middle East to take the podium at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel on Oct. 28 because the women in that room would be some of Hollywood's richest and most powerful.


It Started With Pitting Calamata Olives
IT all started when Nick Boboris heard a restaurant chef, who was preparing a dish that required Greek olives saying, "Life would be much simpler if these olives were pitted." Mr.
Boboris's commercial mind was challenged.
As the owner of Sirob Imports Inc. of Lindenhurst, a distributor of Greek food specialties, he was already importing and packaging olives and olive oil.
Always on the lookout for new products to sell to restaurants, specialty stores and supermarkets, Mr.
Boboris decided to explore removing the pits from the Calamata olives that he imports from Greece.
He knew that green pitted California olives, dyed black, were available in markets.


How the Candidates For Statewide Offices See Major Issues On Election Eve
The political races of '94 are almost run, and along the way, the candidates have spoken hundreds of thousands of words -- in speeches, debates, mailings and advertisements.
Often, though, dialogue on the issues of governing has been overshadowed by discussion of other matters, some substantive, others less so.


What Grass-Roots Women Advocate
It was with much regret and disappointment that I read "Assaying the Implications of Women's Resistance to Equality"  [ Oct. 9 ]  about Sherrye Henry, whose book purports to be about women and equality.
Obviously Sherrye Henry has not done all her homework.
Ms.
Henry is a proud self-avowed feminist, but those of us who have worked for many years in the feminist movement, to create change for women, take offense at her claim.
It is obvious to many of us, even to those who worked hard on Ms.
Henry's political campaign, that she is a woman of the privileged South, which has infected her view of feminism.
Ms.
Henry at the very opening of her book, which is ironically called "The Deep Divide," does nothing more than divide women by class, gender and race.
Throughout the book she consistently refers to "us" and "them," by "us" meaning the privileged few and by "them" lumping all other women together as gender-bashing, unfeminine, antimother feminists.


Out of Service


New Schools Official Undaunted by Critics
The new second-in-command of New York City's public schools has emerged as something of a conundrum.
A wealthy banker, he traded retirement for the rough and tumble world of New York City politics.
As a camera-shy dealmaker, he managed to provoke the wrath of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani when he accepted the Schools Chancellor's job offer.
But the conundrums of Barry F. Sullivan, the newly appointed Chief Operations Officer, who has the daunting task of preparing the schools for their tightest financial squeeze in decades, begin to be answered in Chicago, where he spent the 1980's as one of the nation's top bank executives.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Fred Lester, running back, and Tuineau Alipate, linebacker, from their practice squad.


McNally, True, but Vaguely Neo-Chekhovian
YOU MIGHT NOT THINK THAT Terrence McNally, the man who wrote "The Ritz," one of the few authentic modern American farces and one with a decidedly gay sensibility, has much in common with Anton Chekhov, but then you haven't yet seen "Love! Valour! Compassion!" The new play, now at the Manhattan Theater Club, is a big, generous, haunted comedy that in its vaguely neo-Chekhovian way is both very funny and filled with intimations of time's passage, of loss and death.
"But," you might say, "Chekhov wasn't gay." To which Buzz Hauser (Nathan Lane), one of the eight homosexual characters in "Love! Valour! Compassion!," would reply, "Who says so?" It's probable that Buzz, who's convinced that virtually everybody is gay and just doesn't admit it, could make a case for Chekhov.
Yet it isn't homosexuality that links the new comedy to "The Cherry Orchard" and "The Seagull." Rather, it's Mr.
McNally's breadth of vision and his ambitious attempt to deal with characters, who are both privileged and threatened, in a way that ignores self-pity but doesn't ignore the larger world outside.
Though the audience never sees that other world, what's happening in it is very much a part of the life of the play itself.


Last Call for Getting In the Spring Bulbs
WHY do today what can surely be done next week?
This sort of procrastination is typical of gardeners.
Inspired by a few weeks of beautiful mild weather, they postpone those inevitable chores, particularly bulb planting.
But the weeks move along with amazing speed and there are no surer reminders than the early-fading light of fall days and the page-turning of the trusty calendar that winter is on its way.
With it will come frozen soil and snow.
So good gardeners, do be sporting and carry on.
Even a traditional deadline for planting tulips -- Election Day -- is on the horizon.


Taxing Athletic Facilities
MIGHT there be occasions when a resident of a New York State condominium, co-op or homeowner association owes sales tax on monthly charges?
The possibility has created an uproar among board members, managing agents, accountants and lawyers since the New York State Tax Commission issued an advisory opinion last spring warning Shaker Commons, a 98-unit condominium in Colonie, N.Y., that its residents owed sales tax on the portion of its common charges attributable to the operation of its swimming pool and tennis courts.


A Community Is Wary After A Kidnapping
Worried residents of Fairfax County, Va., are bolstering home security measures while the police search for leads in the case of a 6-year-old boy kidnapped from his bedroom, assaulted and abandoned nearly 30 miles from his home early Thursday, the police said.
A police spokesman, Warren Carmichael, said the kindergartner was taken from his bedroom sometime before 2:30 A.M. while his parents slept nearby.
The boy's father discovered him missing and notified the police about 3 A.M.
The home showed no signs of forced entry, Mr.
Carmichael said.


Voting Isn't Pretty, but Somebody Has to Do It; Where the Mandate Is
To the Editor:
Re "Here Come the Republocrats" (Op-Ed, Nov. 1): In advocating political abstinence, Ted Rall follows a curious logic.
"When you don't vote," he writes, "you force politicians to reassess their policies and actions."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SPY TRADER: The Darkest Secrets of the Cold War By Craig R. Whitney.
Times Books/Random House, $5.99.
The man of the title is Wolfgang Vogel, a smooth lawyer from the former East Germany who successfully brokered many thousands of exchanges of political prisoners between East and West over almost three decades.
His story, told by the European diplomatic correspondent of The New York Times, is "a carefully documented, absorbing account," David Wise said here last year.


Togetherness


Rufus Langhans, 72, Who Made History Come Alive on L.I., Dies
Rufus Burford Langhans, the town historian of Huntington, L.I., who once went to England to collect on Revolutionary War-era debts that were never paid to town residents, died Wednesday at Huntington Hospital.
He was 72 and lived in the house Walt Whitman's grandfather built there in 1705.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his brother Paul Langhans of Reedley, Calif.


Players Are Talking Rival United League Seriously, Agents Say
With the price of franchises pegged in the area of $5 million, the United Baseball League should have little trouble finding owners for their projected 10 franchises.
That's a bargain-basement rate compared with the $150 million that major league baseball will probably charge the people from Phoenix and St.
Petersburg, Fla., to get into that exclusive club.
More difficult for the fledgling league will be the seduction of major league players into their teams' uniforms, and a still more arduous task will most likely be the effort to induce 10 cities to build stadiums in return for 15 percent equity in the team and a 15 percent share of the pretax profits.


Last Call for Getting In the Spring Bulbs
WHY do today what can surely be done next week?
This sort of procrastination is typical of gardeners.
Inspired by a few weeks of beautiful mild weather, they postpone those inevitable chores, particularly bulb planting.
But the weeks move along with amazing speed and there are no surer reminders than the early-fading light of fall days and the page-turning of the trusty calendar that winter is on its way.
With it will come frozen soil and snow.
So good gardeners, do be sporting and carry on.
Even a traditional deadline for planting tulips -- Election Day -- is on the horizon.


The Governor's Race: What's in It for Us?
A glossy red, white and blue pamphlet prepared by the State Democratic Committee arrived last week in thousands of New York City mailboxes.
It carried a simple message: If George E. Pataki is elected Governor, "Your rent-stabilized or rent-controlled apartment is history."
"When tenant protections are ended, how many minutes will your landlord wait to call?" the brochure went on.
"And if you can't afford your new rent, how long will he give you to pack your bags?"


A Law, A Legacy And Indian Art
THE DRUMS, PIPES AND melodic chants heard in lower Manhattan last week enlivened the opening of the George Gustav Heye Center of the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian at the Alexander Hamilton United States Custom House.
Prior to the festivities, many of the collectors and dealers who had come to see the museum bought, albeit spottily, at three auctions, which helped revive the lackluster market for beaded shirts, Navajo blankets, Eskimo carvings, and other American Indian art and artifacts.
Wherever enthusiasts of Indian art gathered, discussions raged over the impact of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act on collecting.
The law, passed in 1990, requires the return of certain Indian cultural property acquired by Federally financed museums, though not those owned by dealers, collectors and private institutions.
And some Indians, eager to expand the scope of the law, continue to protest the sale of certain tribal objects.


Actor


World Bank Loans
To the Editor:
Apart from their flawed economic logic, John Cavanagh and Sarah Anderson have employed questionable arithmetic in contending that International Monetary Fund and World Bank adjustment loans to developing countries have reduced United States exports by $1 billion a year ("For U.S., Aid Banks Aren't Too Helpful," Viewpoints, Oct. 2).


Battle Lines Form as Dublin Prepares to Ease an Abortion Law
News this week of the Government's intention to liberalize one of Ireland's highly restrictive anti-abortion laws has renewed national debate on abortion in this predominantly Roman Catholic country.
The Minister of Health, Brendan Howlin, said the law that prohibits the distribution of information about abortion clinics in other countries would be amended in legislation to be considered by the Cabinet of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds next week.
After expected approval by the Cabinet, the measure is to be debated in the Parliament, where there are many vehement opponents of liberalization.


Singer and Song, Opera to Pop
THE human voice -- speaking and singing, solo and in chorus -- is featured in a great variety of musical events.
Starting times, unless otherwise noted, are 8 P.M.
Today: Joined by Eric Lewis, first violinist of the Manhattan String Quartet, the soprano Margaret Astrup sings a free recital at the Yale Center for British Art, the 3 o'clock program listing works of Holst, Vaughan Williams and Villa-Lobos (432-2850 for more details).


All His Wives Are Mother
THE AFTERLIFE And Other Stories.
By John Updike. 316 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Ghost of Lawyers Past
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 30 news article about Rodney G. King's lawyers' $4.4 million bill tests the proverb "The lawyer never dieth a beggar."


That CD or Tape Just May Be a Fake
OVER THE SUMMER THE shaky relations between China and the United States got another jolt.
Oddly enough, the fracas is about audio and video.
Back in June the Clinton Administration threatened trade sanctions within six months if the Chinese Government didn't take action against factories churning out pirate copies of American CD's.
China is a major source of forged CD's, with an output of about 75 million disks a year.
That undercuts American record companies in the world market and adds about $1 billion to America's foreign trade deficit.


Tenants Praise Inspection Blitz After Charging Slumlord Abuse
Inspectors from several city agencies descended on West 22d Street throughout this week in a crackdown on violations at buildings whose tenants say they are being abused by a pair of slumlords.
Emergency repairs were ordered for a gas leak at 327-329 West 22d and for inoperative fire sprinklers at No. 412, city officials said.
Stop-work orders were issued on renovations at 329-331 that were being done without a permit.
And violations were found at several buildings.


STEVE GUNDERSON
In Chandler Burr's article on Congressman Steve Gunderson, Newt Gingrich talks a great deal about how tolerant he is of gays in the Republican Party ("Congressman (R), Wisconsin. Fiscal Conservative, Social Moderate. Gay," Oct. 16).
Any impression one might draw that Gingrich is supportive of fair treatment for gay men and lesbians is wholly inaccurate.
In fact, his record has been one of consistent and vigorous opposition to treating gay men and lesbians fairly.
If his views on gay and lesbian rights are the Republican big tent, it is hard to imagine how microscopic the small one is.
BARNEY FRANK House of Representatives Washington


Great Minds Think . . .
To the Editor:
In her essay on the contemporary relevance of Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya"  [ "Why 'Vanya,' and Why Now?," Oct. 16 ] , Patricia Bosworth attributes to the critic Harold Clurman the quote "Life is a tragedy for those who feel, a comedy for those who think." This quote is a particular favorite of mine and originated with Horace Walpole, who said: "This world is a comedy to those that think, a tragedy to those that feel."  MILLICENT JENSEN  St.
Simon's Island, Ga.


Amy Spitofsky, Matthew Handel
Amy Spitofsky, a daughter of Shirley Spitofsky of Flourtown, Pa., and the late Morton Spitofsky, was married last evening to Matthew Handel, the son of Sandra and Seymour Handel of Paramus, N.J.
Rabbi David Ackerman officiated at Tiferet Bet Israel in Blue Bell, Pa.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in Valley Forge, Pa., for the Resolution Trust Corporation.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Boston University.
Her father owned an accounting firm in Flourtown.


Lopez, Osborne, Ali: Ah, What a Banquet
Felipe Lopez of St.
John's flew out of town on a school night ("He needs another award?" groused his old high school teacher. "He should be home with his books.") Nebraska Coach Tom Osborne flew out of town on a practice night (he stayed only 20 minutes before he flew home).
And Muhammad Ali, once stripped of his title for refusing to be drafted, was awarded an honorary doctorate for public service.
Thus the reform wing of mainstream sports, better known as the Center for the Study of Sport in Society, celebrated its 10th year as part of Northeastern University last Wednesday night with a banquet for 700 in Boston.
The lesson was athletically clear; hang tough long enough, superstars will put you on the scoreboard.


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. NEW YORK
Cuomo -- Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Public Advocate Mark J. Green, the Republican and Democrat who have been rivals since both took office in January, stood together to attack the Republican candidate for governor, George E. Pataki, and to stress his ties to United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Mr.
Giuliani and Mr.
Green, who lost a bid to unseat Mr.
D'Amato in 1986, said a victory by Mr.
Pataki would turn the state government into what the Mayor called "a government of D'Amato, for D'Amato and by D'Amato."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A DEHNER TRIBUTE
The death of Dorothy Dehner last September at the age of 92 has altered the purpose of the exhibition at the Station Gallery in Katonah of her sculptures and drawings from the 1950's to the present.
It has become a posthumous tribute to the American artist rather than a follow-up to the gallery's Dehner exhibition of 1993.
The show opens today and will continue through Dec. 4.
Influenced heavily by the Fauves, Cubists and German Expressionists of the 1920's, Dehner drew and painted until the 1950's, when she began to sculpture as well.
The show contains line drawings, watercolors, gouaches and bronzes, varying in scale and ranging in style from the figurative to the abstract.
During the 50's she divorced her husband, the sculptor David Smith, and began achieving a reputation for herself.
The gallery director, Vincent Baldassano, said: "Dehner is often analyzed in terms of her 25-year marriage to Smith, during which she nurtured him intellectually and artistically. His effect on her life and art, however, is variously described as competitive, intimidating and stifling."
The gallery, at 43 Katonah Avenue, is open Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
For more information, call 232-7529.
FIBER FAIR
Fiber artists will be on hand in profusion and would-be spinners, weavers, knitters and crocheters should be intrigued with the possibilities displayed on Saturday when the Westchester Knitting Guild, the Handweavers Guild of Westchester and the Center for Fiber Arts at Marymount College get together for a Fiber Fair on the Tarrytown campus from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
The sponsoring nonprofit groups are dedicated to promoting the use of fleece, cotton, wool, silk and flax in creative ways, and they encourage people to use natural fibers in weaving.
Visitors who come dressed in their own fibre creations will receive gifts, and those who donate a knitted or woven cap to a drive called Caps for Kids will get a free raffle ticket.
Throughout the day there will be classes for beginners and experienced practitioners, children, teenagers and adults, in knitting, spinning, weaving, dyeing, crocheting, pattern charting and machine knitting.
Yarn, fleece, flax, silk, buttons, books, videos and all kinds of knitting, spinning and weaving equipment will be on sale.
The college cafeteria will be open for lunch, and all events will be held in Rita Hall, including the raffle, a bake sale and a fiber fashion show.
Admission will be $5, $2 for children.
The college is at 100 Marymount Avenue.
Call 322-1627 for more information.
WATERSCAPING
Home gardeners longing for a little lily pond, landscape designers on the lookout for new trends and techniques in waterscaping and anyone interested in having a front or backyard enhanced by water will have reason to attend the symposium on "Waterscaping for the Home Garden" at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx on Tuesday from 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Patrick Chasse, known for his residential garden designs and restoration work, will be the symposium moderator and the first speaker, at 9 A.M., on "The Art and Craft of Water Gardens." At 9:30 Anthony Archer-Wills, British water-gardening authority, will talk about "Water Gardens for Everyone: From Containers to Wetlands," and at 11:15 A.M.
Judy Glattstein, popular lecturer in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey, will discuss "Plants for Natural and Created Waterscapes."
At 1:45 P.M.
James Lawrie, manager of Waterford Gardens in Saddle River, N.J., will speak about "Design and Construction: A Step-by-Step Approach," followed at 3 P.M. by the botanist and author Dr.
William Niering talking about "In Harmony With Nature."
General admission will be $89 for the day, covering refreshments, a box lunch, handouts and a program book.
College students with identification can attend for $58, excluding the box lunch.
To register or for information, call (718) 817-8747 or (718) 817-8720.
Related workshops will be led by local experts at the Botanical Garden through November at additional cost.
Included are pond construction; fountains, streams and waterfalls and residential poolscaping.
For details, call the same phone numbers.
MORTGAGE MESSAGE
First-time home buyers are invited to attend a free workshop titled "Demystifying the Mortgage" on Saturday from 9:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. at the White Plains Public Library, 100 Martine Avenue.
The many aspects of purchasing a home, obtaining a mortgage and coping with closing costs and procedures will be discussed by a panel of experts and moderated by Joy Burgos, a pre-purchase counselor at Westchester Residential Opportunities, a nonprofit fair-housing agency.
Ann Seligsohn, the agency's fair housing director, will speak about lending rights; Eileen Halatyn, a Westchester-Putnam realtor, will explain the role of the real estate broker; legal matters about closing a purchase will be addressed by Vincent D'Andrea, a Westchester lawyer, and Nick Papajohn, a mortgage specialist, will talk about getting mortgages.
For details, call 428-4507.
CHESTNUT BLIGHT
A lot of homeowners, parks and probably a few blacksmiths have lost their spreading chestnut trees to chestnut blight since the mid-1960's.
But a stand of 20 healthy American chestnut trees was identified in 1991 at the Lasdon Arboretum in Somers, and the site has become a research center for the American Chestnut Foundation of Morgantown, W.V.
Dr.
Sandra Anagnostakis, a biologist affiliated with the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station in New Haven, has developed a disease-resistant American chestnut tree.
She will preside over a program about her work and the work of the Morgantown foundation and the Lasdon Arboretum in bringing a disease-resistant chestnut tree to market by the year 2000.
The event is on Wednesday at 7 P.M. at the Arboretum, and admission is free.
To reach the Arboretum, in Lasdon Park, take Exit 6 off I-684 and go west on Route 35 four miles to the entrance.
Call 593-2645 for more information.
ELEANOR CHARLES


Theresa A. Miller, John J. DeGioia
Theresa Anne Miller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Thomas Miller of Las Vegas, Nev., was married yesterday to John Joseph DeGioia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. DeGioia of Hamden, Conn.
The Rev.
John J. Begley, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Washington.
Mr. and Mrs.
DeGioia both graduated from Georgetown University in Washington and now work there.
She is an assistant director of the annual fund and he is an associate vice president and the chief administrative officer of the main campus.


A Wider European Union
Europe remains economically divided between East and West.
The European Union spent most of that period trying to strengthen links among its West European members instead of reaching out to the post-Communist countries of the East, unnecessarily complicating the Easterners' transition to democratic capitalism.
Thanks mainly to political shifts in key West European countries, a less parochial outlook is taking hold.
Austria, Norway, Sweden and Finland are scheduled to be admitted next year.
The most advanced post-Communist economies, Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, now have a realistic chance of admission within the next decade.


U.S. Wife's Resolute Quest Shakes Guatemala
The last time Guatemalan officials told Jennifer Harbury they knew what had happened to her husband, they took her to a remote cemetery and handed her a bucket containing a head they said was his.
A metal cap on one front tooth proved to her that it wasn't.


Gerry H. Rubin, David L. Schwartz
Dr.
Gerry Helaine Rubin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold D. Rubin of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
David Lawrence Schwartz, a son of Dr.
Sandra Weiss of Livingston, N.J., and Dr.
Irving Schwartz of Caldwell, N.J.
Cantor Henry Butensky officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
The bride, 34, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from Rutgers Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J.
She is the associate director of the bone-marrow transplantation unit at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Paterson, N.J., and an assistant professor of medicine at Seton Hall University in Orange, N.J.
Her father is the chief of medicine at St.
Joseph's and a professor of medicine at Seton Hall.
Her mother, Judith Rubin, teaches English at Woodcliff Middle School in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Giuliani's Two Battles: Pataki, Then D'Amato
Putting his muscle behind his endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has been campaigning the last two weeks as if he were the candidate himself.
But it is hard to distinguish whether he is running against State Senator George E. Pataki or United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Under the direction of the Cuomo campaign, Mr.
Giuliani has traveled to Rockland County, Long Island and Brooklyn and has made the traditional fly-around of upstate cities.
Strategists for the Governor say that they are using Mr.
Giuliani to appeal in particular to Jews and Italians, in the suburbs and boroughs, who might otherwise consider the Republican line.


HOW MUCH IS HIS FAULT?
Cronin's description of Americans as "lousy followers" does not strike me as apt for people who happily followed Reagan and Bush for 12 years, many of whom lusted after Bush or Perot for four more.


A New Life for an Old Nightclub
The delapidated art moderne building on 160th Street just north of Jamaica Avenue, nestled among mom-and-pop stores and across from a farmers' market, is slated for its fourth incarnation -- as a center to help small local businesses.
The building's story winds into the past, nearly to the turn of the century.
It was constructed in 1907, a neo-classic building with elegant Doric columns.
The current owners believe that it may have been used as a men's club.


Voices From the Trenches
To the Editor:
It's no wonder that corporate art collecting is in trouble  [ "How Corporate Collecting Fell on Hard Times," Oct. 9 ] .
The companies mentioned buy "radical" art intended to discomfit the viewer and then pout when it succeeds.


Joy J. Kaplan, Morey B. Wildes
Joy J. Kaplan, a daughter of Iris and Dr.
Harold Kaplan of Plano, Tex., and Morey Bruce Wildes, a son of Bertha and Dr.
Jerome Wildes of Lawrence, L.I., are to be married today.
Rabbi Walter Wurzburger is to perform the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 27, is an associate at the law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a professor of pathology at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
He was the medical director of the Greater New York Blood Center from 1988 to 1992.


Voting Isn't Pretty, but Somebody Has to Do It; Ideas Need Rethinking
To the Editor:
The recent disclosure of a memo by Alice Rivlin, the budget director, that raised the possibility of only the most modest revisions in Social Security caused a shameful display of ducking and covering by Democrats.
Instead of using the opportunity to discuss some real solutions to our deficit and national debt dilemma, they chose not to offend the all-powerful senior citizen voting bloc.


Makeup as Illusion And a Cue for Reality
NAME: Kevyn Aucoin (pronounced oh-COIN).
IDENTITY: Makeup artist.
AGE: 32.
RECENT PROJECTS: Fashion Week spring shows for Isaac Mizrahi, Donna Karan, DKNY, Richard Tyler for Anne Klein, Ralph Lauren, Todd Oldham; author of "The Art of Makeup," (HarperCollins, 1994; $60).
PAST CLIENTS: Tina Turner, Barbra Streisand, Roseanne, Elizabeth Taylor, Diana Ross, Susan Sarandon, Uma Thurman, Audrey Hepburn, Anjelica Huston, and Vogue, Harper's Bazaar and Allure magazines.
Q.
How did you get into makeup?
A.
As I was growing up in Louisiana, people told me I was ugly.
I think it was because I was effeminate.
Mine is the story of the ugly duckling, about being able to see that you're not what everyone around you is telling you that you are.
I became interested in the idea of transformation.
Where it stemmed from, for me, was the awareness from a very early age that I was gay, then hearing how awful and evil that was.
Eventually I realized that was all lies, and then I started questioning what else I had heard that wasn't true.
It was a wonderful springboard for me into the world of fashion and beauty, because it kept me from accepting what was and made me see the possibilities of what could be.
Q.
It's interesting that you translated notions of illusion into such a literal metaphor.
A.
It wasn't anything conscious, but I guess it was vicarious, in a way -- the idea that if I can make you look good and feel good about yourself, that makes me feel good about myself because I helped you.
Q.
What's this glamour thing about?
A.
At a certain point in the 80's, there was a no-makeup movement, which was, I think, a political movement.
I always think everything that happens in the fashion world is based on politics.
In the 80's, people in the fashion world were losing their friends to AIDS, they were watching gay and lesbian civil rights being destroyed, there was an enormous amount of sexism going on.
And the fashion business reacted in several ways.
During the beginning of the Reagan years, there was a real white-male view of women as Barbie dolls -- very glamorous, and voluptuous.
So in the early 80's there was a lot of Big.
Big hair, big makeup, big breasts.
Then, suddenly, came the no-makeup movement.
What it meant politically was that women don't have to wear makeup to be accepted.
It's O.K. for women to be bare-faced.
And not only is it O.K., it's good, it's a great look.
And it was important to expand the boundaries of what we considered acceptable.
Now, there's a return to glamour because even the no-makeup look was becoming oppressive.
Q.
So the fashion world presents us with an extreme?
A.
Always.
No one's going to go home and do their makeup the way we do it for a magazine.
But you can go off and say "Oh, purple's the message." It's not about saying, "Go wear this to go out tonight," but rather: "Oh, yellow! Color! I'll put a little spring into it." Q. Who creates trends, and how?
A.
There's a really small group of people that can make a big difference.
It's not like some little committee, and it keeps changing, but it's a group of people who love women and feel a great respect for women, and most of them have their finger on the pulse of what's going on, in terms of what affects their lives.
Manipulation is not part of the inspiration.
It's the desire to open up doors and make things more acceptable.
That's where Kristin McMenamy and Kate Moss come in.
That's where Roshumba comes in, or Naomi Campbell, who has more traditional black features than most of the black models before her.
When Steven Meisel brings Kristin to the American public and says, "This is beauty, and it's not the typical all-American blonde," it's because Steven fights for it that America wakes up.
Like Barbra Streisand.
Those are the people I love and adore, because they are breaking the boundaries and creating more acceptance for everyone.
Q.
What are some of the runway makeup trends that are new and interesting?
A.
I'll tell you what I think is the most old-fashioned: a ton of foundation.
I think what's new is someone with dark, smoky eyes -- yet you can see their skin -- and glossy lips.
Not so long ago, there was a return to the 70's, but it was done very literally, copied from a 70's magazine, without any modern take on it, which to me is uninspiring.
What I'm here for, as a makeup artist, is to present women with options.
A new option is to be inspired by a look from the past, and then make it modern.
Q.
Who's doing the most innovative makeup nowadays?
A.
The Japanese are light-years ahead of everyone else when it comes to formulating makeup.
It's scary to me that American companies have no clue, compared to the Japanese.
For the Japanese it's more of an art.
For American companies it's about how much something will sell.
Q.
What looks do you like?
A.
The whole range, from a woman who's completely dressed up, has her hair pulled back, let's say, and wears a velvet coat, huge earrings and no makeup, except for some sort of oil in her face (I love skin that looks glowing like that).
Women with a lot of makeup on also catch my eye.
I love the extremes.
It's fascinating to see that someone's far up on either end of the spectrum.
It says they're not afraid of being different.
And those are the people I gravitate toward, because that's me.
Q.
Where do your ideas come from?
A.
I get a lot from children.
I look at my niece -- her little cherub cheeks, rosy lips, long blond eyelashes, dark eyebrows -- and I think: "That's it! That's the makeup for the show!"
It's not at all about making women look just like little girls, either.
It's just that my niece inspired me, just like I get ideas from old movies I watch.
Q.
Where do fashion and beauty go now?
A.
That depends on what happens in politics.


CONTROL IN SENATE NEAR G.O.P. GRASP AS RACES WIND UP
One of the closest, nastiest and perhaps most consequential off-year set of Senate campaigns in decades is clattering to an end in the same volatile climate of voter unrest, partisan invective and incumbent anxiety with which it began.
After months of state-by-state drama punctuated by increasingly mean and shallow advertisements, and after a record-breaking total of more than $200 million in Senate campaign spending, the central question remains: Can Republicans pick up the seven seats they need to control the chamber?


Seething With Humorous Discontent
THE Gallery at Mercer County Community College began in 1991 by focusing on artists from the area.
Now, under the direction of Henry Hose, it is reaching out like a telephone company -- to the rest of the state and beyond, if the current show, "The Red Figure," is any indication.
A lot is going on in this show, not all of it red or, for that matter, related to the figure, and the organizer, John Goodyear, who teaches art at the Mason Gross School at Rutgers, makes it clear from the outset that the ride will not be easy.
For example, he opens his brief introduction with a quote, "We are the ancients," attributing it to Francis Bacon.
He does not say whether he means the 20th-century Irish painter or the 16th-century English philosopher.
No matter; either one could have made the remark.


The Thrill of Burning Bridges
THE CONCERT By Ismail Kadare.
Translated from the French of Jusuf Vrioni by Barbara Bray. 444 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


Lone Prairie (0-44) Is Buried
Going into today's game against Tarleton (Texas) State, the Prairie View A&amp;M Panthers were staring at a desolate prospect; tying the Division I-AA record for most consecutive losses.
The leader in football futility in their bracket is Columbia, which set the mark of 44 straight games from 1983 to 1988.
Prairie View was 0-8 this season, but this game was the one on the schedule they hoped might end that streak: Tarleton was a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II school, a notch below Prairie View's status; it was homecoming and a full house of 6,000 was on hand in Blackshear Stadium here, about 45 miles northwest of Houston.
And, to add a little glamour to the event, a new scoreboard had just been installed.


You Think You're Depressed?
DANCER WITH BRUISED KNEES By Lynne McFall. 216 pp.
San Francisco: Chronicle Books. $18.95.


Computers As Wasters Of Energy
WHEN college campuses try to become more "green," they often start recycling and using biodegradable materials.
But the State University of New York at Buffalo's, conservation campaign has targeted the personal computer.
Computers cause the fastest-growing use of electricity on campus, and the university's facilities department decided to try to break the bad energy habits computer users develop.


Bosnian Shift: Are the Serbs Now on the Run?
A long stalemate in the Bosnian war has abruptly given way to a flurry of victories by Muslim-led Government forces that pose a central question: Is the Bosnian Serb army on the run?
The question would have been unthinkable two weeks ago, when the superiority of the Bosnian Serbs in artillery, tanks and military organization seemed as impregnable as throughout the previously one-sided 31-month-old war.


Cold War Without End
HARALD RAUDSEPP'S daily journey into his past is a ritual unmarred by age, frailty and the upheavals of history.
Ninety-one years old now, he walks with a tremulous gait, and he cannot converse without a hearing aid.
But he still puts on a starched suit every morning and rides the subway to midtown Manhattan, clutching typewritten testaments to a former life.
Mr.
Raudsepp is editor of The Free Estonian Word, a weekly newspaper for the estimated 10,000 Estonians in and around New York.
He arrived here in 1949, after years of hiding from the K.G.B. in Soviet-occupied Estonia.
The memories linger with haunting clarity.


Voters to Fill 7 Judicial Slots
ALTHOUGH the gubernatorial race and a few hotly contested legislative posts are likely to attract the most attention on Election Day Tuesday, voters will also fill seats on county and state judicial benches.
There are four spots for the County Court, where judges primarily handle felony criminal cases and are elected to serve 10-year terms at a yearly salary of $113,000.


The Nation; The Boom in Jails Is Locking Up Lots of Loot
TWO of the dominant sentiments in America today are the desire to get tough on criminals and the desire to reduce government spending.
Yet these two impulses are clashing across the nation as the United States finds itself in the midst of an unparalleled prison building boom.
Spurred by public anger over persistent crime, the Federal Government and the states have been beefing up police forces, imposing tougher sentences and restricting parole.
As a result, the nation's inmate population has been climbing at a rate of more than 900 new prisoners a week for about the last decade and a half.
The result of this flood of inmates -- which in Federal and state prisons topped one million this summer for the first time -- is a penal system bursting at the seams and scrambling to expand.


At Work; Still In the Dark on Diversity
THOSE whose business it is to ride up in the crow's nest of life, scanning the trend horizons, say there are few instances of a single piece of work having as fast and pervasive an impact as the Hudson Institute's "Work Force 2000: Work and Workers for the 21st Century."
The 1987 report projected an increasingly diverse American labor force, that is one increasingly composed of women, members of minority groups and other alternatives to the traditional white, male breadwinner.
A certain number of forward-looking companies immediately grasped the implications of employing a work force that might -- but might not -- arrive at the office sharing the same social and cultural assumptions.
Diversity, the consulting specialty, was born.


Squash, Anyone?
Squash is constitutionally incapable of letting down its gourd.
Its leathery skin is resolutely protective, able to defy sharp knives and good intentions.
With its dense flesh and hard mien, winter squash must be defeated.
The cook should be reconciled to the effort, to the thwack of a heavy knife and the heat necessary to coax the sweet, nutty nature out of these tough critters.
Squash is the sweetness of cool weather.
It is a vegetable that can perform like fruit, acting as the perfect counterpoint to a rich winter meal or, on its own, as a satisfying soup.


The Fashion Week That Was
A party given by The New Yorker with Seventh on Sixth under way, Oct. 28.


Residue of Fear Remains as Toxins Are Removed
Wind shifts on hot summer days brought the first signs of trouble.
Neighbors in the new subdivision called Timber Stream told each other the odor carried on the breeze was probably nothing more than a bad day at a sewer pumping plant a mile away in Glassboro.
Then pink foamy water bubbled to the surface of the mossy ground in the woods behind their homes and ran in vivid rivulets into a brook that led to Alcyon Lake in the heart of Pitman.
And the smell worsened, burning nostrils and throats.


Oct.2-Nov.5; Look Back in Puzzlement


Hospitals Lose A Vital Sign: Job Security
KERRY MORTH of Waterford started working as a laboratory technician at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London 19 years ago, as a teen-ager just out of high school.
Her husband, Larry, became an engineer and worked at military contracting companies.
"For 8 to 10 years we've lived with the threat of his being unemployed," Mrs.
Morth said.
"He always told me, 'Thank God you're in health care, at least you're secure.' "


The World; Balkan Moral Order Upset As Victim Becomes Victor
ALL moral certainties about the Bosnian war dissolve before the figure of Edina Zec.
A Muslim married to a Serb, she has just fled a sudden advance by the Muslim-led Bosnian army.
Wan with fatigue and worry, she is beyond hope, her soul lacerated by a long war.
Her two brothers fight in the advancing Muslim army; her husband fights in the Serb army confronting them; she stands in the middle, with nowhere to go.
Mrs.
Zec's disarray, brought on by a Bosnian offensive from the Bihac area that overran her home town this week, is nothing unusual.
Almost half of Bosnia's 4.4 million citizens have now been displaced by the war.
But the suffering of this Muslim woman in flight from Muslim-led forces seemed to capture the drained disorientation with which the world took in the Bosnian army's sudden successes over the Serbs around Bihac and in Kupres.


Q. &amp; A.
Leaving Before the Lease Is Up  Q I moved out of an apartment on June 29, 1992, two months before my two-year lease expired.
I had told the management company's leasing agent that for financial reasons I would not be able to continue in the apartment and asked her if I could move into a smaller apartment, which rented for $100 less.
She told me I would not be allowed to move.
I then said I would have no option but to vacate the apartment.


Clancy vs. Buckley
To the Editor:
Do you say to prospective reviewers of Tom Clancy's work: "Are you willing to really lambaste Clancy? If so, you can review his latest"?
Christopher Buckley's review of "Debt of Honor" (Oct. 2) is nit-picking and negative.
I am disappointed you didn't edit out most of Mr.
Buckley's childish criticisms.


School Boards: Manhattan And the Bronx
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1 Lower East Side.
Next meeting: Thursday, 7 P.M.; location: P.S. 34, 730 East 12th Street, between Avenues C and D. Superintendent: Dori Collazo-Baker; President/Chairwoman: Dolores Schaefer; (212) 602-9765.
Agenda: Discussion on effect of budget cuts.


'Dean' Mao's Legacy
In the 1950's and 60's, China mobilized higher education to produce physicists and rocket engineers capable of giving the Communist Party leadership the ultimate in international prestige: a thermonuclear weapon deliverable by intercontinental ballistic missile.
It was an enormous achievement for a nation of peasant farmers led by rough-hewn revolutionaries.
But Mao Zedong, the Communist Party chairman, then decided to tear it all down in the name of permanent revolution and class struggle, and higher education was suspended during the years of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.


Lust for Power
PARENTS FROM coast to coast must have read out loud to their children the startling new medical report from Dr.
Li Zhisui, for two decades the personal physician to Mao Zedong.
Mao never let a toothbrush near his teeth, preferring in peasant custom to rinse them daily in green tea.
"A tiger never brushes his teeth," the Great Helmsman loftily explained in resisting his doctor's advice to improve his oral hygiene.
But his teeth looked as if they were coated with green paint.
And one by one they fell out, leaving the tiger almost toothless as he grew old.


To the Barricades of Egalite
Around the world, universities are wrestling with new challenges.
In countries where graduates find they have trained for careers in fields already crowded with professionals, many schools are shifting their emphasis to job training and workplace skills.
Some universities find themselves short of students; others have a surplus.
As institutions of higher learning struggle to find solutions, they are questioning long-held traditions and beliefs about their systems of higher education.
If French students were long thought to spend their time sitting around drinking coffee, smoking Gitanes and discussing philosophy, that image vanished in clouds of tear gas this spring when tens of thousands of them took to the streets to insist on their right to a well-paid job after they completed their studies.
The spark for the violent protests was a new law allowing employers to pay less than the legal minimum wage to those with technical diplomas.
Affected students were outraged.
They said they had been led to higher education by the promise of good jobs, but now were being told that their studies were worthless.
The Government quickly backed off, saying it had merely tried to fight unemployment, which affects one in four French youths between the ages of 18 and 25.
But the dispute helped focus on a more fundamental issue.
What is the purpose of higher education in France today?
Should youths be educated for the sake of being educated or should the emphasis be on preparing them for the workplace?
Traditionally, French universities had a somewhat elitist approach.
But since 1984 everyone who passes the baccalaureat examination at the end of high school has the right to a place at a university.
As a result, the number of students in higher education has jumped from 1.2 million in 1980 to 2 million this year.
Over this period, umemployment has continued to rise.
And since by law university students can study what they like, they are rarely guided toward degrees with better job prospects.
It is only when they complete their studies, then, that many discover they have not been prepared for the job market.
Officials in the Ministry of Higher Education conceded that they were under pressure from university rectors to limit the number of students and even to institute entry exams, and under pressure from the private sector to focus more on practical education.
But they said all efforts to bring change are politically explosive, not only because higher education is now considered a right, but also because universities absorb youths who might otherwise be unemployed.
"It's a critical situation," one ministry official said.
"The student needs to know if he's capable of doing a specific job, but the university doesn't answer that question. It's only posed when the graduate looks for a job and is told, 'You've done three years of law studies, but tens of thousands have done the same thing, so why should we choose you?' People are only now discovering that their blind faith in degrees is a fiction."
As a result, more students are now opting for two-year courses in so-called University Institutes of Technology because graduates from these schools are in greater demand than those from a conventional university.
It is not surprising, then, that they fought the wage cut.
Some experts believe students must change as much as universities.
"No one wants to stop studying before university," said Jean Barrans, a retired professor from Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse.
"Everyone wants a white-collar job and no longer accepts a blue-collar job." Professor Barrans also said that he felt French students had grown passive because only 20 percent work their way through the university.
The rest are supported by their parents or government grants.
"If they had to work to finance their studies, as in the United States," he said, "perhaps things would be better here." ALAN RIDING


Rallying Support
To the Sports Editor:
I feel the whole cheerleading debate is a bit more complicated than is implied in "Is Cheerleading a Sneaky Way Around Title IX?" (The Times, Oct. 23).
While I personally agree that cheerleading is not a "sport," I can understand why so many girls are rallying to legitimize it as one.


Aryan and Proud
RELIGION AND THE RACIST RIGHT The Origins of the Christian Identity Movement.
By Michael Barkun. 290 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $15.95.


He Wasn't Most Likely to Succeed, but He Is Now
IT HAPPENED 12 YEARS AGO, BUT for Eriq La Salle the memory is still fresh.
The 32-year-old actor, who now plays Dr.
Peter Benton in NBC's new hit series "E.R.," was completing his second year of the four-year acting program at Juilliard.
"I wasn't asked back," says Mr.
La Salle, evenly, in his trailer on the Warner Brothers studio lot in Burbank.
"Or I was asked to leave. Or kicked out -- however you want to put it."
According to Mr.
La Salle, his instructors did not think he would be able to suppress his inner-city speech patterns.


Paula Bronstein, William E. Whyman
Paula Bronstein, an editor with the American Psychological Association in Washington, was married last evening to William Edward Whyman, a director of international economic affairs for the National Security Council and the National Economic Council at the White House.
Rabbi Joel Tessler performed the ceremony at the B'nai Israel Synagogue in Rockville, Md.
Mrs.
Whyman, 29, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the daughter of Susan and Max W. Bronstein of Silver Spring, Md.
Her parents own Federal Office Products Center Inc., an office supply company in Silver Spring.


The Elves Are in Shirtsleeves


The Executive Computer; Digital's Bid to Cut Networking Costs
IF there is one thing information systems managers have learned, it's that PC's don't come cheap -- even considering today's fire sale price tags.
Maintenance and repairs, as well as the constant need to upgrade software, quickly adds to the cost.
And there is the expense of employee training and dealing with frayed nerves when the computers malfunction, as they inevitably do.
But the folks at Digital Equipment Corporation think they have the answer: When it comes to client-server computing, forget the ordinary personal computer. (Forget also, apparently, the fact that Digital's ordinary PC business is currently the company's fastest growing segment.) With an announcement this week, Digital is hoping to sell the world on its new line of Multia workstations, which have been designed to run in complex client-server environments that use many networking protocols.


The School of Resentment
To the Editor:
I read with great interest Norman Fruman's strangely confused review of "The Western Canon," by Harold Bloom (Oct. 9).
Mr.
Fruman suggests, in concurrence with Mr.
Bloom, that personal and political biases have influenced curricular changes and are responsible for the decline in the literary values and cultural literacy of the West.


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
Are childless workers really entitled to the same benefits as those with children if, as Leslie Lafayette acknowledged in "Fair Play for Childless Workers" (Viewpoints, Oct. 16), it costs a quarter of a million dollars to raise a child?
These expensive children will provide future benefits to the childless.
Who else would staff police forces and offices and factories?
The REV.
J.
DOUGLAS OUSLEY  Manhattan, Oct. 15  The writer is rector of the Episcopal Church of the Incarnation.


Mavericks' 1-2-3 Lottery Punch Knocks Out the Nets
The lottery has been especially kind to the Dallas Mavericks.
In 1992, it brought Jim Jackson to town.
In 1993, it produced Jamal Mashburn.
In 1994, the Mavericks plucked the all-America point guard Jason Kidd.
Tonight at Reunion Arena in a 112-103 victory over the struggling Nets, the Big Three ignited the sagging basketball hopes so often associated with the Big D, pushing their youth past Derrick Coleman, Kenny Anderson and a bunch of other undetermined souls from New Jersey before 17,502.
Coach Butch Beard now knows his team takes losing seriously, having lost to the National Basketball Association's best and worst teams on consecutive nights.


Wall Street; The Snapple Story . . . a Tale Written in the Margins
FEW growth stories have excited Wall Street as much as that of Snapple, the bottler of iced tea and fruit drinks.
Last week, Snapple stunned its fans twice within an hour.
First it reported that its sales in the important summer season had fallen from the previous year's level.
Then it said it had agreed to be acquired by Quaker Oats for $14 a share, less than half its price early this year, before growth slowed.
The newest quarterly report also shows that gross profit margins -- based upon the sales price less the cost of producing the drink -- are slipping, in part because Snapple is selling more fruit juice, which costs more to make than iced tea.
High margins had been a big part of the Snapple story.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption last Sunday about the high-occupancy-vehicle lane on the expressway misstated the date of a fatal crash.
It was Oct. 6, not Oct. 13.


The Quadrangle Becomes a Globe
In the late 1860's, when well-to-do American college students began to spend their junior year abroad and Europe also played host to struggling American artists, wandering expatriates and well-heeled sightseers on the grand tour, the novelist Henry James, who probably understood these footloose Americans better than anyone before or since, was asked to describe them.
"There is but one word to use -- vulgar, vulgar, vulgar!" he rumbled, explaining that he could not abide their ignorance and "perpetual reference of all things to some American standard or precedent."
James's novels took a kinder view, frequently emphasizing a noble quality in American character, but his ill-tempered putdown of his countrymen living abroad (reported by his brother) has echoed down through the decades.
Today, a growing number of American educators believe that the world is too small, too competititve and too dangerous to tolerate the sort of ignorant chauvinism that so provoked James.
The cure, they say, is not small, easy or cheap: American higher education needs to go global.
That does not mean lightheartedly dispatching students to sample cultural bonbons in exotic lands.
To serious-minded American educators, globalization means such things as the presence of large numbers of foreign students and professors on campuses in the United States, so that this fall at New York University's Washington Square campus, for example, more than 30 different languages are being spoken.
It means tens, ultimately hundrends of thousands of American students resident in foreign countries, mastering the local language and culture and -- as with present-day University of California students -- taking a full load of rigorous, faculty-screened courses taught in the native tongue at one of 100 institutions in 32 different countries.
It means internationalizing the curriculum, as in a course in accounting at the University of Michigan School of Business that now includes the study of Japanese regulations permitting the depreciation of assets at many times the rate allowed in the United States.
It means using the latest technology so that sudents at Ramapo College, a small, publicly supported institution in Mahwah, N.J., join in discussions with other students, scholars, artists and officials around the world in 120 teleconferences every year.
"International education is not a new idea, but the times have now conjoined to make it dominant," said L. Jay Oliva, the president of New York University, who has taken a leading role in the movement.
"What's happening here," he continued, "is comparable to what happened in the 19th century when Johns Hopkins University adopted the philosophy of the great German research universities and set the pattern for Harvard, Yale and the others."
The number of American student studying abroad has grown steadily over the last five years and is now at a record high of 72,000, according to the Institute of International Education, the nation's leading educational exchange organization.
This figure is small in comparison with the number of foreign students studying in the United States (438,000, or six times as many), but -- significantly -- the profile of these itinerant American students has changed.
"Typically, they used to be affluent women in their junior year at one of the elite Seven Sisters colleges and they would be studying architecture and French language in Paris," said Richard M. Krasno, president of the institute.
"But today more of them tend to be male, they are less likely to be affluent, they may be interested in business or industry and there's a slight shift away from Europe as their destination."
One conspicuous sign of the growth of international studies is the number of study-abroad programs now being offered.
Ranging from a business and economics course at the university of Hungary in Pecs to another concentrating on language and culture at the leading university in Hanoi, Vietnam, these programs have virtually doubled over the last decade, from 1,857 to 3,701.
Students are eagerly responding.
At an elite institution like Harvard University, 51 percent of the undergraduates participate in at least one work or study program abroad.
At Kalamazoo College, a small, selective liberal arts school in Kalamazoo, Mich., 85 percent of the students study overseas thanks to a private gift of more than $5 million that subsidizes travel and on-site living expenses.
A few American colleges and universities have not been satisfied with merely offering study-abroad programs but have adopted globalism as a fundamental objective for the entire institution.
Speaking for N.Y.U., Mr.
Oliva recently declared: "We plan to enter the next century as the quintessential global university. We will extend to every undergraduate the opportunity to study abroad as part of his or her N.Y.U. education, and we will become a center for global faculty inquiry and a center for worldwide conferences of university leaders."
Robert A. Scott, president of Ramapo College in New Jersey, said his institution aspired to be "a global college" for more practical reasons.
"We believe," he said, "that our graduates likely will either supervise or be supervised by someone of another race, ethnicity or nationality, and that their careers and lives as citizens will be affected by international and intercultural life."
Several American colleges and universities have established campuses in foreign countries so that students may spend extended periods abroad and earn credits readily accepted by employers and graduate schools in the United States.
Webster University in St.
Louis operates wholly owned branches in Geneva, London, Vienna and the Dutch city of Leiden.
Emerson College, a small liberal arts school in Boston, has established a branch in Maastricht, the Netherlands, where students study subjects such as global marketing, communications and advertising.
Some of these branches fare better than others; Japan, for example, has proved especially tricky for American institutions to penetrate.
Of the more than 20 American branches established in Japan in recent years, at least 9 have failed, most recently a Texas A &amp; M branch in Koriyama.
All are said to have been victims of the economic recession in Japan and the unexpected difficulty of recruiting Japanese students.
But if it has not always been easy to attract foreign students to American compuses overseas, foreign students have for years flocked to attend colleges and universities in the United States.
In fact, according to the Department of Commerce, the 438,000 foreign students currently resident in the United States, while only a small fraction of the total enrollment of 14.5 million, have fed a major and all-but-hidden export industry bringing some $6 billion annual to the American economy.
The cohort of foreign students has kept growing steadily at the rate of about 4.5 percent a year for the past two decades.
Quite often, these students become leaders in their societies at home.
Chang-Lin Tien, chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley, said he recently attended a state reception in Seoul, South Korea, at which no fewer than seven Cabinet ministers introduced themselves to him as Berkeley graduates.
"That's typical," Chancellor Tien remarked.
"I get the same greetings in Indonesia and Singapore."
The reasons for all of this activity are many.
The first and most important is the rise of the global economy.
Alert, job-oriented students have come to realize that as the world shrinks, many of the best jobs are going to go to college graduates who possess international skills.
For example, after graduating from Wellesley College in 1987, Cynthia Jeffers taught English for two years in Japan under a program run by the Ministry of Education.
She then returned to the United States, entered the Harvard Business School and upon her graduation last June landed a job as an associate in the corporate finance department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, one of the major brokerage firms on Wall Street.
Her experience in Japan, she said, greatly increased her prospects in the job market.
Another stimulus for globalization is that most financial aid for students has recently become "portable," as college officials like to say.
In the past, vaguely worded Federal statutes authorizing financial aid for college students -- Pell grants, Stafford loans and the like -- made many student advisers hesitant to recommend the use of these grants overseas.
Stephen Cooper, the director of academic programs abroad at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, said that he and a group of associates successfully lobbied Congress to make every form of Federal aid for students applicable for study overseas.
The new explicit language appears in the Higher Education Act of 1992.
"Judging from the number of inquiries I've received from around the country, this is having a big impact," said Professor Cooper.
Still another spur is the development and prevalence of new communications technology that allows educators to leap oceans and cross borders with impunity.
B.
Joseph White, dean of the University of Michigan Business School and a pioneer in the field educators now call "distance learning," has taken the new technology a step further.
Last year Dean White set up a program sponsored by Cathay Pacific, the national airline of Hong Kong, that employs interactive television to link M.B.A. candidates in Hong Kong with professors at Ann Arbor.
"It's actually a complex teaching system because we don't believe we can provide the quality we want with interactive TV alone," said Dean White.
"Consequently, we send our faculty to Hong Kong and bring their students here for face-to-face meetings."
"It's the future," he continued.
"Our pilot project for Cathay Pacific carries with it a vast productivity potential."
Another reason for the growth of interest in globalization is that travel abroad, like hit shows on Broadway, has good word of mouth.
"It's a cliche, but over and over you hear students saying 'It changed my life!' " said Dr.
Krasno.
It is a point confirmed by Corbin Smith, the director of Stanford University's Overseas Study Office.
"When we surveyed the senior class here over the last few years," Mr.
Smith said, "asking what was the most meaningful experience during their undergraduate years, more than 87 percent of those who participated in a Stanford study-abroad program gave that the highest rating."
Not everyone is so enthusiastic.
Roger Kimball, the neoconservative author of "Tenured Radicals," which takes a skeptical look at academia, observes that colleges are "making out like bandits" by collecting full tuition from students and "placing them at a fraction of that cost at overseas institutions."
It is true that the ranks of foreign students in the United States have been swollen not only by the quality of colleges here but also by sharp-eyed admissions officials who have successfully recruited well-heeled foreign students when they were unable to fill their campuses with enough American students able to pay the ever-rising tuition costs.
In fact, unregulated overseas recruitment proved so easy -- and profitable -- that a few years ago unscrupulous hucksters began to recruit foreign students for small community colleges in the United States with misleading promises that after a year or two the student could transfer into Harvard or M.I.T.
Today, some professional organizations have adopted generally effective guidelines and codes of ethics to substantially reduce such misrepresentations.
And some critics, like Mr. Kimball, say there is a great
Continued on Page 31  Continued from Page 26  deal of wishful thinking in the notion that "a semester abroad is going to make one into an internationalist."
Holly M. Carter, dean of the office of educational opportunity programs at Northeastern University, argues that the belief that today's college students are more culturally aware than their predecessors is a comforting myth that ignores "the increase in hate crimes, blatant bigotry and racism on the campuses."
But educational leaders like Mr.
Oliva of N.Y.U. argue that a global perspective is vital to the international community.
"There are at least three factors driving the globalization of education today," he said.
"The first is purely serendipitous: We're on the cusp of a new wave of immigration." (About a million immigrants have come to New York over the past decade, many of whom have attended N.Y.U.)
"Second," he continued, "people realize that the more different environments you move into, the more you learn. Conversely, the more you study with people just like yourself, the less you learn.
"I realize in my own life that I never learned more than when I was overseas for a year and a half. Everything became very vivid. There was no moment when I could let my mind relax. And gradually, I discovered that I could master change."
"And third," Mr.
Oliva said, "the demise of the Soviet Union has made Americans more international than ever. It made us realize that the Soviet Union had been a major force in policing ethnic rivalries. The world got capped under big cloaks. We used to think of the division between Northern and Southern Ireland, and what's happening in Yemen, as anomalies. Now we see them as the rule.
"In the future," he continued, "we probably face 30 to 40 years of instability and border wars like the 19th century, but with one frightening difference -- small nations possessing immensely destructive weapons. So our job in international education is to help provide a global environment in which these ethnic disputes can be handled on the basis of intellectual discourse and debate, not war."
John Markham, director of the University of California's Education Abroad Program, says, "The question I like to ask is: Should the University of California have a foreign policy?"
Most educators acknowledge that the vast majority of American faculty and students are still relatively insular, but they are optimistic that economic forces will prevail.
"The sea change will occur," Dr.
Krasno said, "when the global economy drives corporate leaders to say they want to hire people with foreign language skills and knowledge of foreign cultures, and that all things being equal they will hire them first. That's when the rush will begin."


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  RAINY LAKE  By Mary Francois Rockcastle. Graywolf, $22.50.


Changes at Housing Court Have Benefited Tenants
To the Editor:
With regard to the Sept. 25 article, "In Housing Court: Not a Clue": As lawyers who have been representing both landlords and tenants for a decade, we feel the article fails to reflect many changes in the courts that have favored tenants.


Stay of Execution for a Dazzling Airline Terminal
PLANES SHOULD STREAK IN drill formation to salute the New York City Council for voting late last month to uphold the landmark designation of the T.W.A. terminal at Kennedy Airport.
And T.W.A. also deserves an aerial loop-the-loop.
While the airline contested the designation of parts of Eero Saarinen's 1962 building, described by Robert A. M. Stern as the "Grand Central of the jet age," it had good reason for doing so.
In addition to sharing J.F.K.'s general state of dilapidation, the T.W.A. terminal is in dire need of design modifications.
Airport security regulations and increased air traffic have placed demands on the building unforeseen 30 years ago.
Happily, these changes will now be supervised by a preservation architect sensitive to Saarinen's design.
The Grand Central comparison is probably stretching it.
While T.W.A. is a powerful piece of expressionistic sculpture, echoing Erich Mendelssohn's dynamic designs of the 1920's, it lacks Grand Central's urban prominence and complexity.
Wallace K. Harrison's main terminal for La Guardia remains the most architecturally distinguished airport building in New York, not least because of the skill with which Harrison knitted the terminal into the context of urban transportation.
With its raised roof canopy tilted toward the sky above the terminal's concave facade, the design deftly merges the highway's horizontal curve with an airplane's upward angle of takeoff.


Perot Backs Golisano as a Shaker-Up in His Own Image
There was an unmistakable pride of authorship in Ross Perot's eyes yesterday as he stood next to B. Thomas Golisano and backed the businessman's independent bid to become governor of New York.
Mr.
Perot may have met Mr.
Golisano only once before, but he clearly discerned a candidate very much in his own image.
"Tom has lived the American dream, and he is determined to pass it on," Mr.
Perot said, using phrases almost identical to the ones he used to describe himself two years ago.
"He's putting his time, his money and his reputation on the line for the people of New York State and the United States."


Laura Blodgett, W. T. Comfort 3d
Laura Landon Blodgett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Noyes Blodgett of New York, was married yesterday to William Twyman Comfort 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Comfort Jr. of Locust Valley, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Comfort, 28, graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She is the researcher and production associate at "Adam Smith's Money World," a business program shown on PBS television stations.
Her father is the chairman of TBA Resources, a management consulting company in New York.
Her mother, Anne Blagden Blodgett, is an artist.


B. J. Duberstein, David A. Messer
Barbara Julie Duberstein, a daughter of Eleanor O'Connor of Westport, Conn., and Col.
Alvin Duberstein of Apalachin, N.Y., was married last evening to David Alexander Messer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred A. Messer of Atlanta.
Rabbi Pinchas Kasnett officiated at the Explorers Club in New York.
The bride, who is 29 and is keeping her name, is also a stepdaughter of Charles O'Connor.
She graduated from Hampshire College and received a master's degree in social work from Yeshiva University.
She was until recently a fund-raiser at the UJA-Federation in New York.
Her father retired as a United States Army dentist.


Self-Appointed Painter Touches Up the Town
Scruffy street furniture, beware!
Alice Parsekian and her trusty paintbrush are out to get you.
She is a civic-minded handywoman who helps tend a community garden near her apartment on West 34th Street.
Her latest project: painting mailboxes and hydrants along 20 blocks of Ninth Avenue and nearby.
The Post Office supplied blue and olive drab paint, she said.
She did not exactly get permission to do the hydrants (in regulation black paint with aluminum on the top, "like a Hershey's kiss").
She said, "It makes the whole street look different." Reactions vary.
"Some people are very appreciative, and others want to know, 'Do they know you're doing that?' " B.L.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Oct. 2, about Paris, gave an incomplete range of ticket prices for the Opera Bastille.
A reader's letter received Oct. 12 pointed out that the tickets are 60 francs to 570 francs, or about $12 to $114 at an exchange rate of 5 francs to the dollar.


Teresa Scott and Frederick Joseph
IF you were walking through Grand Central Terminal in the middle of the afternoon on Oct. 29, you might have seen a bride on the east balcony, looking like a ghost appearing a few days early for Halloween.
It was actually Teresa Scott, 28, a clerk for Judge Sterling Johnson of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
She was on the lookout for guests arriving for her train-station marriage to Frederick Joseph, also 28, an M.B.A. student at Columbia University.


Brazil's Army Joins Battle In Lawless Rio
The war on crime in Rio, the nation's most lawless city, has taken on a military cast after President Itamar Franco last week ordered Brazil's army to coordinate police efforts.
The President turned to the army after mounting crime made it clear that the government of Rio de Janeiro State had lost control of most of the city's 400 shantytowns.
In recent weeks, patrols by the state police have been met by drug gangs firing automatic rifles and by slum residents burning buses and building street barricades.


Rental Cars
To the Editor: I made a reservation for a car to be picked up at Hertz on East 90th Street in Manhattan on Friday, Oct. 7.
I was given a reservation number.
Friday night, at the rental station, I was surprised to hear that no reservation could be found under my name.
When I presented the reservation number, a phone call was made, and I was told this was a "bogus number." Hertz personnel refused to try to resolve the issue and said I would not be given a car.
Later that evening, I called Hertz's 800 number and was told that my reservation was active and the number valid.
It was only after Hertz in Oklahoma contacted the 90th Street office that a car was made available.


Oct.2-Nov.5: Post Tailhook; West Point Cadets Face Harassment Inquiry
For all the muddled aftermath of Tailhook, the scandal in which partying Navy men mauled and spun female colleagues down a drunken gauntlet, the Army, at least, seems to have learned a lesson.
Within hours of the first complaints from female cadets at West Point last month that they had been manhandled at a pep rally by members of the football team, a down-the-ranks inquiry was ordered by the Superintendent of the United States Military Academy.
He took care, too, to send an early heads-up to his Pentagon and Congressional overseers.
The superintendent, Lieut.
Gen.
Howard D. Graves, has not spent a career at mastering tactics for naught.
And when the results of the inquiry were on his desk -- five football players accused of groping 18 female cadets as they ran past in a regimental "spirit run" of hundreds of cadets -- the general volunteered disclosure of the story to The New York Times along with his plans for three months disciplinary action against football players found guilty.
"We have studied very hard the lessons learned from Tailhook," General Graves emphasized.
Beyond the obvious lesson that service women are not for abusing, Tailhook demonstrated the price to be paid in ranking careers for those later suspected of engaging in official coverup.


Voters Tire Of Abuse Candidates Spewing Out
In normal times, Virginia is a genteel state of horse farms and tobacco fields and politics in moderation.
But these are not normal times.
In the final days of probably the meanest, ugliest race in a mean and ugly election season, Virginia feels like a country at war with itself, where a line is as clearly drawn as the Appomattox, and it has nothing to do with whether people personally like Senator Charles Robb, a Democrat, or his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North.
By now, most people say they are sick of both.


From the Heart
VOULEZ-VOUS ** (212) 249-1776; 1462 First Avenue, at 76th Street; $$; American Express, Mastercard, Visa, Diner's Club
This welcoming neighborhood spot specializes in heart-warming regional French bistro cooking.
For appetizers try the brandade de morue, the garlicky codfish and potato puree; onion soup gratineed ; leeks vinaigrette or bilibi soup.
Among entrees to look for are cassoulet and the choucroute Alsacienne, the sauerkraut-based dish filled with smoked sausages, pork chops, potatoes, smoked chicken and juniper berries.
Weekly specials include such staples as seafood choucroute and rack of veal. (Review: 1/15/93)


Canada Tightens Immigration, Emphasizing Wealth and Skills
Canada, which takes in more people per capita than any other industrialized country, plans to reduce the number of immigrants it will admit next year, put greater emphasis on their skills and wealth, and shift the financial burden for insuring their welfare from taxpayers to the immigrants themselves.
The cutbacks, announced this week, would limit the number of new immigrants to about 200,000 entries in 1995, down from the 230,000 projected for 1994 and 240,138 who arrived in 1993.
That would represent a retreat from an election pledge by the Liberal Government to set immigration at 1 percent of Canada's population of 29 million.


Kerry L. Kronfeld, S. K. Shelanski
Kerry Lynn Kronfeld, the daughter of Penny Kronfeld and Eric Kronfeld, both of New York, was married last evening to Stephan Keith Shelanski, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris V. Shelanski of Wynnewood, Pa.
Rabbi Norman Kahan performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Shelanski, 28, is the marketing director at the Youth Wellness Foundation in Denver, an organization that advocates improved nutrition and physical fitness for children.
She graduated from New York University, from which she received a master's degree in journalism.
Her father is the president of Polygram Holdings, the entertainment company in New York.
Her mother is a partner in Feldman, Kronfeld &amp; Beatty, a New York law firm.


U.S. Women Make Changes
Two leading American runners, Kim Jones, 36, of Spokane, Wash., and Anne Marie Letko, 25, of Glen Gardner, N.J., said they have learned how to overcome the problems that knocked them out of last year's New York City Marathon, Jones by running with a medicated atomizer to combat her chronic asthma and Letko by controlling her pace and drinking plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Jones, who placed second twice, in 1989 and 1990, and Letko, a strong 10,000-meter specialist who has yet to complete a marathon, are each given a good chance to become the first American woman in 17 years to win the race.


Tamara J. Hicks, David M. Jablons
Tamara Jo Hicks, the daughter of Lucinda Keller and Thomas Hicks, both of San Diego, was married on Friday to Lieut.
Cmdr.
David M. Jablons, the son of J. Mitchell Jablons of New York and the late Josephine Jablons.
The Rev.
Joan Nelson, a minister of the Humanist Society of Friends, officiated at the Palace of Fine Arts in San Francisco.


For Visitors to Tibet: A Different Guide
While many travelers visit Tibet to marvel at its cultural wonders and the magnificent scenery of the Himalayas, others go to see for themselves how Tibetans have fared under the notoriously brutal domination of China, which in 1950 overran the land known as "the Roof of the World."
For visitors in that second category, there is now a map to guide them.
The "On This Spot" map was prepared by the International Campaign for Tibet, a Washington-based human rights group, and it points out the sites in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, that Chinese tour guides tend to ignore: forced labor camps and prisons, military installations, even the scenes of massacres.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Half a century after fleeing the K.G.B., Harald Raudsepp, Estonian emigre patriot and editor, rages on.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The rap producer Sean Combs, a.k.a.
Puff Daddy, is the young man of Bad Boy.
His motto: "Sleep is forbidden." PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 Lose yourself in Forest Park; check out your prospects in Prospect Park.
MOVIE CLOCK 18 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 20 Italian and beyond on the Upper East Side: From pasta at Erminia and Azzurro to Afghan kebabs at Pamir.
SOAPBOX 21 Gay and black: Life on a high wire.
Plus Photographer's Journal and one New Yorker's NoName blues.


Bystander Is Wounded in Card Game Fight
A 47-year-old man on his way to work was shot and critically wounded in Times Square yesterday by a gunman who was trying to hit a three-card monte dealer who he believed had cheated him, the police said.
The gunman, identified as Gregory Rivera, 30, of Queens, chased the dealer a short distance from his makeshift card table at about 9:00 P.M., and fired several shots at him with a .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol, striking the victim once, said Officer Bernadette Rainy, a Police Department spokeswoman.
The man may have stopped on the street to watch the game, she said.


The Changing Face of Furniture Making
IF you are in your 30's or 40's, chances are you grew up with Early American furniture bought at Ethan Allen, a company whose name was synonymous with Colonial home furnishings.
In the 1970's, as interest in Early American furniture waned, Ethan Allen sales slid.
Now in response to the changing tastes of a new generation of consumers, the Danbury-based company has cast aside its traditional image and reinvented itself, marketing four separate lines of furniture and accessories.


At High Noon on Amen Corner, It's Everybody and His Ism
Noontime at the intersection of Court and Montague Streets is the hour of deliverance.
While the thousands of people who work in the municipal and office buildings in Brooklyn Heights file by on their way to buy sandwiches and burritos, they pass proselytizers from various denominations trying to save souls on their lunch hours.


Laura C. Bagnoni, Howard Halligan 3d
Laura C. Bagnoni, a daughter of Rosaria Bagnoni of Brooklyn and the late John S. Bagnoni, was married yesterday to Howard F. Halligan 3d, the son of Audrey Mazzola of Forest Hills, Queens, and Mr.
Halligan Jr. of Delmar, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph Gorman performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.


Sports of the Times; Combating Hand-Checks the World Over
LIKE Winston Churchill, secure in his armored bunker in London during World War II, Rod Thorn hunkered down in a borrowed war room Friday night.
He had better electronics going for him than Churchill ever did.
The Prime Minister mostly had squawking telephones and sputtering radio and clattering wires to tell him what was happening on the different fronts.
Rod Thorn had 12 -- count 'em, 12 -- basketball games flickering on giant television screens.


Penn State Wins, but Not By a Mile
When does a victory become a defeat?
When does the preservation of a perfect season include the possibility that national championship chances have been jeopardized?
When does the losing team celebrate at the end of a game, while the winners, whose lead was never in jeopardy, depart with grim faces?
For Penn State, it all happened on a bizarre, dreary afternoon here today, with a 35-29 victory over Indiana that could create a decisive deficit in the Nittany Lions' quest for a national championship.


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; Last of the Tobacco Queens
In 1948 the first grand marshal of the National Tobacco Festival, in Richmond, was Frank Sinatra.
In Moultrie, Ga., where tobacco festivals were held until the late 1950's, parade queens wore bathing suits covered with tobacco leaves.
But tobacco companies today, aware of their image as merchants of death, want little to do with festivals.
So while small-town festivals celebrating apples, sorghum syrup, chitlins and even kudzu have proliferated, tobacco, as a festival theme, has become about as popular as asbestos.
The National Tobacco Festival was killed in 1984 by its sponsor, the National Tobacco Council, as part of an effort to avoid public attention.
When Richmond citizens wanted to revive the festival, "they didn't want us to use anything with the name tobacco in it," says Dick McClure, an organizer of the festival's successor, the Southern States Autumn Harvest Grand Illuminated Parade.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Reaches Final  A streaking Andre Agassi breezed to a 6-4, 6-4 victory over the two-time French Open champion Sergi Bruguera yesterday in the semifinals of the $2.25 million Paris Open and will meet Marc Rosset in the final.
Rosset rebounded from a disastrous start to defeat Michael Chang by 6-7 (4-7), 6-3, 6-4 in the opening semifinal.


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; Exhausted Women
The Burned Out Businesswomen's Association draws its membership from working women whose common bond is exhaustion.
The group was organized in the Kansas City area by Marcia Hines, a mother and full-time executive who found herself "just really, really tired all the time."
To gain entrance to an association brunch you must have that burned-out look.
Fresh and perky women are not admitted.
You must also leave behind a dirty house for someone else to clean.
And wearers of panty hose will be prosecuted.


Hilary L. Grant, Christopher Byrne
Hilary Lowther Grant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Grant of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Thomas Byrne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Byrne Jr. of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Judith T. Baumer performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Grant-Byrne is the merchandising and creative services manager at Elektra Entertainment, a recording division of the Warner Music Group in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is a vice president and the sales director at WEA Manufacturing, the tape and disk unit of Warner Music.


New Path to Peace in Angola: Clamp Rebels and Hold Tight
Mutilated by one of the world's oldest and ugliest wars, jilted by false peace, Angola is not a land for optimists.
This lush and wretched town in the central highlands, for example, might well scoff at the treaty announced on the radio last Monday, when the Government and the rebels of Jonas Savimbi's Unita movement promised to end their ruinous 19-year conflict.


Work on Columbus Ave. to Slow
For Stewart Schneider, who owns a supermarket and a hardware store on Columbus Avenue between 82d and 83d Streets, the Columbus Avenue reconstruction project has meant a 10 to 15 percent drop in business and store shelves that are understocked because delivery trucks cannot park nearby.
"I'm getting calls from real-estate brokers in my area asking if I want to sell, because they know the situation I'm in," Mr.
Schneider said.


Gun Battle at Social Club Leaves Two Dead
Two men were shot dead and six people were injured, one of them critically, yesterday morning during a gun battle at an unlicensed Queens social club, the police said.
They described the beginning of the fight as one of those common encounters on a dance floor where tipsy dancers occasionally bump into each other.


An Unfashionable Woman
UNDER MY SKIN Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949.
By Doris Lessing.
Illustrated. 419 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Interning For Pleasure And Profit
WHO would want a job that may offer no pay, will last only a few weeks and more than likely mean a lot of drudge work?
College students, of course, who clamor for the chance to land an internship.
Students know that working as an intern can provide contacts and all-important experience in their chosen fields.
And last year, 26 percent of graduates hired by companies had worked as interns, compared with 9 percent the year before.


The Campaigner in Chief Alternately Defends His Record and Looks Ahead
"Forward!" President Clinton has exhorted all week, settling on a slogan for an election in which he contends that voters face a fundamental choice.
It is Democrats who are looking to the future, he says, while Republicans are bent on throwing the nation into reverse.
But in these final campaign days of rallies and relentless interviews, Mr.
Clinton has collided time and again with the view that it is his Presidency that has run off the rails.
His return to the political trail this week, 21 months into his term, has underscored the troubles he faces in campaigning as an incumbent.


Lost in Woods? It's Part of Game
THINK you could find your way around a forest with just a compass and a map?
Beyond that, would you want to?
Well, lots of other people do -- in the form of a sport called orienteering, which has been popular for years in Scandinavian countries and is making significant inroads, so to speak, among outdoorsy, granola-crunching Americans.
But it has yet to take much of a hold in the New York area.


Oct.2-Nov.5; Writer Wins a Bittersweet Verdict
As the jury filed into Judge Eugene F. Lynch's courtroom in San Francisco last week, Janet Malcolm sat quietly.
Her husband wrapped his arm reassuringly around her shoulders, which for the past decade have borne the weight of a $7 million libel suit brought by Jeffrey M. Masson, a Bay Area psychoanalyst she once profiled in The New Yorker.
But as the court clerk read the verdict, the pressure on those shoulders lifted.
The jury found that in her pair of 1983 articles on Mr.
Masson's rise and fall at the Sigmund Freud Archive in London, Ms.
Malcolm had falsely attributed two of five disputed quotations to Mr.
Masson, and that one of those was defamatory.
But she had not acted either willfully or recklessly, the jury concluded, meaning that Mr.
Masson had not been libeled.


Gasoline Testing Shows Compliance
MOTORISTS in the county can be reasonably confident that they are getting what they pay for at the gas pump, because of a statewide gasoline-testing program that began in 1991.
From September to December 1991, 8 percent of gasoline samples taken in the county -- 34 of 435 -- failed to deliver the octane level advertised by the stations.
Through Oct. 20 of this year, less than 1 percent of samples taken -- 4 out of 438 -- failed.
To date, the program has taken 2,277 gas samples over three years, with 58, or 2.55 percent, failing to live up to their labeling.


Anne L. Kellogg And John J. Carr
Anne Lyster Kellogg, the daughter of Margaret and Gordon S. Kellogg of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church to John Joseph Carr, a son of Agnes and Thomas W. Carr, also of Port Washington.
The Rev.
Kurt Von Roeschlaub, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, and Msgr.
James Murray, a cousin of the bridegroom's father, took part in it.
The bride, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Quinnipiac College and is an editorial supervisor at Klemtner Advertising in New York.
Her father retired as a systems analyst in White Plains for the International Business Machines Corporation.
Her mother, also retired, was an administrative assistant at St.
Stephen's.


Don't Stop the Party
Fashion week events bring out celebrities and celebrity watchers.


Jill A. Thau, James D. Miller
Jill Allison Thau, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Thau of East Hills, L.I., was married last Sunday to James Drew Miller, a son of Barbara Miller of Old Brookville, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski performed the ceremony at North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.
The bride is the manager of creative services at the Van Eck Securities Corporation, a mutual fund investment company in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.


Lead Poisoning, the Classless Stalker
YVONNE CROOKS remembers how her youngest son, 2-year-old Karon, learned to pull himself up to the living room window and peer out at the world.
If the window was ajar, the curly-haired toddler with dark brown eyes nudged it open even farther and ran a yellow toy car back and forth along the sill.
Especially when he was teething, the boy chewed on the sill, and often he put the car to his mouth.
Blood tests, taken last spring during a routine physical checkup at the local public health clinic, showed that Karon had dangerously elevated levels of lead in his body.
That was about the time that Mrs.
Crooks and her husband, Cosmo, an auto mechanic, noticed changing behavior in their son.


Senate Race Makes Virginians Militant
In the final days of probably the meanest, ugliest race in a mean and ugly election season, Virginia feels like a country at war with itself, and it has nothing to do with whether people personally like Senator Charles Robb, or his challenger, Oliver L. North.
By now, most people say, they are sick of both.


The Museums of Mom and Dad
FAMILY By Ian Frazier. Illustrated. 386 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.


Williams Rolls Over Wesleyan
Quarterback Mike Bajakian threw for three scores and ran for two more today as Williams (7-0) knocked off its Little Three rival Wesleyan (2-5), 45-15.
The victory extended the Ephs' winning streak to 13 games, dating to last season.
It was the 15th straight Little Three victory in a row for Coach Dick Parley, who will try to win his eighth title next week at Amherst.


Gretchen J. Meyer, Stephen J. Russell
Gretchen Joan Meyer, a daughter of Wally and Werner Meyer of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Stephen John Russell, a son of Patricia M. Russell of Melbourne, Australia, and the late Keith L. Russell.
Msgr.
J.
Peter Cullen officiated at St.
Aloysius Church.


In America; The Doom Mongers
The Republicans in Washington in the spring and summer of 1993 predicted catastrophe.
President Clinton, in office only a few months, was struggling to pass his deficit reduction plan.
Nowhere could he find a Republican, not one -- not in the House and not in the Senate -- who would vote for it.


The Text of Reagan's Letter
Following is the text of the letter written by former President Ronald Reagan announcing that he has Alzheimer's disease:
My Fellow Americans,


Beth Grossman, Michael Fredman
Dr.
Beth Grossman, a clinical and consulting psychologist in New York, and Dr.
Michael Lawrence Fredman, a professor of computer science at Rutgers University at New Brunswick, were married last Sunday.
Rabbi Niles Goldstein officiated at the American Federation of Arts building in New York.
The bride graduated cum laude from Goucher College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her Ph.D. in clinical psychology from the New School for Social Research.
She is the daughter of Evelyn Grossman of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Dr.
Mordecai Grossman.
Her mother, a statistician, retired as the Head of Human Nutrition and Home Economics at the United States Department of Agriculture in Washington.
Her father was a professor of philosophy and education at City College.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN In a Fury of Campaigning, Candidates Pursue Last-Minute Votes; Sending Signals to Voters
Endorsing B. Thomas Golisano in the governor's race, Ross Perot said support for the independent would be "a tangible signal to Albany and Washington." He also campaigned with Senator Frank R. Lautenberg in New Jersey.
Page 52. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times)


Social Security: The Issue They Chose To Ignore
PESSIMISM may be this year's most important public attitude.
And that will be true whether or not it leads voters to punish the Democrats.
The belief that the future is going to be worse than the present has historically been a negative for the stock market, and one market indicator, based on the Conference Board's consumer confidence index, is close to giving its first sell signal since shortly before the 1987 crash.


HOW MUCH IS HIS FAULT?
When politicians get in trouble, they frequently blame "cynicism" for the voters' loss of faith in them.
On the contrary, we aren't cynical enough.
We remain an immature nation, with a correspondingly naive political culture, one in which too many unrealistic hopes are pinned on self-serving office seekers.
If we were able to see through the promises, we'd spare ourselves a lot of unhappiness.
We'd also be less inclined to tell pollsters how disappointed we are in whomever it is we elected and so would more likely get what we really want (like a good health care bill).
BARRY EDELSON Baldwin, L.I.


Beyond The Calisthenics
To the Editor:
How disappointing that so many of the commentators Guy Garcia cites in his article on sex in the movies  [ "Women = Coy Banter, Men = Nude Blondes," Oct. 23 ]  reiterate such hackneyed cliches and reinforce such hoary stereotypes about women and men!


STEVE GUNDERSON
Burr tells us that Steve Gunderson is gay and has been in the same relationship for 11 years.
We see a photo of Gunderson, with his male partner, and a formal portrait of him wearing a wedding band (or facsimile thereof).
In short, you make him look like someone gays should be delighted to have in Congress.
Then you tell us that Gunderson is not good enough to satisfy some gay activists, without mentioning that he refuses to sign as a sponsor either of the two gay civil rights bills before Congress.
One of the bills may be too liberal for a political moderate.
The other definitely is not.


Window and Door Open to Interpretation
To passers-by, Edwin Peters's ground-floor apartment at 307 West 111th Street stands out for what it has in the windows.
There are pictures of former Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and former President John F. Kennedy; religious statues; large flowerpots filled with plastic plants; African figurines and a red teakettle.
But to neighbors in the city-owned building, the apartment is also well-known for its stream of loud, late-night visitors.
They have easy access, too, since his door is often ajar, and the building is missing both front doors.


Candlelight Isn't Enough
To the Editor:
What is glaring to me in Guy Garcia's article is the complete lack of acknowledgment on the part of anyone that American women have not been allowed to see in mainstream American culture their own object of heterosexual desire: the male body.


Audrey L. Sorgen and Scott D. Sanders
Audrey Lynn Sorgen, a daughter of Howard and Roberta Sorgen of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Scott David Sanders, the son of Michael and Roberta Sanders of West Bloomfield, Mich.
Rabbi Gabriel Maza officiated at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Sanders, 25, is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in health psychology at Yeshiva University.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a senior vice president and the managing director of global systems and technology at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Milan
Richard Wagner's somber "Die Walkure," which will open the 1994-95 season of the Teatro alla Scala on Dec. 7, may not be quite in tune with the vivacious melody of Milan life, but no matter.
Whatever the program, the annual opening of Italy's premier opera house on the feast of St.
Ambrose, the heavenly patron of this dynamic and creative metropolis, is always a civic apotheosis.
It draws top national and local officials, politicians and some of the richest and most stylish members of Milan society, while the music aficionados are mostly in the less expensive galleries.


Political Turmoil Distracts Poland as NATO Decisions Loom
Poland's increasingly chaotic political situation is more confused than ever these days.
Embarrassing the Government at an important juncture in its foreign policy, Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski announced last week that he would resign because his reputation had been impugned by a fellow Cabinet member.


Putting Dave Brown Under a Microscope
George Henshaw, the Giants' offensive coordinator, has become something of a surrogate father to quarterback Dave Brown.
He has taught him to be poised and to be strong when things don't go right.
As times have turned tough for Brown and the 3-5 Giants, Henshaw has been there to offer help.
He knows Brown well.
But there are people who may know Brown better.
They are the players Brown competes against.
The linebackers who sit in darkened rooms watching more film than Siskel and Ebert.
The defensive backs who look to see what Brown does in certain formations, who want to know what he has for breakfast, how fast he is and whether he likes the Knicks or the Nets.


On Sunday; Feud, Betrayal, Italian Players: Electoral Verdi
THIRTY years ago, when he first politicked in Italian on the avenues of Bensonhurst as a "new wave" postwar Sicilian immigrant, Arnaldo A. Ferraro found his older predecessors complacent in their storefront social clubs and wary of the strange treacheries of mainstream New York politics.
So it is with considerable joy that even with his own State Senate candidacy in some doubt this year, Mr.
Ferraro is counting the engrossing gubernatorial campaign now before us as a veritable crescendo of progress in the Italian-American community's demonstration of its heft in American politics.
"And I don't think Giuliani really carries that much clout in crossing over to Cuomo," says Mr.
Ferraro, getting right to what is the fun part of the campaign for most of us, the aggressive Republican Mayor's shock endorsement of the proud Democratic Governor, and the dilemma this might pose for the many Italian-American Republicans in the Brooklyn precincts of Mr.
Ferraro and beyond.
"Don't forget, for anyone seeking an ethnic factor, well, there's also a D'Amato and a Molinari endorsing Pataki. And I do remind such voters -- even as I disagree with the idea of ethnic voting -- that Pataki is half-Italian."


THE ANGER: EVER DEEPER
It has become a cliche of TV ads for politicians to be pictured in color photographs, smiling, while their opponents are shown in harsh black and white.
In your issue on politics, the article about Kathleen Brown, a Democrat, is accompanied by color photographs, as are the articles about the gay Republican Congressman, Steve Gunderson, and the Democrat Congressman, Dan Rostenkowski.


Saint


Gina Ravosa, Christopher Miller
Gina Ravosa, the marketing representative for the American Red Cross in Greater New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Alan Miller, a recruiter for the Dale Cunningham Agency, employment recruiters in New York.
The Rev.
Jack Traugott performed the Lutheran ceremony at the Norwich Inn in Norwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Miller, 31, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Claire and Carmino Ravosa of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Her father is the composer-in-residence at the Dalton School in New York and a songwriter for the PBS program "Shining Time Station."


2 Killed as Biplane Dives Into Great South Bay
A father and his son died today when their 1940 Stearman biplane nose-dived into the Great South Bay as the two men were performing aerial stunts, the Suffolk County police said.
They said Neale Maccarn, 64, and his son Kenneth, 28, were doing acrobatics -- turns, rollovers and loops -- in their World War II-vintage open-cockpit plane at about 2 P.M. when it plummeted into the water a quarter mile from the town of Sayville.


An 'America-First' Challenger Is Resonating, in English Only
The way Frank Borzellieri sees it, he is the true believer in conservatism.
He accuses Anthony Seminerio -- a staunch supporter of the death penalty who has voted against an expansion of gay rights and who once introduced legislation proposing that Queens secede from New York City -- of being soft.
Mr.
Borzellieri, the Republican challenger for the State Assembly seat in the borough's 38th district, does not compromise on the themes that make up his campaign: eliminating foreign languages from government-issued documents and banning from public schools books he considered anti-American, like biographies of Martin Luther King Jr.


HOW MUCH IS HIS FAULT?
As a population mostly of followers who are, as Thomas E. Cronin tactfully persuades us, lousy at it, let us consider what effective followers might look like ("How Much Is His Fault?" Oct. 16).
We might agree that they would have convictions built upon critical reasoning and authentic emotions; they would take responsibility for these convictions, articulate and defend them and be willing to change them.
They would be concerned about the diversity of others.
They would not be blindly compliant but discerning and selective.
They would appreciate mastery in others and would try to develop their own form of mastery.


Commercial Property/Coffee Bars; Landlords Savor the Smell of Coffee Bars
THERE'S a building on Madison Avenue in the 40's whose owners tell a decidedly non-90's tale.
A few months ago they put a 2,100-square-foot space on the market for an annual rent of $60 a foot, figuring that this would be a starting point for negotiations.
That it was.
A couple of bids trickled in at $60.
Then a coffee house, fearing that other tenants might grab the space, offered $65.
A rival coffee house promptly offered $70.
The rival will get the space -- provided a third coffee house does not bid even more.


The Young Man of Bad Boy
FOR Sean Combs, a. k. a.
Puff Daddy, it was a long, long weekend.
But not atypical.
The president of Bad Boy Entertainment moves around a lot.
There he was on Friday night at Nell's restaurant on West 14th Street, on a video shoot for the Notorious B.I.G., one of his rap artists.
Then it was off to Philadelphia for a party.
On Saturday, he was back at a posh house in Westbury, L.I., to work on another B.I.G. video.
In the wee hours of Sunday morning, it was finally finished.
"I'll sleep for like an hour," he said.
Up again, he was off to produce another video; this time for the singer Mary J. Blige, back in Manhattan at 145th Street and Riverside Drive.
"Our motto is, sleep is forbidden -- when most are sleeping, we are working," says Mr.
Combs, trotting out his energy and youth to explain why he is a rising young producer.


The Prime Purpose Of Making a Budget
To the Editor:
Although your "Keeping Budgets Honest" on Oct. 16 was certainly a step in the right direction, it did not get to the true heart of the budget process.
The primary purpose of the budget process is not to accommodate outsiders by providing for adequate cash reserves, but rather to help shareholders keep their costs from escalating.


Southern Discomfort
MISSISSIPPI HISTORY Stories.
By Steve Yarbrough. 158 pp.
Columbia: University of Missouri Press.
Paper, $14.95.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: David J. Carol; Adding More (and Faster) Rail Service
AMTRAK'S vice president for high-speed rail, David J. Carol, is charged with overseeing a $3 billion, 16-year improvement project for the 231-mile stretch of railroad that makes up the Northeast corridor between Boston and Washington, D.C.
The Northeast corridor is one of the busiest in the Amtrak system, with 1,150 trains a day carrying 220 million passengers a year.


The World: Slapstick at the C.I.A.; Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Tosspot
IF it weren't so tragic, the 116-page Senate report published last week, "An Assessment of the Aldrich H. Ames Espionage Case and Its Implications for U.S. Intelligence," would have potential as a new art form: the absurdist slapstick spy thriller.
Act I: Rome, 1986 to 1989.
The story thus far: Rick Ames, a career Central Intelligence Agency officer, has sold the Soviets the keys to the C.I.A.'s kingdom, turning over the inside dope on all its important operations aimed at Moscow and the names of all the C.I.A.'s important Soviet agents.
At least 10 of the agents are executed.


Wall Street; Muriel Siebert's Declaration of War
NO one has ever accused Muriel Siebert, president of the discount brokerage firm that bears her name, of being overly subtle.
The first female member of the New York Stock Exchange, it was she who lobbied in 1987 to get a ladies' room installed on the seventh floor of the Big Board -- site of the luncheon club she regularly frequented.
Her ploy back then: to warn the exchange's chairman that if she didn't see a ladies' room on the floor by her 20th anniversary as a member in December 1987, she would arrange for a Port-o-San to be delivered to the board of directors.


The Guests Were Divine, Nostalgic, Off the Rails
DOWNTOWN -- "Fashion Week is Seventh Avenue's High Holidays," said Fern Mallis, the executive director of the Council of Fashion Designers of America.
Like a very well-dressed president of a local Hadassah chapter, she was looking down on Nov. 2 at a congregation of fashion worshipers from what once was the bimah, or platform, of a former synagogue on the Lower East Side.
A splashy party for the British design label Ghost was in progress.
Behind her, bartenders were serving vodka martinis from an alcove that once held the Torah scrolls of the synagogue (which was built in 1850 and has been a nonprofit gallery and concert hall called the Angel Orensanz Foundation since 1987).


A Romanian Director Tells A Tale of Ethnic Madness
Lucian Pintilie couldn't simply bask in the glow of the reception for his film "An Unforgettable Summer" at the Telluride Film Festival, in Colorado, in September.
The Romanian film maker was incredulous that he couldn't smoke indoors.
For someone who had just made a film about tolerance and freedom -- or the lack thereof -- no-smoking policies were a reason to grumble.
Then again the 61-year-old Mr.
Pintilie (pronounced pin-teel-YEE-ay), whose film opens in New York on Friday, has been known as someone who does what he wants.
After becoming one of Romania's leading directors of theater, film and television, in 1972 he was deemed subversive and unemployable by the Communist Government, which suspended his stage production of Gogol's "Inspector General," a satire of governmental bureaucracy.


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
Leslie Lafayette missed perhaps the biggest example of the married-with-children bent in our society: the United States military.


Erosion Pact Could Help Other Beaches Around U.S.
AN $80 million pact by the Army Corps of Engineers to restore the beaches of West Hampton Dunes and modify the jetties in Westhampton Beach could set a precedent for similar accords between Washington and other shorelines.
The agreement not only benefits homeowners in West Hampton Dunes who suffered severe damage in the major storm in December 1992, but it will also protect Moriches Bay and low-lying mainland areas, as well as create a two-mile-long public beach in the Hamptons.


Grandparents Day Got Its Start in the 1950's
Grandparents Day existed long before 1961 when, according to your report on Oct. 2  [ "The View From Riverdale" ] , it was conceived by Jacob Reingold, executive vice president of the Hebrew Home for the Aged.
In 1956 my agency was public relations counsel to the New York City Nursing Home Association.
Reading a news report of Grandparents Day being celebrated somewhere in the Midwest, I advised the homes in our association of this opportunity for good community relations and, of course, for some good publicity.


ABOUT BOOKS
New Jersey Murders
IT is not the kind of legacy to boast about, and nowhere near the proportions of the O. J.  Simpson case, but this state can claim some front-page murders far from easy to forget.
"Murdered in Jersey," by Gerald Tomlinson, a collection of true crime stories, cites factors that draw out the sensationalism.
Steamy sex, prominent people, unknown killers, multiple victims, depraved treatment of the deceased, shocking disclosures as the case progresses -- one or all -- move the murder to page 1.
The 60 murders included here took place between 1922 and 1992 and had one or more of those elements.


Perking Up Pasta With Wild Mushrooms
REMEMBER when the only mushrooms were cultivated whitecaps?
Now markets offer wild mushrooms: portobello, shiitake and oyster mushrooms, orange chanterelles and porcini.
Porcini are boletus mushrooms, also known as cepes, Polish mushrooms or Steinpilz.
They are good dried, too, but they need to be soaked in hot water or chicken broth for about half an hour.


Partying With Newt
The voters are angry.
When they think about where the country is headed they feel bad, but not nearly as bad as they are going to feel if they accept Representative Newt Gingrich's invitation to make Tuesday a national day of binge voting.
Mr.
Gingrich is like an enabler at a neighborhood cocktail party.
His message is familiar and seductive: Don't worry about tomorrow.
So what if it gives you a headache?
Let's tie one on!


From Runways to the Real World
The 1990's fashion silhouette appears to have crystallized on the runways and on some of the women attending the spring shows held last week in Bryant Park.
Women with the highest antennas seem to be mirroring what was shown in some of the best New York designer collections.
The look is still only a trickle on the scene (and stores report sales for it have done poorly).
But it is a style that recalls women in the paintings of the artist Reginald Marsh in the 1930's and 40's.
The cut of the satin crepe bias-cut dresses and skirts has the same saucy sensuality.
The hemline has stabilized at the top of the kneecap, and the overall image is one of understated plainness in somber black, navy, ivory, beige and an occasional brown.
It is a look that defines a generation's new sense of low-key style.


No Headline
"This is what it has come to. It's intellectual violence. There's so much hatred it scares me." ALINA GAWLIK, of Falls Church, Va., describing the Senate campaign in her state.  [ 28:1. ]


County's Minutiae Codified
THOSE who live in the county may have mastered the arcana of school district lines, the vagaries of municipal boundaries and lots of the local folklore, but other little-known facts about the region are even more obscure.
How many know, for example, that the cocktail was invented in Elmsford during the Revolutionary War, that New Rochelle was a stop on the Underground Railroad and that the white oak is Westchester's official tree?
The county also has an official song, bird, flower and fish.


72d St. Riders Protest Delay In Repairs
Four years after West Siders were told that the subway station at Broadway and 72d Street would be renovated and expanded, news that the project has been deferred indefinitely for lack of funds has ignited outrage from local residents, who staged a rally on Thursday night to call attention to what they say are the station's dangerous conditions.
While the rally may have provided an emotional lift to the 100 straphangers who attended, transit officials say it is unlikely to restore financing to the project, which was budgeted for $40 million in 1990 but is now estimated to cost up to $200 million.
Because of the new cost projections and municipal budget cuts, the Transit Authority announced last month that renovations to the station at 72d Street and Broadway and five other stations would be deferred.


Kara A. Dolan, William Callahan
Kara Anne Dolan, a daughter of Kathleen and Kenneth T. Dolan of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to William John Callahan, the son of Ann Marie and William L. Callahan of Blauvelt, N.Y.
Thomas Aquinas Dolan, a Roman Catholic deacon who is the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
Agnes.
Mrs.
Callahan, 25, graduated from Manhattan College, as did the bridegroom.
She is a junior account executive at M Booth &amp; Associates, a public relations company in Manhattan.
Her father is a captain in the New York City Fire Department in Manhattan.
Her mother is a legal secretary in Rockville Centre.


The Early Signs Of a New SoHo?
West Chelsea, long dominated by old warehouses, factory buildings and automobile repair garages, has suddenly blossomed into a serious player in the city's art scene.
Several new galleries and dozens of studios have opened in recent months, and more are on the way.
Some people are calling the neighborhood the new SoHo, and it is, in fact, attracting artists fleeing old SoHo's high rents.
A few think it should have a new name: WeChe.


Lynn E. Becker, Samuel M. Haber
Lynn Ellen Becker, a daughter of Anita and Murray Becker of River Vale, N.J., is to be married today to Samuel Myles Haber, a son of Muriel and Dennis Haber of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Louis Frishman is to officiate at the Pearl River Hilton in Pearl River, N.Y.
The bride, 33, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in English education at New York University.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received a master's degree in teaching English from Montclair State University.


Black-White Issue, Gray Area: Redistricting Plan Is Pulled
After an avalanche of protests, an advisory panel appointed by the Board of Education last week scrapped its original proposal to carve out new school districts for Southeast Brooklyn.
But though sighs of relief were heard throughout the area, the board, under court order, will probably have to revisit the unresolved issue in the future: In two districts where blacks make up more than half the combined student population, only 2 of the total of 18 representatives on the school boards are black.


Michelle Powers, John C. Dougherty
Michelle Powers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Powers of Oradell, N.J., was married yesterday to John Caleb Dougherty, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jude P. Dougherty of Potomac, Md.
Msgr.
Robert S. Sokolowski performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Oradell.
Mrs.
Dougherty, 27, is an associate counsel in the Office of the Inspector General at the State Department in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Boston College, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Catholic University of America.
Her father is a vice president and the associate general tax counsel at the ITT Corporation in New York.


Coach's Corner
To the Sports Editor:
As the coach of the current national champion cheerleading squad, I feel compelled to respond to Jane Gottesman's article that demeans all high school cheerleaders.
I am a local representative for the International Cheerleading Association, I've had contact with literally hundreds of squads across the country and I know of no cheering team that gets its attire from Frederick's.


Oh, Yes, About Peter and That Poor Wolf . . .
A Report From the Ethics-in-Music Society CONSIDERABLE PROGRESS HAS been made toward the banning of Haydn's music from public performance.
As the myth of a benign Papa Haydn gives way to an awareness of the composer's personal and professional life, indignation in the music community continues to grow.


Capriati Set for Return
ANKE HUBER has the ranking and the seeding.
Her opponent will bring the fans and media to their first-round meeting.
JENNIFER CAPRIATI will play in her first tournament in 14 months when she takes on sixth-seeded Huber Tuesday or Wednesday night in the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia.
Capriati's agent, BARBARA PERRY, who also is the tournament director, said Capriati is "fit now and ready to go." (AP)


A Voters' Guide
A guide to the candidates in the major races in New Jersey and Connecticut, including the major Congressional contests, appears on page 54.


Danny De Vito: Center of the Universe?
Almost everyone considers Michael Ovitz the most powerful man in Hollywood.
But did his name come up in connection with "Pulp Fiction," a movie that some say transformed movie making?
We think not.
Instead, it can be argued that Danny DeVito is not only the most powerful man in Hollywood but also the center of the universe.
Through this actor-director-producer-beautician, anyone could theoretically get to anyone else.
Producing, through his company Jersey Films, has made Mr.
DeVito's reach all encompassing.
The company's productions run the gamut of subjects (and studios) from "Hoffa" (20th Century Fox) to "Reality Bites" (Universal) to "Pulp Fiction" (Miramax).
Next up: "Get Shorty" (MGM), starring John Travolta and "Feeling Minnesota" (New Line Cinema), starring Keanu Reeves.
Mr.
DeVito will also direct "Matilda," based on the Roald Dahl children's book, for Universal.
Here's how Mr.
DeVito Links up to the universe.
JOSH YOUNG GRAMMY WINNERS
Mr.
DeVito appeared in "Ruthless People" with Bette Midler, opened for Barbra Streisand at a benefit for Bill Clinton and was born in Asbury Park, N.J., the town Bruce Springsteen put on the map.
PEOPLE WITH TELEVISIONS
Nearly everyone remembers Mr.
DeVito from the series "Taxi." "People pat me on the back, and say, 'Hey, how are Rhea and the kids?"' Mr.
DeVito said.
Anyone deprived of "Taxi" has certainly been to "Cheers," where Mr.
DeVito's real-life wife, Rhea Periman, served drinks as Carla.
WORLD LEADERS (INCLUDING MICHAEL OVITZ)
In "Junior," which opens on Nov. 26, an airline flight attendant (played by Judy Ovitz, wife of Michael Ovitz) tries to eject the DeVito character from the First-class cabin.
"Let's face it, Danny knows everyone," says Ivan Reitman, the film's director.
Also co-starring: Emma Thompson and Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Kennedy spouse and head of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports during the Bush Administration.
GENERATION X
For a 50-year-old, Mr.
DeVito has impeccable credentials with 20-somethings.
"Reality Bits," directed by Ben Stiller, 28, and written by Helen Childress, 24, is known as the definitive Gen-X movie.
If not for Mr.
DeVito and his partner, Michael Shamberg, backing this film, the revival of the Knack's hit "My Sharona" might be years away.
ALUMNI OF THE WILFRED ACADEMY OF HAIR AND BEAUTY CULTURE
The Wilfred Academy once had 58 branches in the New York area.
After completing his studies in Asbury Park in 1964, Mr.
DeVito got his beautician's license and practiced at his sister's salon.
Told that all Wilfred outlets are now closed, Mr.
DeVito sheepishly admitted, "I haven't kept up with my alma mater." NEW HOLLYWOOD
Jersey Films has made movies at nearly every studio except its home base, Columbia Pictures, so it shouldn't be surprising if the company gets a film going with the new studio formed by Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg, and David Geffen.
During Mr.
Katzenberg's reign at Walt Disney Studios, Mr.
DeVito starred in three Disney films: "Tin Men," "Ruthless People" and "Renaissance Man." OLD HOLLYWOOD
Mr.
DeVito's first turn on the golf course was with Jack Nicholson, a close friend since they appeared together in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest " (1975).
"I played 18 holes my first time out, and I lost every ball in Jack's bag," Mr.
DeVito said.
"Michael" -- Michael Douglas, a pal since the 70's and a collaborator on four DeVito films -- "is a golf enthusiast too, but I'm not getting out there with him." Mr.
Nicholson's best friend is Warren Beatty.
QUENTIN TARANTINO
Since the critical success of "Pulp Fiction," Quentin Tarantino is a universe unto himself.
Three years ago, Stacey Sher, president of Jersey Films, slipped Mr.
DeVito and Michael Shamberg the script for "Reservoir Dogs," then in production.
Jersey Films bought Mr.
Tarantino's next script, for "Pulp Fiction," sight unseen and was the executive producer of the film, distributed through Miramax.
"The only guidance you need to give a guy that talented is what kind of lenses to use," Mr.
DeVito said.


The Sound of Literature


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BUCKLEY AND ROBARDS
Two distinguished personalities will provide the narrations for performances by two noted musical organizations on Saturday at the Norwalk City Hall concert hall, 125 East Avenue.
William F. Buckley Jr. will add to his accomplishments as a harpsichordist, author, teacher, editor, publisher, political figure, and television personality by narrating the story of "Peter and the Wolf."
The Prokofiev work will be performed by the Norwalk Symphony Orchestra during its first young people's concert of the season on Saturday at 10:30 A.M.
Tickets are priced at $12, $10 for people 65 and older, and $8 for students and children.
Call 866-2455 for reservations or more information.


Last Call for Getting In the Spring Bulbs
WHY do today what can surely be done next week?
This sort of procrastination is typical of gardeners.
Inspired by a few weeks of beautiful mild weather, they postpone those inevitable chores, particularly bulb planting.
But the weeks move along with amazing speed and there are no surer reminders than the early-fading light of fall days and the page-turning of the trusty calendar that winter is on its way.
With it will come frozen soil and snow.
So good gardeners, do be sporting and carry on.
Even a traditional deadline for planting tulips -- Election Day -- is on the horizon.


No Room At the Dorm; Inn Will Do
BEFORE the start of the fall term at New York University, about 200 freshmen were notified that they could not be accommodated in campus housing.
Instead, the university had leased space for them in an off-campus hotel, the South Gate.
When letters explaining the arrangement went out, complaints started coming in, a university official said.
Not even the university's president, L. Jay Oliva, was immune from the onslaught of angry telephone calls of protest.
But the school was in a jam, and the cause was the lack of a "melt."


Voters and Candidates Meet On Information Superhighway
The Internet and other spurs of the information superhighway have emerged as powerful new links between politicians and voters in this election year, adding forums for debate by the candidates, nearly instant voting results and vast pools of background information for local, state and national races.
The idea of electronic democracy has spread to nearly every state along with the rapid expansion of the Internet and a variety of on-line information services and electronic bulletin boards, which are used by more than five million Americans.


A New Species of Couch Potato Takes Root
CHRISTOPHER FUSCO watches his favorite television show from a chrome-legged swivel chair he bought at a yard sale.
The moment a commercial comes on, he whirls around to his I.B.M.-compatible personal computer, dials up an on-line service and types out messages to other fans who are also tuned in to "The X-Files," the Fox network's New Age answer to "The Twilight Zone" or "The Outer Limits."
When the commercial ends, Mr.
Fusco, a 24-year-old molecular biologist who lives in Germantown, Md., logs off and rolls back to the television.


A Multiculturalist Before It Was Fashionable
THE EXHIBITION OF PAINTINGS by Adolph Gottlieb at the Phillips Gallery in Washington charts a subtly provocative course through a decade in American painting that has still kept some of its secrets.
"Pictograph" was Gottlieb's name for these paintings.
There are 69 of them at the Phillips, all dated between 1941 and 1953. (They will be there through Jan. 2 and will travel to the Brooklyn Museum in April.) In every case, a group of individual images or signs is corralled, each in its own rectangular space.
Those spaces vary in size and shape, but the general effect is that of a series of compartments fitted together in a steady, measured, unhurrying way.


Miracle Man
To the Sports Editor:
While the running community may be aware that the late Fred Lebow was born Fischel Leibowitz, it is not common knowledge that his final "marathon" was not the 26.2-mile race he ran with Grete Weitz in New York in 1992 but a half marathon in Israel at the 1993 Maccabiah Games.
The games is an Olympics for Jewish athletes held every four years; in 1993, the games in Israel drew 5,600 participants from 56 countries.


Rise of the Blue Helmets
THE UNITED NATIONS, IRAN, AND IRAQ How Peacemaking Changed.
By Cameron R. Hume. 269 pp.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. $29.95.


'In Defense of Elitism'
To the Editor:
"De mortuis," etc., but happily Roger Kimball is alive to savor the mockery he has earned with his review of the late William A. Henry 3d's "In Defense of Elitism" (Oct. 16).
He approvingly cites the "forthrightness" of Henry's observation, "The unvarnished truth is this: You could eliminate every woman writer, painter and composer from the cave man era to the present moment and not significantly deform the course of Western culture," and numbly but solicitously comments, "It is painful to admit it, I know, but Henry is right."


The Sunny Side of Psychoanalysis
ON FLIRTATION By Adam Phillips. 226 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $19.95.


Math Theory Gains Ground: Girls' Classes Help Them Learn
Solving the math problem seemed simple to one school board member.
If, in fact, girls do poorly in math classes with boys, he reasoned, why not put them in math classes for girls?
Charles L. Vaughn, the board member who is the chief architect and proponent of the classes proposed in Portsmouth, said the issue for young women was their "sense of focus."


Sheila A. Tellier, J. D. Nottebohm Jr.
Sheila Ann Tellier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Tellier of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Johann Dieterich Nottebohm Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nottebohm of Guatemala City.
Msgr.
James F. McCarthy performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Mrs.
Nottebohm, 24, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a trading assistant in the institutional municipal-bond department at Alex.
Brown &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.


PAYING FOR KEEPS
In "Paying for Keeps" (The Big City, Oct. 9), John Tierney seems to have something more like a private club in mind when he proposes that "a company" financed by user fees take over the park.
He states that "the park's new keeper should be free to run it according to users' desires, not the whims of politicians." (Those politicians are, after all, our democratically elected representatives.) Those who can't afford membership -- a cost that would no doubt escalate rapidly -- would be treated as charity cases.


The Bloopie Awards!
TIME ONCE AGAIN for the coveted Bloopie Awards, recognition of Madison Avenue solecisms that sends thrills of Schadenfreude through the ranks of advertising copywriters.
Because the top of this column gets the lowest rating (the audience increases as we approach Prime Space), we begin with the least important award, "For the most egregious abuse of the comma." Push the envelope, please:


Express to Canada
Border crossings between the United States and Canada should get speedier in the next few months thanks to an agreement between the two countries.
The pact expands the use of special express lanes known as Dedicated Commuter Lanes -- already in Blaine, Wash. -- to include Detroit and Point Roberts, Wash.
For a $25 annual fee, motorists who regularly cross the border get a windshield sticker enabling them to use the special lanes.
And in late spring, several remote unstaffed crossings in Maine, Montana, North Dakota, Vermont and Washington will be designated Automated Permit Ports, enabling preregistered commuters to pass through.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Massachusetts  The Last Weekend: Senate Races Where the Battle Has Been Intense; Romney Eclectic In Final Sprint
Mitt Romney, the Republican venture capitalist who wants to replace Senator Edward M. Kennedy, is down in the polls as the election campaign nears the wire.
So he is borrowing a tactic or two from Presidential races of recent and not-so-recent memory.
Taking a page from the Ross Perot scrapbook, Mr.
Romney went on television Friday night with the first broadcast of a new half-hour commercial.
Then, appropriating an old Harry S. Truman trademark, the Romney campaign pulled out of North Station here this afternoon on a whistle-stop train tour.
And Mr.
Romney plans to spend Sunday campaigning through the state by bus, reminiscent of the Clinton-Gore caravans of 1992.


INSIDE
Harsh Light on Guatemala
A hunger strike in Guatemala by an American woman determined to find out the fate of her rebel husband has strained that country's relations with the United States.
Page 3.
Oldest Heavyweight Champ
George Foreman, 45, captured the heavyweight boxing title with a knockout of Michael Moorer.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the fight ended.)


Principles and Politics Collide In Tangled Execution Dispute
When Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo insisted last year that Thomas Grasso serve a 20-year-to-life term for a murder in New York before being executed for another murder in Oklahoma, he said he was defending legal principles: that a killer convicted in two states should serve sentences in the order they were handed down and that no politician should overrule a judge's sentence.
But in the final days of the gubernatorial campaign, State Senator George E. Pataki, who favors the death penalty and says that, if elected, he would try to have Mr.
Grasso returned to Oklahoma to be executed, has focused on the case to highlight Mr.
Cuomo's longstanding opposition to capital punishment -- which the Governor has vetoed in each of the 12 years of his administration.


Religions Are Putting Faith in Environmentalism
Considering that insulation, energy-saving light bulbs and low-flow shower heads are sold along with menorahs and seder plates, the gift shop at Temple Adath Joseph might seem like a one-stop shop for the observant and conservation-minded handyman.
Rabbi Jeffrey Glickman considers all the items to be Judaica, and he will even help install them.
"The concept of the environment is central to Judaism," said Rabbi Glickman, who also talks about ecology at services at the Reform temple in St.
Joseph, Mo.
"God, who could have done any number of things to talk to Elijah, didn't waste. He used the smallest possible means for communication: the still, small voice. We should choose the same."


Work Ended, Trusteeship Council Resists U.N. Ax for Now
The United Nations almost succeeded in eliminating a small part of its bureaucracy this week, but the Charter has allowed it to remain in business even though it has no work to do.
On Tuesday the United States, which had administered the Palau island chain since 1947 at the behest of the United Nations, formally notified the Trusteeship Council that Palau's 16,000 people had officially voted to become a sovereign nation.
Palau is located about 600 miles east of the southern Philippines.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 6, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
25
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
3
7
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A young girl disappears.
4
21
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
6
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
6
2
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
7
19
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
8
7
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
9*
12
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
10*
1
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
11*
10
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) A child's mysterious death.
12*
7
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
13
2
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in 1942.
14
16
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
15
1
THE DEVIL'S OWN, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A 1987 novel about a woman who accepts the advances of a rogue to save nine orphans.
16*
1
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
8
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
6
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
4
43
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
2
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
6*
574
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
10
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
8
2
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9
2
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
10
6
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
11*
5
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A 1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.
12*
1
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
13
90
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14*
24
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
15
26
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
190
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
6
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
4
11
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional character.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Hummable Treasure Hunt
To the Editor:
After reading Andrea Marcovicci's essay "Cabaret Is Where You Go for Tenderness"  [ Oct. 16 ] , I went back to two words that perfectly describe my motivation and specialty as a collector of old melodies: obscure treasures.
Here are just a few of the gleanings from 10 years' work going through untold thousands of 78's and LP's and seeing old musicals at the Dryden Theater of Eastman House here in Rochester.


Angle by Angle
JACK KEROUAC IS PREGNANT Stories.
By Aurelie Sheehan. 188 pp.
Normal, Ill.: Dalkey Archive Press. $19.95.


F.Y.I.
For a Small Turtle Soup?
Q.
Recently I have seen numerous street vendors selling small live turtles.
The turtles are green and have shells perhaps two inches in diameter.
Where are they coming from?
What are they for?
Are they safe?
Are they legal?


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
JULIET'S STORY By William Trevor. 105 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 10 and up)


Diane McNicholas, William Rapavy
Diane Maria McNicholas, a daughter of Margaret and James McNicholas of Dix Hills, L.I., and William G. Rapavy, a son of Judith and William Rapavy of Scotia, N.Y., were married yesterday at the National Arts Club in New York.
Acting Justice Harold Silverman of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29, is a textile designer in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father retired as a systems analyst at the Grumman Corporation in Bethpage, L.I.


Sports of The Times; 'I Knew He Wasn't Going To Get Up'
FOR more than two decades, the enduring image of George Foreman was that of his being toppled onto the canvas by Muhammad Ali's right hand in the eighth round in Kinshasa, Zaire.
Then 25 years old, big George had appeared unbeatable and he had been: 40-0 with 37 knockouts.
But suddenly he had been knocked out.
Suddenly he was an ex-heavyweight champion.
Suddenly he had been the dope in what Ali would later describe as the "rope-a-dope."


Promising Young Riders Set for Maclay
The Maclay National Championship is the ultimate goal for all junior riders with aspirations of a career on the horse show circuit and subsequent Olympic appearances as members of the United States Equestrian Team.
Approximately 120 riders under the age of 18 will compete Sunday in the prestigious Maclay event that will culminate this week's 111th National Horse Show at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Madness Is Message for Thomas, and He's Crazy Like a Fox
Thurman Thomas.
Volatile.
Mischievous.
The primary symbol of the Buffalo Bills' Super Bowl woes.
An attention seeker.
A chip on his shoulder.
Rude.
Thurman Thomas.
A family man, married for seven years to Patty and a loving father to two daughters, Olivia, 5 years old, and Angelica, 3.
A running back who proved National Football League scouts wrong, lasting until the second round and the 40th pick in the 1988 draft and then becoming the only one to lead the league in total yards from scrimmage for four consecutive seasons -- 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992.
A true source of inspiration in Buffalo's four-year domination of the American Conference.
The lightning rod -- and rallying point -- of the Bills' locker room.


Election Day Fantasy
AS YOU ENTER THE voting booth on Tuesday, bear in mind that a fiercely contested seat in the United States Senate now costs between $10 million and $20 million, probably more in California.
The governorship of New York will cost the winner about $10 million and the losers another $10 million.
Electing the entire House of Representatives cost more than $300 million in 1992, and 60 of the winners spent more than $1 million each.
Much of this money can be fairly called a bribe -- it is laboriously gathered from corporations and individuals seeking favors from Government.
No more desirably, some of it comes from the personal fortunes of candidates.
Most of the money goes to buy television commercials that are often misleading and even mendacious.
Charges of drug dealing, tax cheating and criminal coddling crowd the screen, with not even a pretense of proof.
Television, in other words, has simultaneously corrupted and debased the American political system.
That stark sentiment is widely acknowledged even by the compromised members of Congress.
But the search for remedies has been frustrated by their diverse self-interests.
And, alas, too few of the remedies address the central problem: the high cost and low quality of TV ads.
True reform -- a revolution really -- would force the candidates to forgo commercials in return for free television time, in segments long enough to make them debate their issues and qualifications.
Considering the failure of lesser reforms, it's a fantasy worth pursuing.
THE PRESENT SCANDAL HAS two dimensions.
By surrendering enormous influence to organized donors -- the political action committees of bankers or physicians or environmentalists -- the system distorts and blocks legislation in every field.
And by filling the campaign chests of incumbents, the committees enfeeble all challengers except millionaires who can subsidize themselves.
The PAC's don't just pursue their own little loopholes and benefits.
They join with like-minded others to acquire the force of what the former Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire has called "wolf packs."
Moreover, the influence of PAC's extends beyond a single vote.
As the former Senator William Proxmire of Wisconsin has said: "It may come in a speech not delivered . . . in a colleague not influenced. It may come in a calling off of a meeting . . . in a minor change in one paragraph . . . in a witness not invited to testify." PAC's don't always win, but they are investors, betting on a high rate of return.
They favor incumbents over challengers by a ratio of $10 to $1.
As for the millionaires, they were given a fast lane to political power in 1976 when the Supreme Court simultaneously upheld laws that limit contributions to candidates but struck down, on free-speech grounds, limits on spending by candidates.
That has produced high rollers like Representative Michael Huffington, the Republican candidate for the Senate in California, who lent or gave himself at least $17 million this year, and Senator Herb Kohl, the Wisconsin Democrat whose own $3.5 million fund is 10 times the amount his challenger could raise.
The risk of encountering such a rich opponent also means that the moment they win one contest, legislators turn to special interests for help in amassing a huge war chest for the next.
If they thus discourage a challenger, so much the better; they can then become a PAC themselves by giving to other campaigns -- or employ the imaginative strategies by which members continue to divert leftover campaign funds to personal spending: a car or two, restaurant accounts, a "study" trip abroad.
MINDFUL THAT JOURNALists, for some reason, are widely suspected of cynicism, let me turn from sordid reality to the realm of reform.
The most successful reform yet devised dealt with the election of Presidents.
By raising a lot of money in small amounts, candidates can qualify for Federal matching funds and, if nominated, they can qualify for full subsidy by accepting a limit on total spending.
That limit in 1992 was $55 million -- except that roundabout contributions to the Democratic and Republican Parties allowed them to spend an additional $71 million and $62 million respectively to help Bill Clinton and George Bush offset the challenge of Ross Perot's own $60 million.
A Federal Elections Commission is supposed to prevent such evasions, but its three members from each party can't often reach a majority decision of consequence.
It is also woefully underfinanced; not until last May did it fine the Bush campaign for fund-raising violations in early 1988!
The larger lesson here is that money that wants to be spent will find a way to be spent, like water seeking its level.
Limit spending for Clinton speeches and he'll find a surrogate to celebrate an unnamed political genius in Arkansas; limit spending on Bush rallies and he'll spend for "get out the vote" meetings in his Houston neighborhood.
Give away free television time and the candidates will use the money they save to write personal letters to 150 million voters every week.
But no matter: if given abundant television time, no candidate would lack the means to get a well-rounded message to the electorate.
And if given enough television time in return for giving up TV ads, candidates would be liberated from endless fund-raising and from the dictates of special pleaders.
A half-hour a day, including some prime time, for a few weeks before elections should suffice to cover all but very local races.
Some interviews, some debates, with the real candidates, not hired guns and graphics.
Force campaign coverage onto broadcast television but not onto cable and into newspapers and magazines?
Yes, indeed, and for very good reasons.
Broadcast television has largely given up serious coverage of elections even as television commercials have become the main campaign arena. (Cable at least subsidizes the excellent C-Span programs.)
The most compelling reason, however, is that broadcast television bears a huge public debt.
In exchange for the promise of "public service," licensed television stations never paid a cent for the use of the broadcast spectrum or for the law that required cable systems to carry their programs.
They still owe us, for many decades.
Come the millennium, perhaps we'll collect and reclaim our democracy.


The Nation; Stone Walls Do Not a Prison Make, Shoppers
CROSS Orwell with the wireless-digital age and a Madison Avenue sensibility and you might come close to some of the ads appearing in Corrections Today.
Recent years have been good for the glossy magazine, the official publication of the American Correctional Association and the biggest in the country geared to corrections departments, wardens and other prison administrators and staff.
Seven times a year it goes out to each of the association's roughly 20,000 members -- many of whom have a big say in how Federal, state or local tax dollars are spent on prisons and jails.
Thus the magazine is a powerful tool for advertisers of just about anything its readers might want to buy -- from riot batons to barbed-wire fences to electronic surveillance systems to modular housing units to entire prisons.


If You're Thinking of Living In/North Salem; Charm, Tradition, Space, High Taxes
TUCKED into the northeast corner of Westchester County is a rustic community of graceful horse farms and estates amid thousands of acres of lush woodlands and apple orchards.
This is North Salem, only 50 miles north of Manhattan, a horseman's paradise of open fields and rugged hills surrounding the New York City-owned Titicus Reservoir.
Three-quarters of the land is zoned for four acres or more and there are no sidewalks, sewers or public water supply.
Until last year, there were no numbers on houses.


Corrections
An article in the Frugal Traveler column on page 6 of the Travel section today, about Sofia, Bulgaria, appears in some copies with part of a sentence missing.
The affected passage, starting with the last line of column 5, should read, "There were two other guest rooms as well, occupied by an American in charge of a placement agency for Bulgarian orphans and a Canadian filmmaker named Robert."


The Two-'L' Llama Is a Beast, but Peaceable
WHEN Richard Snyder began to walk the perimeters of the old farm he bought in Milford, Pa., almost 10 years ago, he looked out over the overgrown pastures and woods with the eyes of a farm boy.
"I grew up on a dairy farm in Carlisle," he said.
"My father, at age 83, is still farming 150 acres. But I hated it as a kid. Getting up before dawn to milk the cows. Picking stones out of the field. It was so boring."


A Modest Gain for the Bosnian Serbs as Muslims Regroup
Bosnian Serb forces have regained some ground against Bosnian Government troops in the northwest, United Nations officials in Sarajevo and Bosnian Croat militia officials here said today.
The United Nations officials said the Bosnian Serbs had retaken Kulen Vakuf, a village 20 miles southeast of Bihac in what appeared to be a tactical withdrawal by Government forces.
The village was captured when the Muslim-led Bosnian Army launched an attack 10 days ago in which it gained 95 square miles of territory that had been in Bosnian Serb control for more than two years.


BEST SELLERS: November 6, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
2
2
5
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
3
4
36
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
4
6
2
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
5
3
10
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
6
5
20
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
7
7
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
8
13
2
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
9
8
8
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
10
9
5
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
11
10
117
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
12
11
15
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
13
12
2
STAR TREK FEDERATION, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $22.) Captain Kirk and Captain Picard must both carry out vital missions.
14
21
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
15
14
7
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
2
1
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, pain and hope, and Christianity's relationship to other faiths.
3
4
4
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
4
1
5
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
5
3
6
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
6
1
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence and class structure are affecting American life.
7
5
4
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8
2
8
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
9
6
9
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
10
7
46
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
13
6
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign.
12
9
4
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
13
10
35
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
14
11
2
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
15
8
7
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
76
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
28
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
6
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
35
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of oscillating designs.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AND THE STARS WERE SHINING, by John Ashbery. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.) Mr.
Ashbery's 16th poetry collection offers 58 shining new lyrics, supple, skeptical, conscious of mortality but never oppressed by gloom.
AS SEEN ON TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s, by Karal Ann Marling. (Harvard University, $24.95.) Themes of the mythic decade -- Disneyland, tail fins, Elvis and others -- shrewdly observed by a witty, rompish historian.
THE COMING PLAGUE: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance, by Laurie Garrett. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A disturbing, meticulously researched medical alarm, by a Newsday reporter, about the menace of fast-spreading, terrifying new diseases and genetically remodeled old ones.
A CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK, by Irving Howe. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) The book Howe was working on at his death last year, a collection of freestanding essays on the art of fiction, is mainly a record of the pleasures of thinking, and thinking acutely, about novels.
THE FOLLOWING STORY, by Cees Nooteboom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.
HIMMELFARB, by Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $18.50.) An unsettling first-person novel, the confession of an 80-year-old German ethnologist whose reputation depends entirely on research he appropriated from a Jew from 1939 to 1941.
HINGE &amp; SIGN: Poems, 1968-1993, by Heather McHugh. (Wesleyan University/University Press of New England, cloth, $35; paper, $14.95.) A retrospective gathering of old and new work by a poet who is our laureate of physical love, whose poems about sex are poems of poetic vocation.
IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS, by Tim O'Brien. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This grim, telling novel deals with the incapacity to register reality of a politician whose disappearance from the record of the My Lai massacre precedes his vanishing from the earth.
LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS: The Rise of Elvis Presley, by Peter Guralnick. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A meticulous marshaling of the facts about the ascendant career of a "real decent, fine boy" whose rise to the top (10 million singles for RCA in 11 months in 1955-56; he was 21) startled him as much as it did the rest of the country.
NATURALIST, by Edward O. Wilson. (Shearwater/Island Press, $24.95.) A memoir by a distinguished biologist who has never lost his boyhood enchantment with nature, though he has suffered abuse for his sociobiological synthesis.
WINCHELL: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity, by Neal Gabler. (Knopf, $30.) The life of Walter Winchell, inventor of the modern gossip column, who reached two-thirds of adult Americans in the 1940's and left behind him a national habit of confusing notoriety with news.


Weegee's Grisly Images Gaze on These Dancers
"I DON'T RELATE TO VIOLENT crime," the choreographer Susan Marshall was saying.
"No one in my circle of loved ones has ever been touched by that." As she talked while sipping tea in a cafe near her apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, her hands took the precaution of knocking on every wooden surface within reach, a comic ripple in her otherwise intense demeanor.
"Unfortunately, I do know something about illness," she continued.
"It's a slower-acting violence but similar in its randomness. People are caught in its wake and don't understand what's happening. Fate steps in, and we're left to pick up the pieces."


Life of a Mother Accused of Killing Offers No Clues
On the evening of Oct. 24, Susan Smith went to her aerobics class.
The next morning, she took her children to a baby sitter and went to work at her job as a secretary.
That night, investigators say, Mrs.
Smith pulled her car to the edge of a deep lake, stepped out, put the gearshift in drive and let it roll down the boat ramp into the black water.
Her two little boys, buckled snugly in their safety seats, died under the lake.
To the people of Union who grew up with Mrs.
Smith, who remember tying ribbons in her hair when she was a little girl, who enjoyed her smile -- everyone talks about the smile -- it is as if there are two Susans.
They talk over and over about what caused her to kill her own children, but nothing, for many people, will ever explain how this woman, who seemed to be a perfect mother and so hard-working and devout, could do such a thing.


Stefanie H. Roth, David N. Dishy
Stefanie Helene Roth, a daughter of Ellen and Paul Roth of New York, is to be married today to David Neil Dishy, the son of Linda and Bernard Dishy, also of New York.
Rabbi Thomas K. Weiner is to perform the ceremony at Central Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received a law degree from Harvard.
Until recently she was a law clerk for Judge John S. Martin Jr. of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.
In January, she is to become an associate at Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, the New York law firm.
Her father is a founding partner in Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, the law firm in New York.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in New York.


Farcical Doings in 'Rough Crossing'
THERE'S nothing quite like the sound of cascading laughter to get a play off and bolting.
No sooner does the curtain at the McCarter Theater go up on John Lee Beatty's swank Art Deco shipboard design for Tom Stoppard's "Rough Crossing" than Dvornichek, a steward, tilts forward, bearing a tray of Cognac.
It's not the ship that's listing, mind you, it's Dvornichek -- from side to side, backward and forward again.
Clearly his response to a call for Cognac is strictly self-serving.


Perking Up Pasta With Wild Mushrooms
REMEMBER when the only mushrooms were cultivated whitecaps?
Now markets offer wild mushrooms: portobello, shiitake and oyster mushrooms, orange chanterelles and porcini.
Porcini are boletus mushrooms, also known as cepes, Polish mushrooms or Steinpilz.
They are good dried, too, but they need to be soaked in hot water or chicken broth for about half an hour.


Ideas &amp; Trends; 'My Choice All Along, Starting Now!'
THE single image that voters were not supposed to see this season was that of one political figure grasping the hand of another and holding it aloft.
At a time when even the incumbents are trying to disavow the entire political system and its hoary trappings, who would want to be seen in the tired embrace of an admitted politician?
And yet, in brazen defiance of the conventional wisdom, endorsements are suddenly and dramatically back.
Two of the most memorable and possibly pivotal moments of the political season occurred when incumbent Republican mayors crossed party lines to support Democrats, in New York's gubernatorial race and the Senate campaign in California.
A long line of Republicans, including Ronald and Nancy Reagan, has given an anti-endorsement to Oliver L. North, their party's Senate candidate in Virginia, blasting him as a liar, though Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, swallowed hard and backed the ex-marine.


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
Kudos to Leslie Lafayette for her essay on fair play for childless workers.
As a man in banking, I have felt the unstated expectation of covering for my female colleagues on the "mommy track." They can work flexible hours and still receive promotions as high as vice president, some even while on maternity leave, yet when broaching the subject of time flexibility so that I could pursue my M.B.A. studies or care for a sick parent, the response I received was less than favorable.
Luckily my present employer, because of its relatively small size and good corporate culture, is highly sensitive to all its employees.


BENEFITS
Eliot Feld to be Honored  TONIGHT -- Eliot Feld, the director and choreographer of the Feld Ballets/NY will be honored, as will the late Leonard Bernstein, at a dinner-dance at the Essex House that will benefit the Dance Library of Israel in Tel Aviv.
The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 362-9116.
Celebrating F.I.T. at 50  MONDAY -- The Fashion Institute of Technology will hold a black-tie evening at the Waldorf-Astoria, and the designer Calvin Klein, an alumnus, will be honored, as will Bergdorf Goodman.
The event, to be held in celebration of the institute's 50th anniversary, will benefit the college's scholarship fund.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by a fashion exhibition.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 760-7820.
The Mr.
Abbott Awards  MONDAY -- Jerry Zaks, who directed "Guys and Dolls" and "Laughter on the 23d Floor" is to be the recipient of the Mr.
Abbott award, named for the playwright George Abbott and presented by the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation.
Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Television Network, and the entertainer Gwen Verdon will also be honored.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner, a musical tribute featuring the actors Nathan Lane, Stockard Channing and others, and dancing, all at the Copacabana, 617 West 57th Street.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 302-5359.
A Reading for Gilda's Club  MONDAY -- Jason Alexander and Julia Louis-Dreyfus, two of the stars of "Seinfeld" on NBC-TV, will present a reading at the Walter Kerr Theater of "Bunny Bunny," Alan Zweibel's recently published reminiscence of the late Gilda Radner.
The 7:30 P.M. event will benefit Gilda's Club, an organization named for the late comedian that is developing a center on West Houston Street that is to provide free psychological and social support to people with cancer.
A buffet supper will follow at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 522-9232, or $20 to $100 for the 7:30 P.M. reading alone, from (212) 239-6200.
A 2 P.M. reading is also available at $15 to $50 per person.
Thatcher Aboard the Intrepid  TUESDAY -- Lady Margaret Thatcher, the former British Prime Minister, will speak at the "Salute to Freedom" dinner and fund-raiser for the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum.
The evening begins with cocktails at 7:30 P.M. on board the Intrepid, West 44th Street at the Hudson River, followed by dinner.
The United States Marine Band will perform.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 957-7020.
A Special-Olympics Dinner  TUESDAY -- A dinner for the New York Special Olympics at the Waldorf-Astoria will honor Dick Schaap, the ABC sports reporter, along with several athletes.
The night begins with cocktails at 6:15 P.M.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 245-6570.
A Benefit for Camp Oakhurst  WEDNESDAY -- A performance of "The Glass Menagerie" with Julie Harris at the Roundabout Theater, at 1530 Broadway near West 44th Street, is to benefit Camp Oakhurst, a camp for physically disabled children and adults in Oakhurst, N.J.
A 6 P.M. cocktail party will precede the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 533-4020.
Honoring Neil Simon  WEDNESDAY -- An autumn ball for Lenox Hill Hospital at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner.
The actor Alan Alda will present the playwright Neil Simon with an award.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 434-2544.
The Press Freedom Awards  WEDNESDAY -- Tom Brokaw of NBC News will be the master of ceremonies for the Fourth Annual International Press Freedom Awards dinner, at which George Soros, the financier, will be among those honored.
Dan Rather of CBS News and Peter Jennings and Barbara Walters, both of ABC News, are among those scheduled to be presenters.
The black-tie evening, which benefits the Committee to Protect Journalists, begins with cocktails at 7 P.M. at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Tickets, $500, (212) 465-1004, extension 107.
A Duchess and Boomer Esiason  WEDNESDAY -- The Duchess of York and Boomer Esiason, the New York Jets quarterback, are to greet the guests attending a fund-raiser from 7 to 9 P.M. at F. A. O. Schwarz, 767 Fifth Avenue at East 59th Street.
The event will benefit the children's emergency fund of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
There will be a buffet supper, refreshments and a performance of the Flying Karamazov Brothers.
Tickets, $150 for adults, $50 for children age 12 and under or $250 for a family of four, from (212) 821-0591 or (212) 821-0578.
A New Year's Celebration  WEDNESDAY -- Diwali, the Indian new year celebration, will be marked from 7:30 P.M. to midnight at Shaan, a restaurant at 57 West 48th Street.
The event, sponsored by the young professionals group of the Asia Society, includes a buffet supper, a raffle and dancing.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 288-6400, extension 270, or $100 at the door.
A Performing Arts Party  WEDNESDAY -- The TriBeCa Performing Arts Center will hold its fifth annual benefit from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. at the Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street at Greenwich Street.
Chefs from more than a dozen TriBeCa restaurants will prepare a buffet supper.
The Pinballs, a Cajun and zydeco group, will perform.
Tickets, $50, (212) 346-8500.
The Ambassador's Ball  THURSDAY -- The Ambassador's Ball, celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Hospitality Committee for United Nations Delegations, begins with cocktails at 7 P.M. in the United Nations Delegates' Dining Room.
Dinner and dancing will follow.
Guests enter at the United Nation's East 46th Street visitors' gate.
Black tie or native dress.
Tickets, $250, (212) 963-7182.
Ronstadt and Clooney  THURSDAY -- The singers Linda Ronstadt and Rosemary Clooney are scheduled to perform at the Waldorf-Astoria at the 10th annual Spirit of Liberty awards dinner for People for the American Way, an organization dedicated to preserving civil liberties.
Charles Kuralt, the former CBS newsman will be honored; the humorist Garrison Keillor is to be the host.
It begins with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 944-5820.
For a Pediatric Cancer Wing  THURSDAY -- The young leadership division of the Laura Rosenberg Foundation, which finances research on pediatric leukemia, will sponsor a dinner-dance, from 7:30 to 11 P.M. at the Fifth Avenue Ballroom, 24 Fifth Avenue at East Ninth Street, to raise money for the establishment of a pediatric cancer wing at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 772-8223, or $65 at the door.
A Camphill Concert  THURSDAY -- The Camphill Foundation, which has established residential schools for developmentally disabled children, will benefit from an 8 P.M. concert at Alice Tully Hall that will feature performances by the pianists Emanuel Ax and Dick Hyman; Carter Brey, a cellist; Ani Kavafian, a violinist, and many others.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 838-2660.
Employing Those With AIDS  THURSDAY -- At the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street, there will be an evening of Latin entertainment, including performances by Eddie Torres and the Mambo King Orchestra and by Samba Novo, a dance troupe.
The show, from 8 P.M. until midnight, will benefit Multitasking Systems of New York, an organization that seeks to provide employment opportunities for people with AIDS and H.I.V.
The evening includes a cocktail buffet and an auction that will feature trips to Antigua and Bonaire.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 727-9210.
For the New York Grand Opera  THURSDAY -- The New York Grand Opera will have a benefit concert at 8 P.M. in the Weill Recital Hall of Carnegie Hall that will feature selections from "I Lombardi." A wine and hors d'oeuvres reception will follow.
Tickets, $100, or $25 for the performance alone, from (212) 245-8837.
Honoring Ahmet Ertegun  THURSDAY -- Ahmet Ertegun, the chairman of Atlantic Records, will be honored at a dinner and auction of musical memorabilia for the Nordoff-Robbins Music Therapy Foundation, which provides treatment for autistic and other disabled children.
The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 541-7948.
A Casino Evening  FRIDAY -- United Cerebral Palsy of New York City will hold an evening of dancing and games of chance, beginning with cocktails at 7 P.M., at the New York Hilton.
A buffet supper will be served.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for those 35 and under, from (212) 683-6700, extension 228.
A Dinner-Dance on Long Island  FRIDAY -- A dinner-dance at Harrison House, Dosoris Lane off Brewster Street, in Glen Cove, L.I., will begin with a buffet supper at 7:30 P.M.
The black-tie event is to benefit the Nassau County chapter of the Association for the Help of Retarded Children and also the International Rett Syndrome Association, an organization that provides support to families of children with this neurological disorder.
Tickets, $150, from (516) 626-1000, extension 1131.
A Party for Art  SATURDAY -- Gen Art, an organization that stages exhibitions of the works of young artists, will benefit from a party, from 10 P.M. to 2 A.M., at the Cristinerose Gallery, 395 West Broadway, near Spring Street.
A late supper will be served and there will be an open bar and an exhibition of works by 15 artists in their 20's.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 290-0312.
Battling Juvenile Diabetes  SATURDAY -- Elaine May and Mike Nichols are scheduled to perform at the 22d annual Promise Ball, sponsored by the New York Chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation.
The black-tie evening at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner, games of chance, a raffle and dancing to the Hank Lane Orchestra.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 689-2860.
For El Salvador  SATURDAY -- The model Christy Turlington will be the host of an evening at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue, that will raise money for a cultural center to be built in San Salvador.
The program, from 7 P.M. until midnight, will include a dinner and a 9:30 P.M. performance by Aimee Mann, a singer, and dancing.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the performance and dance party alone, from (212) 431-7845.
Fighting Hunger in Connecticut  SATURDAY -- A magic show featuring Robert Olson and several other magicians is to raise money for Foodshare, a food bank serving Connecticut's Hartford and Tolland counties.
The program begins with cocktails at 7:30 P.M., followed by a buffet supper and a silent auction at the Town and County Club, 22 Woodland Street at Farmington Avenue in Hartford.
Tickets, $50, from (203) 688-6500.
Caring for Young and Old  SATURDAY -- A dinner-dance in Great Neck, L.I., will benefit the adult and child-day-care programs of the Providence Rest Nursing Home in the Bronx.
The event, at Leonard's of Great Neck, 555 Northern Boulevard, near Lakeville Road, will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M.
The evening includes an auction of sports memorabilia from the New York Rangers.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 931-3000.
Known Stars, Unsung Musicals  NEXT SUNDAY -- The actors Harry Groener of "Crazy for You" and Liz Callaway of "Cats" and other Broadway performers are to appear in a musical review, "Unsung Musicals," that features the music of Broadway shows that had runs of a week or less.
The concert, at 7 P.M. at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 68th Street near Park Avenue, will benefit the Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS organization.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 772-4448.
Fighting Breast Cancer  NOV. 14 -- Donna Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of Revlon, will be honored at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre for the National Breast Cancer Coalition.
Shawn Colvin, a singer, will perform, and the models Lauren Hutton and Veronica Webb will be among those presenting the awards.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
National Urban League Dinner  NOV. 15 -- The producer and songwriter Quincy Jones and Daniel P. Tully, the chairman of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, will be among those to be honored at the National Urban League's 38th annual Equal Opportunity Day dinner at the New York Hilton.
There will be a 6 P.M. cocktail reception, and Rachelle Ferrell, a singer, is to perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 310-9045.
Marking Billboard's 100th  NOV. 15 -- Liza Minnelli; Kenny G; Shawn Colvin, a singer, and the musical groups the Shirelles and G. E. Smith, and the Saturday Night Live Band are to perform at the Marriott Marquis at a benefit that will raise money for an arts center to be built in Lenox, Mass., by the National Music Foundation.
The event, which will celebrate the 100th anniversary of Billboard magazine, will begin with a 6 P.M. cocktail party followed by a silent auction and dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.


A Bach Maestro Tackles Mahler, or Vice Versa
OF ALL THE CLASSICAL music performers known to Americans chiefly through recordings, few are better known to serious collectors than the Belgian conductor Philippe Herreweghe.
Mr.
Herreweghe, who will conduct the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and two European choruses in a program of Faure, Weill and Stravinsky on Thursday evening at Carnegie Hall, has performed in the United States only once, on a West Coast tour in 1984.
But because of his remarkable range of sympathies and his zest for the unhackneyed, listeners of many stripes have encountered him on one overgrown musical path or another.
His two latest CD's for Harmonia Mundi France are typically contrasted: Orlandus Lassus' "Lagrime di San Pietro" (901483) and Gustav Mahler's "Lied von der Erde," as reduced for chamber forces by Arnold Schoenberg and Reiner Riehn (901477).
Both are somber works, each amounting to a grand, late summation by its composer, but they have little else in common.


Running Around the Country (Literally) and Other Marathon Tales
The world's first marathoner didn't get to enjoy the fruits of victory for very long.
Legend has it that in 490 B.C., Pheidippides ran 25 miles from a battlefield at Marathon to tell the Greeks in Athens that they had defeated the Persians.
Once the message was delivered, the tuckered-out runner promptly dropped dead.
Training methods and medical care have improved in the past two and a half millennia, so the vast majority of the runners lined up in Staten Island this morning at the start of the New York City Marathon should be able to proclaim their own victories: I won; I improved my time; I made it.
Their trek through the five boroughs of New York will mark the 25th time the city's marathon has been run.
Although it isn't the oldest marathon and it isn't the most grueling, it can boast that it provides the world's longest urinal for the world's largest starting group of runners.
Boasting rights for other marathons as well as some odder incidents in the history of the sport, are noted at right.
ANNE CRONIN WORLD'S OLDEST MARATHON -- The modern Olympic games, which began in 1896, included a 40-kilometer (24.85-mile) marathon.
It was won by Spiridon Loues of Greece, with a 2:58:50 time.
OLDEST IN U.S. -- The Boston Marathon, first run 1897, is the world's oldest annual marathon.
Members of the Boston Athletic Association had attended the 1896 Olympic games and decided to start a marathon in Boston.
The race, then 24.7 miles, was won by John J. McDermott in 2:55:10, although he walked several times during the final miles.
GLUTTON FOR PUNISHMENT -- John A. Kelley ran the Boston Marathon 61 straight years, from 1931 to 1992.
He won twice, in 1935 and 1945, and came in second seven times.
In one of his runner-up runs, Mr.
Kelley tapped Ellison "Tarzan" Brown, then leading, as he passed him.
This riled Mr.
Brown, who redoubled his efforts and went on to win.
The spot of the tap was called "Heartbreak Hill" in The Boston Globe the next day.
The name stuck.
HOW THE MARATHON GOT ITS LENGTH -- Marathons were generally 40 kilometers long until the 1908 Olympics in London.
Princess Mary, who was the official starter for the race, asked whether the starting line could be moved to Windsor Castle, so her children could watch from the nursey windows.
This extended the course to 26 miles, 385 yards to the finish line.
The longer "London" distance was adopted as the standard in 1924.
PLEASE DON'T USE THE BUSHES -- The world's largest urinal will be installed at the start of the New York City Marathon in Staten Island.
The 290-foot facility will be located at the Fort Wadsworth Naval Station along with 350 portable toilets.
Another 200 portable toilets will be placed along the route.
A CAST OF THOUSANDS -- This year, more than 27,000 runners will be competing in the New York City Marathon, which could break its own record for most starters -- 28,656 in 1992.
The London Marathon is the second largest, with 25,194 this year.
SHOELESS ABEBE -- The 1960 Rome Olympic marathon was won by an Ethiopian who had never run a marathon outside Addis Ababa.
Abebe Bikila ran barefoot and won with a record time of 2:15:16.2.
He was also the first man to ever win consecutive Olympic marathons, finishing the race in Toyko with another record time of 2:12:11.2, despite having had an appendectomy a month before.
He wore shoes the second time around.
GOLD STANDARD -- The record for Olympic marathon wins is two, shared by Mr.
Bikila (1960, 1964) and Waldemar Cierpinski of East Germany (1976, 1980).
Grete Waltz of Norway won in New York nine times (1978-80, 1982-86, 1988).
WOMEN'S FIRSTS -- The first woman officially entered in a marathon was Violet Percy of Great Britain, who ran the 1926 London Marathon in 3:40:22.
The first championship marathon for women was held by the Road Runners Club of America in 1970.
Women's Olympic marathons began in 1984.
LONG HAULS -- The longest marathon races ever were the 1920's transcontinental runs from Los Angeles to New York City.
Andy Payne ran 3,422 miles in 1928 with a time of 573:04:34.
Johnny Salo won the 1929 version of 3,665 miles in 525:57:2, for an average of 6.97 miles per hour.
The longest annual race is Australia's Westfield Run.
The record for the 658 miles was set by Yiannis Kouros of Greece in 1989; 5 days, 2 hours, 27 minutes, 27 seconds.
The longest individual run on record was Sara Covington-Fulcher's lap around the United States, starting and finishing in Los Angeles.
The 11,134 miles took from July 21, 1987, to Oct. 2, 1988, to cover.
Sources: Jack Fleming, Boston Athletic Association; Hal Higdon, senior writer at Runner's World; New York City Road Runners Club; London Marathon; "The Guinness Book of Sports Records, 1994-1995," edited by Mark Young; Facts on File, publisher.


Suspension Upheld
An appeals panel in Monte Carlo, Monaco, agreed yesterday with track's governing body that JOHN NGUGI, the five-time world cross country champion from Kenya, was wrong in refusing to give a urine sample to an agent who visited his home.
The panel upheld a four-year suspension imposed by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.


Butch Cassidy et al.
To the Editor: Butch Cassidy in Patagonia is anything but mythical ("Magellan's Route in Tierra del Fuego," Oct. 9).
As the author of "Digging Up Butch and Sundance," I can report that not only did Butch spend four years ranching peacefully in Northern Patagonia's Cholila Valley with the Sundance Kid and Etta Place in the early 1900's, but that he and Sundance later robbed a bank in Rio Gallegos, Argentina, a mere 50 miles from the Strait of Magellan.
What is mythical is the Hollywood version, which skipped the Patagonian chapter in the saga of the Old West's most affable and peripatetic outlaws.
ANNE MEADOWS  Washington


Stacey Blumberg, Steven Paradise
Stacey Eileen Blumberg and Steven Robert Paradise, associates at New York law firms, were married last evening at the Glen Head (L.I.) Country Club.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal, the executive director of the New York Board of Rabbis, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Paradise, 28, works at Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband, and received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Martin and Maxine Blumberg of Woodbury, L.I.


Across Uganda's Rich Land By Train
NEARLY a century ago, England set out to cement control of its East African colonies, not by war, law or religion, but by locomotion, building a train line from Nairobi into Uganda's interior that first touched the shores of Lake Victoria and was eventually extended to Kampala.
Surmounting inauspicious beginnings -- a host of singularly African plagues, from malaria to man-eating lions to tribal tensions and cost overruns -- the railway was begun in 1895 and completed in 1928.
It became such an important conduit of goods and people that trains running twice daily between Kenya and Uganda were full with passengers, who included in the early years Theodore Roosevelt and Winston Churchill.
Churchill called Uganda the "Pearl of Africa," a sobriquet that stuck.
But in the early 1970's Idi Amin put his chokehold on Uganda, and the East African community, which had created common currency and markets among Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania, rancorously disintegrated.
By 1977 relations had so seriously deteriorated that the Nairobi-Kampala train trips came to a screeching, 17-year halt.


Born Predators
To the Sports Editor:
Despite Pete Bodo's conclusion that it is the pronghorn antelope's speed that is its liability, it is obvious that it is Bodo's and other hunters' penchant for slaughter that is the beautiful animal's vexation.
As Bodo sits safely behind a high-powered rifle aiming for a "clean kill," he notes in passing that the antelope's natural predators have become extinct or have been eliminated.
Thankfully, Bodo and his cohorts have taken it upon themselves to assume the role of natural-born predators.
Now, we can all rest easy knowing that nature's forces are still in balance.
KENNETH BROWN  The Bronx


Margot Hoffman, David W. Juros
Margot Hoffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Hoffman of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to David William Juros, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Juros of Cheshire, Conn.
The Rev.
Vance E. Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Juros, 27, is a research associate at Smith McCabe, a public relations firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in sociology from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Her mother, Gloria Hoffman, is the guidance director at Rye High School.


Frugal Travel
To the Editor: My husband and I write to support the Frugal Traveler column.
We lived overseas for over 20 years, all of that time in developing countries, and traveled extensively.
Even though we were able to afford luxury accommodations, we almost always opted for the frugal.
Our reasons are valid for a good segment of travelers.


Diana J. Blaney, Bruce M. Sabados
Diana Jean Blaney, a daughter of Kathleen and Henry Blaney of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Bruce Mathew Sabados, the son of Nancy and Eugene Sabados of Shelton, Conn.
The Rev.
John Kauta performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.


Fliers Are Snapping At G.M.H.C.
Fliers have begun appearing in mailboxes, headlined G.M.H.C.
Watchdog and taking on the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the world's first and largest private AIDS agency.
It's the latest in a series of disputes between two men and the agency, headquartered at 129 West 20th Street.
As the agency has grown, from an emergency self-help group in 1981 to an employer of 300, challenges have arisen from within and without over the organization's leadership and mission.
Jim Fielding and Scott Melvin, who are producing the fliers, say they represent present and former G.M.H.C. workers, volunteers, clients and donors "who have become disillusioned" with some of its policies.
But Daniel Wolfe, a G.M.H.C. spokesman, called them "two disgruntled former employees with a fax machine" and an ax to grind.
The two, who left G.M.H.C. this year, led a failed attempt to unionize the staff, and Mr.
Fielding has filed an AIDS discrimination suit against G.M.H.C.
The fliers, mailed to a list of about 300, accuse G.M.H.C. of dropping its distribution of free condoms at gay bars and clubs.
Mr.
Wolfe said G.M.H.C. is simply asking bar and club owners to pay about eight cents a condom.
B.L.


In the Region/Connecticut; Once-Sliding Agriculture Is Making a Comeback
FOR hundreds of years, Connecticut, like much of America, was farm country -- until the 50's, when city folk began pouring into its villages, wealthy suburbs and developing subdivisions, and hundreds of office buildings created an urbanized state.
Only about 400,000 of Connecticut's 3.2 million acres is farmland today.
But 1.7 million acres of forest and 50,000 acres of shellfish grounds bring the total amount of agricultural land to more than 2.1 million acres.


Data Bank/November 6, 1994
Data Bank/November 6, 1994
Employment
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
In thousands
124,200
123,600
123,200
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,600 (5.8)
7,715 (5.9)
8,000 (6.1)
Factory Orders
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
-0.2
4.7
-2.0
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.5
0.0
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
1.6
0.0
0.1
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.4
0.5
Gold
Nov. 4
Oct. 28
Oct. 21
Friday A.M. London fix
$383.50
$387.30
$390.80
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 28
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
In thousands
323
324
329


Wilson Never Called for 'Identity Card'
To the Editor:
"California Governor Suggests Requiring Citizenship Cards" (front page, Oct. 27) misrepresents what I have proposed to help deal with the consequences of illegal immigration.


Overturning a Rent Law That Benefited a Hospital
CORPORATIONS do not occupy apartments; people do.
A decision by the New York State Court of Appeals last month in a case involving Lenox Hill Hospital makes a point of that distinction, and in the process advances the cause of ownership control over the occupancy of rent-regulated apartments.
It also calls new attention to the problem hospitals have in helping nurses find housing in Manhattan.


Editorial Notebook; The Rites of Fall New York's Religion: What Else but Fashion?
To the list of most-repeated lies -- the check is in the mail, I'm from the government and I'm here to help you -- add one more: I don't care what I look like.
Especially in New York, this is self-deception at its most flagrant.
A quick look at police statistics, combined with a little basic research, will confirm that people are much more likely to commit a major felony than to show up at the office in the wrong shoes.
Yet even here, in this city of surfaces, where walking down the street looking good is the most widely practiced art form, people cling to another strange vanity: that they have none.


. . .and a Home for a Nomad
Public School 235 has never had a building to call home -- unless one counts the abandoned supermarket in which it was founded 24 years ago.
The product of a grass-roots campaign to provide bilingual education for Morrisania's growing Puerto Rican population, P.S. 235's birth had the misfortune of coinciding with the South Bronx's decline.
So, after nearly a quarter of a century, some of its students are at Public School 11, while others share space a few miles away at Intermediate School 148.


School Boards: Manhattan And the BronxTHE BRONX   DISTRICT 7 South Bronx. Next meeting: T.B.A. Superintendent: Pedro Crispo; President/Chairwoman: Feliciano Ramirez Jr.; (718) 292-0164.  DISTRICT 8 Pelham Bay, Throgs Neck, Clason Point, East Morrisania. Next meeting: Wednesday, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 182, 650 White Plains Road. Superintendent: Max Messer; President/Chairman: Ciro Guerra; (718) 409-8801. Agenda: General meeting. DISTRICT 9 Morrisania, University Heights. Next meeting: Nov. 30, 6 P.M.; C.I.S. 148, 3630 Third Avenue, near 168th Street. Acting Superintendent: Arthur Aronstein; President/Chairman: Carmelo Saez; (718) 681-8558. Agenda: T.B.A. DISTRICT 10 Riverdale, Tremont, Kingsbridge, Norwood, Fordham. Next meeting: Nov. 16, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 37, 230th Street and Irwin Avenue. Superintendent: Irma Zardoya. President/Chairman: Charles Williams; (718) 584-8338. Agenda: General meeting.  DISTRICT 11 Co-op City, Northeast Bronx. Next meeting: Nov. 22, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 97, 1375 Mace Avenue, corner Throop Avenue. Superintendent: Joseph Kovaly; President/ Chairwoman: Loretta Y. Jones; (718) 519-2647. Agenda: T.B.A. DISTRICT 12 Central Bronx, Crotona. Next meeting: T.B.A. Superintendent: Robert Henry; President/ Chairman: Israel Cruz; (718) 328-2310. Schedules of school board meetings in other boroughs will appear in a subsequent issue.
MANHATTAN  DISTRICT 1 Lower East Side.
Next meeting: Thursday, 7 P.M.; location: P.S. 34, 730 East 12th Street, between Avenues C and D. Superintendent: Dori Collazo-Baker; President/Chairwoman: Dolores Schaefer; (212) 602-9765.
Agenda: Discussion on effect of budget cuts.
DISTRICT 2 Downtown, TriBeCa, SoHo, Greenwich Village, Midtown, Upper East Side.
Next meeting: Nov. 22, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 198, 1700 Third Avenue, at 96th Street.
Superintendent: Anthony Alvarado; President/Chairwoman: Karen Feuer; (212) 330-9400.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 3 Upper West Side.
Next meeting: Nov. 30, 7:30 P.M.; P.S. 191, 210 West 61st Street.
Superintendent: James Mazza; President/ Chairwoman: Judith Moore; (212) 678-2845.
Agenda: Presentation by official from the Special Commissioner of Investigations.
DISTRICT 4 East Harlem.
Next meeting: Nov. 16, 6:30 P.M.; P.S. 155, 319 East 117th Street.
Superintendent: Marcelino Rodriguez; President/ Chairwoman: Shirley Stroud; (212) 860-5910.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 5 Central Harlem.
Next meeting: Nov. 17, 7:00 P.M.; P.S. 200, 150th Street and Seventh Avenue.
Superintendent: Dr.
Bertrand Brown; President/Chairwoman: Wynola Glenn; (212) 769-7600.
Agenda: General meeting.
DISTRICT 6 Washington Heights, Inwood.
Next meeting: Nov. 16, 7:30 P.M.; I.S. 52, 650 Academy Street.
Superintendent: Anthony Amato; President/Chairman: Robert Jackson; (212) 795-9549.
Agenda: T.B.A.


Few Trained In Teaching Junior High
NEARLY half the nation's middle-school teachers received no special training for teaching 10-to-15-year-olds, a new study finds.
"If this were medicine, it would be considered malpractice," said Dr.
Peter Scales, an author of the study, "Growing Pains: The Making of America's Middle School Teachers."
"The ages 10 to 15 are a critical period where we can put young people on a path to a safe, productive adulthood," he said, "or we can lose them to pregnancies, substance abuse or dropping out." About 60 percent of the 2,100 respondents in five states had not even gained experience as student teachers in middle schools, said Dr.
Scales, who is the director of national initiatives at the Center for Early Adolescence at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


CHARLES MURRAY
Charles Murray says that what he is peddling is social science porn ("Daring Research or 'Social Science Pornography' "? by Jason DeParle, Oct. 9).
I pray that it will not turn into sociological poison.
The moral conclusions do not follow from his data.
People who have lower I.Q.'s deserve more of our help, not less.
His data are clearly in error; the American economy has grown in years that our collective I.Q. is said to have declined, while the economies of white-only societies have collapsed (Eastern Europe) or are lagging.
Rapid-growth economies are largely nonwhite.


County Getting Millions in Mental Health Windfall
AT a time when most agencies are struggling with reduced budgets and major cutbacks, the county's Department of Community Mental Health has just received a windfall, because of legislation passed last year requiring that money saved from the closing of state psychiatric institutions be reinvested in the communities they once served.
Dr.
Richard Surles, Commissioner of the State Office of Mental Health, presented a check to the county for $3.2 million in a ceremony here recently.
The money is the first installment on an expected total of nearly $25 million over the next five years.
The money will be used to support an array of mental health services.


Upper East Side: Italian and Beyond
AZZURRO ** (212) 517-7068; 245 East 84th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Pleasing Sicilian-style fare at reasonable prices, amid antique maps and nautical charts.
Pastas include penne in a tomato sauce with eggplant; gnocchi in pesto; and ricotta-and-spinach-filled ravioli served with a light porcini mushroom sauce.
Other dishes include grilled chicken paillard; breaded veal chop; and grilled sirloin with a black peppercorn cream sauce. (Review: 11/1/91; revisited: 10/28/94)  ERMINIA * (212) 879-4284; 250 East 83d Street; $$$; American Express
A cozy and romantic setting with a rustic decor where wood-fire grilling is the specialty and pastas are pleasing.
Choices among the dozen or so pastas include linguine in a white clam sauce; capellini primavera; and pappardelle tossed with artichokes, tomato, sausage and porcinis.
Among grilled entrees are veal chop; baby lamb chop, chicken and a mixed grill including beef, lamb, chicken and sausage.
Other options are sauteed snapper with onions in a balsamic vinegar sauce and lobster fra diavolo with shrimp, clams and mussels. (Review: 1/30/87; revisited: 10/29/94)  ETATS-UNIS ** (212) 517-8826; 242 East 81st Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Engaging home-style fare is what this spirited little spot offers.
Each day, specials are incorporated in the concise handwritten menu while others are deleted.
On a given evening diners might start with grilled fresh sardines with a red wine sauce; arugula and beet salad with goat cheese in a lemon dressing; or corn pudding with lobster sauce.
Entrees could include roasted sea bass with coriander and accompanied by flageolet beans and a red pepper puree; charcoal-grilled filet of beef with braised shallots and mashed potatoes; lobster chowder with tomato, potatoes, beets, lima beans, corn and peppers; and grilled veal rib with a tuna-and-caper sauce and a zucchini-tomato gratin. (Review: 11/1/93)  MARK'S ** (212) 879-1864; The Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
Genteel English atmosphere, elegant setting and sophisticated cuisine: Mark's new seasonal menu features roast squab with a bitter chocolate sauce and corn salsa; loin of venison with a huckleberry sauce and braised cabbage; seared sea scallops with roasted artichokes and wild mushrooms; and sauteed trout with a fennel sauce and served with braised tomato and broccoli rape. (Review: 10/5/90; article: 12/21/93)  PAMIR * (212) 734-3791; 1437 Second Avenue, near 75th Street; $$; Mastercard, Visa
Afghan food blends Middle Eastern cuisine with spicy Indian accents, emphasizing lamb, chicken and vegetables.
Pamir's dining room has a nightclublike feeling with candlelit tables, Oriental rugs and soft music.
Entrees include various grilled marinated lamb kebabs; highly seasoned kofta kebabs, balls of ground beef, and rice-based dishes like morange palaw (saffron rice with almonds, pistachios and orange zest over an aromatic lamb stew). (Review: 10/11/91) PIG HEAVEN ** (212) 744-4333; 1540 Second Avenue, at 80th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Designed with a playful barnyard motif, this lighthearted Chinese spot is ideal for large groups.
What lures regulars in at this engaging fish house is the relaxed atmosphere and fresh and beguiling seafood preparations.
There's seared salmon with a dill-mustard sauce on a bed of lentils; pan-roasted lobster with chipotle butter and corn cake, and grilled swordfish with saffron-infused orso and sun-dried tomatoes. (Review: 5/7/93) SHABU-TATSU ++ (212) 472-3322; 1414 York Avenue, at 75th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This is a new uptown branch of a chain (one restaurant in the East Village and three in Tokyo) specializing in beef dishes that diners cook themselves on circular metal grills set over burners in the center of each table.
The bright, rectangular dining room, with its benches of polished wood, is festive and informal.
The attentive staff does not allow the conspicuously helpless to go unattended. ($25 and Under, 10/28/94)  SAMALITA'S TORTILLA FACTORY ++ (212) 737-5070; 1429 Third Avenue, at 81st Street; $; no credit cards
Samalita's serves both Mexican and Cal-Mex dishes.
Mexico City tacos are tops: fresh, soft corn tortillas filled with delicious stuffings like spicy crumbled chorizo mixed with chunks of vinegary potatoes, or carnitas, chunks of tender pork, marinated then grilled. ($25 and Under, 7/15/94) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


The Quadrangle Becomes a Globe
In the late 1860's, when well-to-do American college students began to spend their junior year abroad and Europe also played host to struggling American artists, wandering expatriates and well-heeled sightseers on the grand tour, the novelist Henry James, who probably understood these footloose Americans better than anyone before or since, was asked to describe them.
"There is but one word to use -- vulgar, vulgar, vulgar!" he rumbled, explaining that he could not abide their ignorance and "perpetual reference of all things to some American standard or precedent."
James's novels took a kinder view, frequently emphasizing a noble quality in American character, but his ill-tempered putdown of his countrymen living abroad (reported by his brother) has echoed down through the decades.
Today, a growing number of American educators believe that the world is too small, too competititve and too dangerous to tolerate the sort of ignorant chauvinism that so provoked James.
The cure, they say, is not small, easy or cheap: American higher education needs to go global.
That does not mean lightheartedly dispatching students to sample cultural bonbons in exotic lands.
To serious-minded American educators, globalization means such things as the presence of large numbers of foreign students and professors on campuses in the United States, so that this fall at New York University's Washington Square campus, for example, more than 30 different languages are being spoken.
It means tens, ultimately hundrends of thousands of American students resident in foreign countries, mastering the local language and culture and -- as with present-day University of California students -- taking a full load of rigorous, faculty-screened courses taught in the native tongue at one of 100 institutions in 32 different countries.
It means internationalizing the curriculum, as in a course in accounting at the University of Michigan School of Business that now includes the study of Japanese regulations permitting the depreciation of assets at many times the rate allowed in the United States.
It means using the latest technology so that sudents at Ramapo College, a small, publicly supported institution in Mahwah, N.J., join in discussions with other students, scholars, artists and officials around the world in 120 teleconferences every year.
"International education is not a new idea, but the times have now conjoined to make it dominant," said L. Jay Oliva, the president of New York University, who has taken a leading role in the movement.
"What's happening here," he continued, "is comparable to what happened in the 19th century when Johns Hopkins University adopted the philosophy of the great German research universities and set the pattern for Harvard, Yale and the others."
The number of American student studying abroad has grown steadily over the last five years and is now at a record high of 72,000, according to the Institute of International Education, the nation's leading educational exchange organization.
This figure is small in comparison with the number of foreign students studying in the United States (438,000, or six times as many), but -- significantly -- the profile of these itinerant American students has changed.
"Typically, they used to be affluent women in their junior year at one of the elite Seven Sisters colleges and they would be studying architecture and French language in Paris," said Richard M. Krasno, president of the institute.
"But today more of them tend to be male, they are less likely to be affluent, they may be interested in business or industry and there's a slight shift away from Europe as their destination."
One conspicuous sign of the growth of international studies is the number of study-abroad programs now being offered.
Ranging from a business and economics course at the university of Hungary in Pecs to another concentrating on language and culture at the leading university in Hanoi, Vietnam, these programs have virtually doubled over the last decade, from 1,857 to 3,701.
Students are eagerly responding.
At an elite institution like Harvard University, 51 percent of the undergraduates participate in at least one work or study program abroad.
At Kalamazoo College, a small, selective liberal arts school in Kalamazoo, Mich., 85 percent of the students study overseas thanks to a private gift of more than $5 million that subsidizes travel and on-site living expenses.
A few American colleges and universities have not been satisfied with merely offering study-abroad programs but have adopted globalism as a fundamental objective for the entire institution.
Speaking for N.Y.U., Mr.
Oliva recently declared: "We plan to enter the next century as the quintessential global university. We will extend to every undergraduate the opportunity to study abroad as part of his or her N.Y.U. education, and we will become a center for global faculty inquiry and a center for worldwide conferences of university leaders."
Robert A. Scott, president of Ramapo College in New Jersey, said his institution aspired to be "a global college" for more practical reasons.
"We believe," he said, "that our graduates likely will either supervise or be supervised by someone of another race, ethnicity or nationality, and that their careers and lives as citizens will be affected by international and intercultural life."
Several American colleges and universities have established campuses in foreign countries so that students may spend extended periods abroad and earn credits readily accepted by employers and graduate schools in the United States.
Webster University in St.
Louis operates wholly owned branches in Geneva, London, Vienna and the Dutch city of Leiden.
Emerson College, a small liberal arts school in Boston, has established a branch in Maastricht, the Netherlands, where students study subjects such as global marketing, communications and advertising.
Some of these branches fare better than others; Japan, for example, has proved especially tricky for American institutions to penetrate.
Of the more than 20 American branches established in Japan in recent years, at least 9 have failed, most recently a Texas A &amp; M branch in Koriyama.
All are said to have been victims of the economic recession in Japan and the unexpected difficulty of recruiting Japanese students.
But if it has not always been easy to attract foreign students to American compuses overseas, foreign students have for years flocked to attend colleges and universities in the United States.
In fact, according to the Department of Commerce, the 438,000 foreign students currently resident in the United States, while only a small fraction of the total enrollment of 14.5 million, have fed a major and all-but-hidden export industry bringing some $6 billion annual to the American economy.
The cohort of foreign students has kept growing steadily at the rate of about 4.5 percent a year for the past two decades.
Quite often, these students become leaders in their societies at home.
Chang-Lin Tien, chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley, said he recently attended a state reception in Seoul, South Korea, at which no fewer than seven Cabinet ministers introduced themselves to him as Berkeley graduates.
"That's typical," Chancellor Tien remarked.
"I get the same greetings in Indonesia and Singapore."
The reasons for all of this activity are many.
The first and most important is the rise of the global economy.
Alert, job-oriented students have come to realize that as the world shrinks, many of the best jobs are going to go to college graduates who possess international skills.
For example, after graduating from Wellesley College in 1987, Cynthia Jeffers taught English for two years in Japan under a program run by the Ministry of Education.
She then returned to the United States, entered the Harvard Business School and upon her graduation last June landed a job as an associate in the corporate finance department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, one of the major brokerage firms on Wall Street.
Her experience in Japan, she said, greatly increased her prospects in the job market.
Another stimulus for globalization is that most financial aid for students has recently become "portable," as college officials like to say.
In the past, vaguely worded Federal statutes authorizing financial aid for college students -- Pell grants, Stafford loans and the like -- made many student advisers hesitant to recommend the use of these grants overseas.
Stephen Cooper, the director of academic programs abroad at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, said that he and a group of associates successfully lobbied Congress to make every form of Federal aid for students applicable for study overseas.
The new explicit language appears in the Higher Education Act of 1992.
"Judging from the number of inquiries I've received from around the country, this is having a big impact," said Professor Cooper.
Still another spur is the development and prevalence of new communications technology that allows educators to leap oceans and cross borders with impunity.
B.
Joseph White, dean of the University of Michigan Business School and a pioneer in the field educators now call "distance learning," has taken the new technology a step further.
Last year Dean White set up a program sponsored by Cathay Pacific, the national airline of Hong Kong, that employs interactive television to link M.B.A. candidates in Hong Kong with professors at Ann Arbor.
"It's actually a complex teaching system because we don't believe we can provide the quality we want with interactive TV alone," said Dean White.
"Consequently, we send our faculty to Hong Kong and bring their students here for face-to-face meetings."
"It's the future," he continued.
"Our pilot project for Cathay Pacific carries with it a vast productivity potential."
Another reason for the growth of interest in globalization is that travel abroad, like hit shows on Broadway, has good word of mouth.
"It's a cliche, but over and over you hear students saying 'It changed my life!' " said Dr.
Krasno.
It is a point confirmed by Corbin Smith, the director of Stanford University's Overseas Study Office.
"When we surveyed the senior class here over the last few years," Mr.
Smith said, "asking what was the most meaningful experience during their undergraduate years, more than 87 percent of those who participated in a Stanford study-abroad program gave that the highest rating."
Not everyone is so enthusiastic.
Roger Kimball, the neoconservative author of "Tenured Radicals," which takes a skeptical look at academia, observes that colleges are "making out like bandits" by collecting full tuition from students and "placing them at a fraction of that cost at overseas institutions."
It is true that the ranks of foreign students in the United States have been swollen not only by the quality of colleges here but also by sharp-eyed admissions officials who have successfully recruited well-heeled foreign students when they were unable to fill their campuses with enough American students able to pay the ever-rising tuition costs.
In fact, unregulated overseas recruitment proved so easy -- and profitable -- that a few years ago unscrupulous hucksters began to recruit foreign students for small community colleges in the United States with misleading promises that after a year or two the student could transfer into Harvard or M.I.T.
Today, some professional organizations have adopted generally effective guidelines and codes of ethics to substantially reduce such misrepresentations.
And some critics, like Mr. Kimball, say there is a great
Continued on Page 31  Continued from Page 26  deal of wishful thinking in the notion that "a semester abroad is going to make one into an internationalist."
Holly M. Carter, dean of the office of educational opportunity programs at Northeastern University, argues that the belief that today's college students are more culturally aware than their predecessors is a comforting myth that ignores "the increase in hate crimes, blatant bigotry and racism on the campuses."
But educational leaders like Mr.
Oliva of N.Y.U. argue that a global perspective is vital to the international community.
"There are at least three factors driving the globalization of education today," he said.
"The first is purely serendipitous: We're on the cusp of a new wave of immigration." (About a million immigrants have come to New York over the past decade, many of whom have attended N.Y.U.)
"Second," he continued, "people realize that the more different environments you move into, the more you learn. Conversely, the more you study with people just like yourself, the less you learn.
"I realize in my own life that I never learned more than when I was overseas for a year and a half. Everything became very vivid. There was no moment when I could let my mind relax. And gradually, I discovered that I could master change."
"And third," Mr.
Oliva said, "the demise of the Soviet Union has made Americans more international than ever. It made us realize that the Soviet Union had been a major force in policing ethnic rivalries. The world got capped under big cloaks. We used to think of the division between Northern and Southern Ireland, and what's happening in Yemen, as anomalies. Now we see them as the rule.
"In the future," he continued, "we probably face 30 to 40 years of instability and border wars like the 19th century, but with one frightening difference -- small nations possessing immensely destructive weapons. So our job in international education is to help provide a global environment in which these ethnic disputes can be handled on the basis of intellectual discourse and debate, not war."
John Markham, director of the University of California's Education Abroad Program, says, "The question I like to ask is: Should the University of California have a foreign policy?"
Most educators acknowledge that the vast majority of American faculty and students are still relatively insular, but they are optimistic that economic forces will prevail.
"The sea change will occur," Dr.
Krasno said, "when the global economy drives corporate leaders to say they want to hire people with foreign language skills and knowledge of foreign cultures, and that all things being equal they will hire them first. That's when the rush will begin."


Oct.2-Nov.5: 20 Rounds Fired; White House Shooting Brings Lesser Charges
More clues emerged about why a dishonorably discharged Army medic spoiled a splendid afternoon a week ago Saturday when he took a semi-automatic assault rifle and fired more than 20 rounds at the White House.
But by the end of last week, the authorities had not decided whether to accuse Francisco M. Duran of trying to assassinate the President, which could carry a sentence of life in prison.
Mr.
Duran, a 26-year-old upholsterer at a Rocky Mountain resort, was charged with four lesser counts, including destruction of Government property and illegal possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.


Ticketmaster's Mr. Tough Guy
PERHAPS the only thing not in rancorous dispute in the ticketing business these days is this: ticketmaster wanted the business and Ticketmaster got the business.
In the pugnacious world of selling entertainment and sports tickets, Ticketmaster is the winner and still ambitious champion.
It is the company that figured out how to sell tickets quickly by phone and at retail outlets.
It cultivated the music industry and other contacts so that it would have tickets to sell.
It then bound the stadiums, halls and other sites to long-term exclusive contracts that kept rivals out in the cold.


Polls in New Jersey And Connecticut
New Jersey voters face decisions in races for the United States Senate, all 13 House districts and a variety of county and local offices.
Polls will be open from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Down and Out in the City
BETTER that Vladimir and Estragon did not move.
Had Beckett's vagabond clowns decided Godot was no longer worth the wait, they might have wound up on a bench in Tompkins Square Park, New York City, where neighborhood kids burn live pigeons for sport and people -- families full -- from other neighborhoods, even the suburbs, stop by to roll the sleeping bums.
They would have names like Sasha and Flea.
They'd be drinking nitrate (spiked with Sterno), warming their hands by setting a fire in a garbage can and fighting over whether one stole $7 from the other.


POSTINGS: Co-op Council Conference; The Usual, Plus Crime
The brochure for the Council of New York Cooperatives 14th annual housing conference next Sunday is filled with the usual seminars and workshops: "Preventing Pigeon Problems," "Lobby Renovations" and "Challenges in Mortgage Refinancing."
Because of the recent scandal involving vendors' paying kickbacks to managing agents, however, several of the 76 courses look like something from a police academy catalog.
"Preventing Fraud and Kickbacks" is an example.
"Detecting and Curtailing Criminal Activities" is another.
"It is the thing that is new this year, and it is concerning a lot of people," said Marc Luxemburg, a lawyer and president of the council.
"It's certainly emerged as the current topic of the moment."
The conference is being held from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. at Hunter College in Manhattan.
Preregistration is required.
The cost is $60 a person for those living in co-ops or condominiums that are members of the Council of New York Cooperatives and $85 for professionals affiliated with the organization.
For others, the cost is $150.
Some discounted tickets are also available.
For more information, call (212) 496-7400.


First Marathon Is Next Step in Quest to Break Out of Life's Routines
There she was at last, rising over the crest of Holly Hill Road with the sun beating down on her.
She was a new marathoner completing her longest workout, the symbolic 20-miler.
And looming next was the big event in New York.
Virginia McDonald, 44 years old, of Marlboro, N.J., finished the run with a steady stride.
Her cheeks were caked with the salt of sweat, the marathoner's badge of honor.
She wore a T-shirt inscribed "Virginia," which she planned to wear today, race day.


On the Ballot: Should Planning Commission Rule on Trees?
AMONG decisions that the electorate faces in the voting booth on Tuesday is a referendum on clear-cutting trees on county property.
The proposal, which has already been unanimously approved by the county's Board of Legislators and signed by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, would require approval from the county's Planning Board for any clear-cutting of trees on county property.
Because the legislation would be an amendment to the County Charter, it requires voter approval.
A similar measure -- an ordinance, not an amendment -- already requires the approval of the county's Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board before clear-cutting trees on county parkland only.
That ordinance has been signed into law by Mr.
O'Rourke.


Voting Isn't Pretty, but Somebody Has to Do It
To the Editor:
Ted Rall's protestation that he won't vote, don't ask him (Op-Ed, Nov. 1) perfectly embodies the vile, know-nothing hissy fit loose in our land.


U.S. Seeks to Increase Lost-Bag Compensation
The Department of Transportation has proposed raising the limit on compensation to consumers for baggage that is damaged or lost by a United States airline.
The new limit is $1,850 per passenger, a 48 percent increase from the $1,250 limit that was set 10 years ago.
If approved by Congress, the change could become effective by the end of the year.


... And the Kitchen Goes Electronic
A TELEVISION MONITOR SHOWS two dancers leaping past each other, then moving together to whirl around in a circle, their bodies seemingly melting into one.
But this is not a taped concert with special effects: each woman is actually dancing at the same moment on a stage hundreds of miles from her partner.
A composer plays one of her works on a keyboard in New York, and the keys move on a piano across the continent in Santa Monica, Calif., so people there can hear her fingering on an actual instrument.
"It's as if my arms were 3,000 miles long," she comments.


Columbia Steps Back After 2 Steps Ahead
For longer than Columbia fans care to remember, even the best football seasons were of the one-step forward, two-steps back variety.
In what has been the Lions' winningest season since 1971, it has become two steps forward and one step back.
With more chances than it deserved to tie it or pull ahead, Columbia couldn't muster a victory today at Memorial Field against an injury-riddled Dartmouth team, falling by 14-13.


What's Fair for Childless Workers?
To the Editor:
Leslie Lafayette sounds like those who complain that handicapped parking spots give an advantage to persons with disabilities.
The cases she cites of employees given perks for their children are extremely rare; in most cases, workers lose money and chances at promotion each time an earache, school conference or snow day causes them to lose work time.
Further, her perspective on property tax is unrealistic: she is not paying tax to send our children to school; we all are paying to educate future citizens.
TRACY BARRETT  Nashville, Oct. 18  The writer is a lecturer in Italian at Vanderbilt University.


Putting a New Face On an Old Slovak City
ONE of the favorite cities of the Hapsburgs' Queen Maria Theresa and capital of Hungary from 1541 to 1784, Bratislava is often forgotten on the revived tourist route of Eastern Europe.
But this is perhaps unjust treatment for a metropolis where the Mayor, Peter Kresani, is an architectural historian intent on insuring that restoration takes place and is done authentically.
Mayor Kresani recently revealed a 20-year plan for the city that restricts the historical inner core to buildings of only several stories in height, placing high-rises on the outskirts.


Arithmetic of the Avenues
Hunting for an address on an avenue in Manhattan without knowing the cross street does not have to be difficult.
Just deop the last figure, divide by 2 and add or subtract as indicated below.
The answer is the nearest numbered cross street.
This key does not apply to Bradway below Eights Street because of the many stretts with names rather than numbers


How the Candidates For Statewide Offices See Major Issues On Election Eve
The political races of '94 are almost run, and along the way, the candidates have spoken hundreds of thousands of words -- in speeches, debates, mailings and advertisements.
Often, though, dialogue on the issues of governing has been overshadowed by discussion of other matters, some substantive, others less so.


Silly and Miguided About Love
SELECTED STORIES By Adolfo Bioy Casares.
Translated by Suzanne Jill Levine. 176 pp.
New York:  New Directions. $21.95.


Danny De Vito: Center of the Universe?
Almost everyone considers Michael Ovitz the most powerful man in Hollywood.
But did his name come up in connection with "Pulp Fiction," a movie that some say transformed movie making?
We think not.
Instead, it can be argued that Danny DeVito is not only the most powerful man in Hollywood but also the center of the universe.
Through this actor-director-producer-beautician, anyone could theoretically get to anyone else.
Producing, through his company Jersey Films, has made Mr.
DeVito's reach all encompassing.
The company's productions run the gamut of subjects (and studios) from "Hoffa" (20th Century Fox) to "Reality Bites" (Universal) to "Pulp Fiction" (Miramax).
Next up: "Get Shorty" (MGM), starring John Travolta and "Feeling Minnesota" (New Line Cinema), starring Keanu Reeves.
Mr.
DeVito will also direct "Matilda," based on the Roald Dahl children's book, for Universal.
Here's how Mr.
DeVito Links up to the universe.
JOSH YOUNG GRAMMY WINNERS
Mr.
DeVito appeared in "Ruthless People" with Bette Midler, opened for Barbra Streisand at a benefit for Bill Clinton and was born in Asbury Park, N.J., the town Bruce Springsteen put on the map.
PEOPLE WITH TELEVISIONS
Nearly everyone remembers Mr.
DeVito from the series "Taxi." "People pat me on the back, and say, 'Hey, how are Rhea and the kids?"' Mr.
DeVito said.
Anyone deprived of "Taxi" has certainly been to "Cheers," where Mr.
DeVito's real-life wife, Rhea Periman, served drinks as Carla.
WORLD LEADERS (INCLUDING MICHAEL OVITZ)
In "Junior," which opens on Nov. 26, an airline flight attendant (played by Judy Ovitz, wife of Michael Ovitz) tries to eject the DeVito character from the First-class cabin.
"Let's face it, Danny knows everyone," says Ivan Reitman, the film's director.
Also co-starring: Emma Thompson and Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Kennedy spouse and head of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports during the Bush Administration.
GENERATION X
For a 50-year-old, Mr.
DeVito has impeccable credentials with 20-somethings.
"Reality Bits," directed by Ben Stiller, 28, and written by Helen Childress, 24, is known as the definitive Gen-X movie.
If not for Mr.
DeVito and his partner, Michael Shamberg, backing this film, the revival of the Knack's hit "My Sharona" might be years away.
ALUMNI OF THE WILFRED ACADEMY OF HAIR AND BEAUTY CULTURE
The Wilfred Academy once had 58 branches in the New York area.
After completing his studies in Asbury Park in 1964, Mr.
DeVito got his beautician's license and practiced at his sister's salon.
Told that all Wilfred outlets are now closed, Mr.
DeVito sheepishly admitted, "I haven't kept up with my alma mater." NEW HOLLYWOOD
Jersey Films has made movies at nearly every studio except its home base, Columbia Pictures, so it shouldn't be surprising if the company gets a film going with the new studio formed by Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg, and David Geffen.
During Mr.
Katzenberg's reign at Walt Disney Studios, Mr.
DeVito starred in three Disney films: "Tin Men," "Ruthless People" and "Renaissance Man." OLD HOLLYWOOD
Mr.
DeVito's first turn on the golf course was with Jack Nicholson, a close friend since they appeared together in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest " (1975).
"I played 18 holes my first time out, and I lost every ball in Jack's bag," Mr.
DeVito said.
"Michael" -- Michael Douglas, a pal since the 70's and a collaborator on four DeVito films -- "is a golf enthusiast too, but I'm not getting out there with him." Mr.
Nicholson's best friend is Warren Beatty.
QUENTIN TARANTINO
Since the critical success of "Pulp Fiction," Quentin Tarantino is a universe unto himself.
Three years ago, Stacey Sher, president of Jersey Films, slipped Mr.
DeVito and Michael Shamberg the script for "Reservoir Dogs," then in production.
Jersey Films bought Mr.
Tarantino's next script, for "Pulp Fiction," sight unseen and was the executive producer of the film, distributed through Miramax.
"The only guidance you need to give a guy that talented is what kind of lenses to use," Mr.
DeVito said.


In Poignant Public Letter, Reagan Reveals That He Has Alzheimer's
Former President Ronald Reagan said today that he had entered the early stages of Alzheimer's disease, an incurable brain ailment that steadily destroys memory and eventually leads to death.
In a handwritten letter to the American people, the 83-year-old Mr.
Reagan said he was in good health now, and while he maintained a positive tone, he did strike a fatalistic note.


THE ANGER: EVER DEEPER
One reason people are fed up with politics is that there is too much of it; everything has been politicized ("The Anger: Ever Deeper," Oct. 16).
The Lebanese composer and poet Marcel Khalife, who was recently in New York for a concert, put it very well when he said: "Culture is the only thing we have left to resist politics." He meant, of course, politics in the sense of "polarized contentiousness," not in the sense of the "art of compromise" (which seems to have been lost in Washington).
ROY FINCH New Rochelle, N.Y


Valhalla, Tex.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE PAPER PRINCESS Written and illustrated by Elisa Kleven.
Unpaged.
New York:  Dutton Children's Books. $14.99. (Ages 4 to 8)


Tina Alster, Paul Frazer
Dr.
Tina Alster, a dermatologist in Washington, was married there on Friday to Paul Frazer, the Minister of Public Affairs at the Canadian Embassy in Washington.
Judge Ellen Segal Huvelle of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia performed the ceremony in her chambers.
Dr.
Alster, who is keeping her name, is also a clinical assistant professor of dermatology at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received her medical degree.
She is a daughter of Lisa Railsback of Auburn, Calif., and Lawrence Alster of Great Falls, Va.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERARY STUDIES HEBREW AND MODERNITY By Robert Alter.
Indiana University, cloth, $27.95; paper, $10.95.


Perking Up Pasta With Wild Mushrooms
REMEMBER when the only mushrooms were cultivated whitecaps?
Now markets offer wild mushrooms: portobello, shiitake and oyster mushrooms, orange chanterelles and porcini.
Porcini are boletus mushrooms, also known as cepes, Polish mushrooms or Steinpilz.
They are good dried, too, but they need to be soaked in hot water or chicken broth for about half an hour.


The Jet Set
Milan, Paris, New York -- the little black bead meets the little black dress.


Candidates On Television
The candidates for governor in New York have scheduled these television appearances:  TODAY: 8 A.M., WABC-TV, Channel 7, State Senator George E. Pataki appears on "Tiempo."
1 P.M., WNBC-TV, Channel 4, Mr. Pataki is questioned by Gabe Pressman.


Word for Word / Fashion Notes; Sweetie! The Zeitgeist Just Blew In. Tablecloth Chic and the Neo-Groovie
THERE are a few words designers do not want audiences to walk away thinking about after runway shows like those that just ended Friday for the 1995 spring and summer collections.
Those words are: shirts, trousers, dresses, jackets and shoes.
So every season, staging runway spectacles that cost almost $200,000, they attempt to direct observers' thinking a bit, by constructing a raison d'etre for their collections.
In their program notes, they philosophize on women's images, on their own role in forming those same images and on themselves (often in the third person, like royalty).
Although these notes are read only by jaded members of the fashion industry (and sometimes not even by them), there is always a pretense that the designer is addressing an idealized woman, the way Billy Joel might in one of his songs.


'Ewige Students'
Germans love to go to school.
It is not uncommon here to find someone well past 30 who is still an active university student and has no interest in leaving academe.
Over the years this German syndrome has become well known across Europe, and there is even a colloquial name for its victim -- the "ewige student," or the eternal student.


My Mentor, Barbie
Instead of throwing Barbie a 35th birthday party, feminists have been dissing the popular, petite plaything.
Yet far from being a bad role model, Barbie could be a modern girl's dream mentor.
O.K., so she does have the equivalent of a 16-inch waist.
Over the years, I still learned some very important life lessons from Barbie.
1.
Family Is Fundamental: Barbie's my age and, as the long-awaited only girl in a suburban clan of boys, I was Mattel's dream customer.
I had 68 Barbies who shared a pink plastic convertible car and split-level condominium, along with 12 Little Kiddles and 28 Dawn dolls so tiny that instead of changing their clothes I just switched their heads.


Oct.2-Nov.5; More Controversy for the N.E.A.
Spurred by $3 million in Congressional budget cuts, the National Endowment for the Arts has decided to assume more direct control of its grants.
Some arts groups complained that the new stance amounts to an effort to stifle those artists who are most likely to draw Congressional fire.
The N.E.A., which will still make awards to artists who apply directly to Washington, is eliminating the system that allows local arts groups to select individual artists for Federal funds.
The decision corresponds with a desire by the endowment's chairman, Jane Alexander, to increase accountability.
In August the National Arts Council, which oversees the N.E.A., vetoed grants to three controversial photographers.
Council members said they did not find the photographs very good, although the work of one photographer, Andres Serrano, is in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.


'In Defense of Elitism'
To the Editor:
As a closet elitist and part-time Roger Kimball watcher, I was curious to see what Mr.
Kimball would make of "In Defense of Elitism." I can't say I'm surprised to find that his review wholeheartedly endorses William A. Henry 3d's condemnation of egalitarianism.


Depleted Army Has No Answers for Air Force Defense
Already handicapped by the loss of its best runner and two top quarterbacks with injuries, Army came into today's game against heavily favored Air Force without two other starters who have been suspended because of an incident involving Army players and female Cadets.
Split end Ron Thomas, Army's leading receiver with 23 catches; Mike Robinson, a starting halfback, and Devry Anderson, a defensive back, were disciplined for their part in a groping incident during an October pep rally.
Army did not release the identities of the players suspended from the team, citing Federal privacy rules, but a source confirmed that these three were not in uniform because they had been disciplined.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A
Including these special reports:
Exchange programs get serious.
Free tuition in New York City: How Cooper Union does it.


Karen Milbauer, Michael L. Wolfe
Karen Rachel Milbauer, a daughter of Nancy and Alan J. Milbauer of Wilmington, Del., was married last evening to Michael Lipton Wolfe, the son of Kathryn and Robert L. Wolfe of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Cantor Norman Swerling officiated at Congregation Beth Shalom in Wilmington.
Mrs.
Wolfe, 26, graduated from Tulane University.
She is an account executive with Nielsen North America, the research company, in New York.
Her father is the vice president of external affairs for Zeneca Pharmaceuticals in Wilmington.
Her mother is a guidance counselor at Avon Grove High School in Avondale, Pa.


The Bigger The Name, The Harder They Falter
On racing's day of days, with or without Holy Bull, the 11th Breeders' Cup series was spiced by D. Wayne Lukas when his horses won the Juvenile and the Juvenile Fillies, but had to settle for second place to Concern in the Classic.
But it was also a day of gyrating emotions that saw Lure and Sky Beauty run ninth, and Paradise Creek run third, in races they were expected to win.
The Europeans, with their largest delegation of 27 horses, took the Mile with Ireland's Barathea in a race that Lure was supposed to capture.
The Europeans also prevailed in the the Turf, with Tikkanen, in a race that Paradise Creek was supposed to win, and the 47-1 long shot One Dreamer won the Distaff in a race that Sky Beauty was supposed to win.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Art on the Cutting Edge
WHEN the sculpturing tool is a chainsaw, mistakes can be costly.
"The chainsaw is unforgiving," Frank Bono said.
For art, and appendages.
Mr.
Bono, of East Northport, has been guarding his fingers while creating his art for three years.
That's how long he has been a chainsaw sculptor.
He takes Long Island dead trees and makes them works of art.
"I have a deal with a tree-service company," he said.
"They bring me their discards." Or he goes to the tree.
"Someone's got a stump," he said.
"They want to turn it into a bear.  I can do that."


Democrats On Defensive In a Handful Of Contests
The Democrats are on the defensive in a handful of contested legislative races around New York State this year, and while the Republicans could pick up seats in both the Assembly and the Senate, the gains would not upset the balance of power in either house and seem unlikely to have any sway in the death-penalty debate.
In the Assembly, where 100 of the 150 members are Democrats, officials from both parties estimate that the majority could lose up to seven or eight seats, though it will probably be fewer.
In the Senate, where 35 of the 61 members are Republicans, both parties have concentrated efforts on two tough races in the Rochester area currently held by Democrats.


Sizing Up Airline Seating
IF you were crammed into economy-class seats all summer with the rest of us, you discovered airlines are no more generous with their leg room than with their peanuts.
There may be an inch of hope on the horizon in the new twin-jet Boeing 777, but don't hold your breath: The 777 will not make a commercial debut until next summer, and it is a protean plane, one with an interior that can be rearranged quickly, so what you see on the charts may not be what you get.
Seating in the main cabins of major United States airlines continues to get tighter as competition intensifies.
As John McDonald, a spokesman for Trans World Airlines said, schedule and price are the bottom line for air travelers, and extra space will attract new customers only when bottom lines are equal.
"The market won't support it," Mr.
McDonald said.
"Comfort is one thing everyone talks about, but you still see 300 people crowded aboard a charter 727 to San Juan." This would be more than twice the capacity on a scheduled flight.


A Patriotic Pitch: Honda Is American
FOR years, the Big Three auto companies and the United Automobile Workers have tried to make patriotism part of the car-buying mentality of Americans.
As a marketing pitch, the effect of showroom jingoism has always been debatable -- so has its economic logic.
Still, the idea that driving a Chevy or a Chrysler is a patriotic act, while owning a Honda or a Toyota is not, clearly appealed to some.
And in their lobbying efforts and in their advertising, Detroit has long argued that buying American-made cars is good for the American economy and that buying imported cars is bad.


Campaign Refrain: 'My Opponent's a Hypocrite'
Politically embarrassed by disclosures that they had both employed undocumented household workers, Senator Dianne Feinstein and Representative Michael Huffington traded new charges of hypocrisy today as each struggled to regain campaign momentum in California's most vituperative Senate race in years.
At a rally here with cheering campaign workers, Ms.
Feinstein, the Democratic incumbent, called Mr.
Huffington, a native of Texas, a carpetbagger "who doesn't give a whit about California." She then accused him of "running lies" about her and her problems with the immigration issue.


The Very Quiet Behemoth of the Philanthropic World
THOUGH other philanthropies are better known, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute is actually the leviathan of the nonprofit world, and C. F. (Terry) Wolfe is the man who minds the money.
No wonder he keeps a pie-sized Bayer aspirin on his desk.
"You just have to cross out the zeros," he said.
Otherwise, he has discovered, "you'd lose perspective."


Marathon Stories Almost Outnumber the Runners
As they stream by his Brooklyn church today, the Rev.
David Dyson says he will honor the New York Marathon runners from the pulpit, summoning Isaiah's prophecy that the young shall run and not be weary.
But he will also read from the first verse of the 12th chapter of Hebrews, in which Paul speaks of runners being surrounded "by a great cloud of witnesses."
It is this verse that inspired the mural surrounding the inside of the church, which depicts "a cloud" of neighborhood folks from street people to firefighters to a kilt-wearing chap playing a bagpipe to, yes, runners in sweats.


Helping Immigrants Get Help: A One-Stop-Shopping Approach
Yvonne J. Graham understands a few things about providing health care for immigrants that many doctors may not.
She knows that they often do not seek it out, because they are afraid that if they are undocumented, they are not entitled to services.
And she is well aware that many of them go to a doctor only after they have exhausted the supposed healing power of plant extracts or leaves.


THE DAWN OF SIMNEWS
The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch has been writing capsules of three Cardinals' championship seasons since opening day, when only a moderately talented seer could have predicted a midseason halt (Word &amp; Image: "The Dawn of SimNews," by Max Frankel, Oct. 2).
Further, The Post-Dispatch carried capsule histories of other noteworthy Cardinals teams, in 1992 and 1993.
It is inaccurate for The Times to suggest that we started this feature because of the strike or that the newspaper, to use Frankel's unfortunate turn of phrase, "feigned excitement over classic games of the past." EDWARD H. KOHN Senior Correspondent St.
Louis Post-Dispatch St.
Louis


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS Undecided in New York; For Many Voters, No Choice Is Satisfying
With just a few days until the election, about 1 in every 10 likely voters in New York State remain undecided about whom to support in the governor's race.
These voters could, in theory, decide the election if they were to swing heavily into one candidate's camp.
The undecideds include Republican die-hards and disenchanted Democrats, people from New York City and remote regions upstate -- all torn between a Governor whom many could no longer abide and challengers they were not comfortable with, either.


A Woman's False Accusation Pains Many Blacks
As racial hoaxes go, the lies Susan Smith told in Union, S.C., about a black man stealing her two children were not novel or new, but they shot around the world anyway as the gospel truth spoken by a grieving mother.
Now, with the news that Mrs.
Smith has confessed to killing her own offspring comes a different kind of grief -- a weary, when-will-it-ever-end sadness.


Out and About
In the tradition of this country's great documentary photographers, Nancy Andrews, a photographer at The Washington Post, illuminates a part of American culture too often hidden from most people's view.
Ms.
Andrews's sensitive, stirring collection of 70 black-and-white photographs with accompanying oral histories, FAMILY: A Portrait of Gay and Lesbian America (HarperSanFrancisco, paper, $25), is an important record of 20th-century gay life and a joy to read.
From the conventional to the outlandish, Ms.
Andrews portrays an extraordinary range of subjects: a World War II veteran, shyly proud in his American Legion cap; the pastor of the Full Truth Unity Fellowship of Christ Church, singing a gospel song, eyes closed in ecstasy; a cowboy, muscular and self-assured, who rides on the gay rodeo circuit; a lesbian garden club in Georgia called the Digging Dykes of Decatur; even a Mardi Gras "krewe" or club, featuring transvestites in Las Vegas-style beaded costumes.
Though the more eccentric photos grab attention, the substance of the book lies in its soulful depiction of people as simply themselves.
Ms.
Andrews's portraits are filled with texture and natural light and reveal a skillful photographer who makes her subjects comfortable.
The text conveys each person's story and manner of speaking, and varies from rambling to eloquent.
"Family" affirms gay men and lesbians in all their diversity, while widening the reader's image of what a family can be.
ANDREA COOPER


He Coulda been a Contender
BRANDO The Biography.
By Peter Manso.
Illustrated. 1,118 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $29.95.


A Negative Lautenberg and Haytaian
In New Jersey, it's all the other guy's fault.
The Democrat is soft on crime and big on raising taxes, and an incumbent to boot.
The Republican is a hypocrite who consorts with racists, and besides, that was a pretty expensive parking garage he voted for.


Last Call for Getting In the Spring Bulbs
WHY do today what can surely be done next week?
This sort of procrastination is typical of gardeners.
Inspired by a few weeks of beautiful mild weather, they postpone those inevitable chores, particularly bulb planting.
But the weeks move along with amazing speed and there are no surer reminders than the early-fading light of fall days and the page-turning of the trusty calendar that winter is on its way.
With it will come frozen soil and snow.
So good gardeners, do be sporting and carry on.
Even a traditional deadline for planting tulips -- Election Day -- is on the horizon.


Running Around the Country (Literally) and Other Marathon Tales
The world's first marathoner didn't get to enjoy the fruits of victory for very long.
Legend has it that in 490 B.C., Pheidippides ran 25 miles from a battlefield at Marathon to tell the Greeks in Athens that they had defeated the Persians.
Once the message was delivered, the tuckered-out runner promptly dropped dead.
Training methods and medical care have improved in the past two and a half millennia, so the vast majority of the runners lined up in Staten Island this morning at the start of the New York City Marathon should be able to proclaim their own victories: I won; I improved my time; I made it.
Their trek through the five boroughs of New York will mark the 25th time the city's marathon has been run.
Although it isn't the oldest marathon and it isn't the most grueling, it can boast that it provides the world's longest urinal for the world's largest starting group of runners.
Boasting rights for other marathons as well as some odder incidents in the history of the sport, are noted at right.
ANNE CRONIN WORLD'S OLDEST MARATHON -- The modern Olympic games, which began in 1896, included a 40-kilometer (24.85-mile) marathon.
It was won by Spiridon Loues of Greece, with a 2:58:50 time.
OLDEST IN U.S. -- The Boston Marathon, first run 1897, is the world's oldest annual marathon.
Members of the Boston Athletic Association had attended the 1896 Olympic games and decided to start a marathon in Boston.
The race, then 24.7 miles, was won by John J. McDermott in 2:55:10, although he walked several times during the final miles.
GLUTTON FOR PUNISHMENT -- John A. Kelley ran the Boston Marathon 61 straight years, from 1931 to 1992.
He won twice, in 1935 and 1945, and came in second seven times.
In one of his runner-up runs, Mr.
Kelley tapped Ellison "Tarzan" Brown, then leading, as he passed him.
This riled Mr.
Brown, who redoubled his efforts and went on to win.
The spot of the tap was called "Heartbreak Hill" in The Boston Globe the next day.
The name stuck.
HOW THE MARATHON GOT ITS LENGTH -- Marathons were generally 40 kilometers long until the 1908 Olympics in London.
Princess Mary, who was the official starter for the race, asked whether the starting line could be moved to Windsor Castle, so her children could watch from the nursey windows.
This extended the course to 26 miles, 385 yards to the finish line.
The longer "London" distance was adopted as the standard in 1924.
PLEASE DON'T USE THE BUSHES -- The world's largest urinal will be installed at the start of the New York City Marathon in Staten Island.
The 290-foot facility will be located at the Fort Wadsworth Naval Station along with 350 portable toilets.
Another 200 portable toilets will be placed along the route.
A CAST OF THOUSANDS -- This year, more than 27,000 runners will be competing in the New York City Marathon, which could break its own record for most starters -- 28,656 in 1992.
The London Marathon is the second largest, with 25,194 this year.
SHOELESS ABEBE -- The 1960 Rome Olympic marathon was won by an Ethiopian who had never run a marathon outside Addis Ababa.
Abebe Bikila ran barefoot and won with a record time of 2:15:16.2.
He was also the first man to ever win consecutive Olympic marathons, finishing the race in Toyko with another record time of 2:12:11.2, despite having had an appendectomy a month before.
He wore shoes the second time around.
GOLD STANDARD -- The record for Olympic marathon wins is two, shared by Mr.
Bikila (1960, 1964) and Waldemar Cierpinski of East Germany (1976, 1980).
Grete Waltz of Norway won in New York nine times (1978-80, 1982-86, 1988).
WOMEN'S FIRSTS -- The first woman officially entered in a marathon was Violet Percy of Great Britain, who ran the 1926 London Marathon in 3:40:22.
The first championship marathon for women was held by the Road Runners Club of America in 1970.
Women's Olympic marathons began in 1984.
LONG HAULS -- The longest marathon races ever were the 1920's transcontinental runs from Los Angeles to New York City.
Andy Payne ran 3,422 miles in 1928 with a time of 573:04:34.
Johnny Salo won the 1929 version of 3,665 miles in 525:57:2, for an average of 6.97 miles per hour.
The longest annual race is Australia's Westfield Run.
The record for the 658 miles was set by Yiannis Kouros of Greece in 1989; 5 days, 2 hours, 27 minutes, 27 seconds.
The longest individual run on record was Sara Covington-Fulcher's lap around the United States, starting and finishing in Los Angeles.
The 11,134 miles took from July 21, 1987, to Oct. 2, 1988, to cover.
Sources: Jack Fleming, Boston Athletic Association; Hal Higdon, senior writer at Runner's World; New York City Road Runners Club; London Marathon; "The Guinness Book of Sports Records, 1994-1995," edited by Mark Young; Facts on File, publisher.


World Group to Debate Plan To Protect Species by Numbers
As conservation authorities from around the world meet in Florida starting on Monday to review the treaty protecting imperiled species from excessive commercial trade, they face an especially heated debate over how to decide which species deserve protection.
In the past, restrictions over importing and exporting tigers, rhinoceroses, orchids, parrots and the like have been imposed one species at a time, using a variety of justifications under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.


Scores of Students Take Up Acupuncture at Center in Syosset
IN a classroom on a Saturday morning a man lay on a table with his shirt open and about 12 needles protruding from the face and chest.
A second young man leaned over and carefully inserted an additional needle through a plastic tube into the chest while their teacher watched.
"The angle is not quite right," the teacher, Dr.
Chi Chou, said.
"It should be pointed outward, in the direction of the meridian."


26 Miles for the 25th Year: There's No Stopping the Marathon Now
On race day in the mid-1980's, Allan Steinfeld received an alarming telephone call 50 minutes before the New York City Marathon was to begin.
The police had made an arrest along the course in Queens after drugs were found in 55-gallon drums, and law enforcement officials had blocked the road to anyone in a car or on foot.
Steinfeld, then the assistant race director, relayed this message: In less than two hours, 23,000 runners would be descending upon Queens.
The law enforcement officials could either move or be trampled.
They moved.


Lojack in New York City: Car G8L54 Where Are You?
LOJACK has come to New York City and southern New York State: The electronic tracking system, which helps the police to find stolen vehicles, went into operation in mid-June in the five boroughs and in Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, Rockland and Orange Counties.
The Lojack premise is straightforward.
Car owners pay a dealer $595 (or less) to have a radio transceiver about the size of a chalkboard eraser hidden in their cars; there are no monthly monitoring fees.
A reply code of five letters and numbers -- each car has a different code -- is paired with the vehicle identification number in police computers.
Lojack donates the hardware that makes the system work to state and local police; the company declines to say how many units have been distributed, or how many cars are equipped with Lojack.


Strumming A Few Bars Of Literature
JEFFERSON. Crevecoeur. Whitman. Steinbeck. Kerouac. Merle Haggard.
Merle Haggard?


Paramount Center: Like Old Times
FINANCIAL constraints have forced the Paramount Center for the Arts to curtail its concert presentations, so only nine events are scheduled through the end of this year.
Because several of those attractions are clustered next weekend, it will be like old times in Peekskill for a few days.
Heading the list is the singer Bobby McFerrin.
Nobody, including Mr.
McFerrin himself, has been able to explain how he produces the myriad sounds that shape his improvisations, but his performances Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M. will be recorded for CD release.


World Markets; Depository Receipts: Now, the World
BACK in the 1920's, a group of investors in the United States invented the American Depository Receipt as a way of making it easier for them to register their purchases of foreign stocks and collect their dividends.
Instead of having to appear in person in some foreign capital to go through the formalities, as laws in most nations required, the investors paid a bank to hold the securities there, collect the dividend and send it on to them.
Over the decades, the concept grew to encompass trading of A.D.R.'s, denominated in dollars, again to avoid the difficulties of actually buying and selling the underlying shares on foreign markets.
Foreign companies eventually discovered the advantages of broadening their shareholder base in the United States, and actively encouraged investors to hold A.D.R.'s.


Journal; Double Trouble
Those of us who live a safe distance from Virginia and California are probably having too much fun arguing the No. 1 election-eve question over dinner: Who would be scarier, Senator Oliver North or Senator Michael Huffington?
It's a deliciously down-to-the-wire debate.
Just when it seemed that Mr.
North, a convicted felon who got off on technicalities, would be the clear winner on the grounds of proven criminality, Mr.
Huffington had to go and admit that he, too, may have violated Federal law by employing an undocumented nanny.
Both men have a special talent for blaming others for their own misdeeds -- Congress in Mr.
North's case, his wife in Mr.
Huffington's -- and both men are outspending every other candidate in the country to sell themselves in ads rather than face questions for which their handlers cannot supply answers in advance.


Voting Isn't Pretty, but Somebody Has to Do It; Imagine No Attack Ads
To the Editor:
By the time Election Day arrives, candidates nationwide will have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to try to win our votes.
Most of these millions will have been poured into advertising campaigns, many of which are intended to divert attention, distort issues and generally disinform the electorate.


For This Father, Daughter Knows Best
IT IS JUST BEFORE A REHEARSAL for "Night Seasons," Horton Foote's next play in the Signature Theater Company's season of his work, and Hallie Foote, his daughter, has some questions.
"How long is it between Laura Lee's visit to Dolly and Mr. Weems's dying?" Ms.
Foote asks her father.


Labor Development Institute Has Never Taken C.I.A. Money
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 30 news article on United States involvement 30 years ago in British Guiana mentions the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s American Institute for Free Labor Development.
It says that "in the 1950's and early 1960's, former United States intelligence officers say, the C.I.A. slipped money to the institute."


The Splendor and Ingenuity of Unabashed Flattery
JUST IN CASE YOU HAVEN'T HAD A  good opportunity to feel inferior lately, in case you haven't had to go on an interview or a Big Date with bags under your eyes or an ill-concealed pimple, a show has arrived to restore you to the common fellowship: "Masterpieces of Hollywood Photography: Photographs From the Private Collection of John Kobal" at the James Danziger Gallery in SoHo.
The great beauties of the screen (sleek Garbo, exalted Dietrich, luscious Rita Hayworth), some of the great handsomes (Coop, suave and brooding; Gable, before a mustache gave him definition and virility), and even one of the great dogs (Lassie, to be precise) are here magnified to the status of miracles, the ne plus ultra not so much of human as of photographic life.
The only really appropriate response to these pictures is either to go down on your knees or to swoon, but since both are rather out of date, a little skeptical admiration will do.


Living It Up in Later Years
IT is a happy time at Stage II of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven where four actors -- Jim Dale, Brian Murray, Martin Rayner and Tom Beckett -- are playing more than 20 parts, including the eccentric dowager extraordinaire, Augusta Bertram.
The occasion is Graham Greene's "Travels With My Aunt," which has been adapted for the stage.
Sort of.
Graham Greene, who died at the age of 86 in 1991, is best known for his novels -- "Brighton Rock," "The Power and the Glory," "The Heart of the Matter" and "The Third Man" -- 24 in all.
The political and the theological were his dominant themes (Greene called himself "a Catholic atheist") but he was as acknowledged for what he termed "entertainments" -- works of suspense and intrigue -- as for his concerns with conscience and spirituality.


The New York Vote: Candidates on the Issues
The political races of '94 are almost run, and along the way, the candidates have spoken hundreds of thousands of words -- in speeches, debates, mailings and advertisements.
Often, though, dialogue on the issues of governing has been overshadowed by discussion of other matters, some substantive, others less so.


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; Last of the Cigar Store Indians
Another fading tobacco symbol is the painted wooden Indian.
At the turn of the century nearly every cigar store had one, but only a few thousand are left, of which about 60 (some pictured above) are owned by Mark Goldman, a Manhattan tobacco wholesaler and retailer.
"I grew up in the tobacco business and fell in love with them," says Goldman, who buys, sells and trades the carved figures.
They are not all Indians.
Goldman has carvings of a baseball player and a Scotsman.
The statues, of all types, range in value from about $5,000 to $90,000.


Makeup, Please!
Allure celebrating the publication of a book, Nov. 2.


The High Price of Free Excellence
THE poster-crammed bulleting boards, grubily clad undergraduates mingling in clumps and scent of old dust mixed with fresh paint bring to mind any of a hundred urban campuses.
But this isn't just any campus.
The students, a potpourri of races and ethnic groups, are among the most talented in America, and the curriculum is among the most demanding.
More striking, the only barrier to entry is the fierce competition for places in the freshman class.
For this is Cooper Union, a specialized college of art, architecture and engineering in Greenwich Village and the only private American college of its caliber that charges no tuition.


Races in Connecticut for Governor, Other Statewide Offices and Congress
GOVERNOR  CANDIDATES
WILLIAM E. CURRY JR., 42, Democrat.
State Comptroller since 1990, lawyer, State Senator from 1979-83, ran unsuccessfully for the United States House of Representatives in 1982, former political director of Freeze Voter, the political arm of the nuclear-freeze movement.
EUNICE S. GROARK, 56, A Connecticut Party.
A one-time Republican, Lieutenant Governor since 1990 when she ran on the third-party ticket of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker.
Lawyer, corporation counsel for Hartford from 1987-90, and a Hartford City Councilwoman from 1981-85.
JOHN G. ROWLAND, 37, Republican.
Congressman from Waterbury from 1985-91, barely lost the 1990 race for governor, member of House Armed Services Committee.
Consultant since 1990 for several military contractors based in Connecticut.
TOM SCOTT, 36, radio talk-show host, State Senator from 1981-1991, led anti-income tax movement in 1991, ran unsuccessfully for United States House of Representatives in 1990 and 1992.
THE ISSUES
The state income tax, imposed in 1991, has been the central issue.
Mr.
Rowland and Mr.
Scott promise to scrap it without raising other taxes.
Mrs.
Groark would not change the income tax, and Mr.
Curry wants to keep it and economize elsewhere to provide money to cities and towns to cut property taxes.
All candidates have called for expanded efforts to reduce crime, and all four favor the death penalty.
Mrs.
Groark has been attacked over the Weicker administration's policy of giving tax breaks and cash incentives to attract and retain companies, an approach she favors.
Mr.
Rowland and Mr.
Scott says tax cuts would do more for the economy than such incentives.
Mr.
Curry would shift economic assistance to smaller companies.
ANALYSIS
Mr.
Rowland has been the front-runner since the campaign began, and has had a large advantage in financing, spending much of his money on television commercials.
But Mr.
Scott, who appeals to many of the same conservatives, has drawn off some support, and many voters, particularly women, have been troubled by Mr.
Rowland's efforts to suppress a police report on a domestic dispute with his ex-wife in April.
After a surprise primary victory, Mr.
Curry has campaigned aggressively, but in a close race he may lose critical votes to Mrs.
Groark.
OTHER STATE RACES  (x denotes incumbents)
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR M. Jodi Rell, Republican; Joseph P. Ganim, Democrat; Audrey Rowe, A Connecticut Party; Glen R. O'Keefe, independent
TREASURER Christopher Burnham, Republican; Joseph M. Suggs, Democrat (X)
COMPTROLLER Gene Gavin, Republican; Nancy Wyman, Democrat, A Connecticut Party
ATTORNEY GENERAL Richard Arnold, Republican; Richard Blumenthal, Democrat, A Connecticut Party (X)
SECRETARY OF THE STATE Andrea Scott, Republican; Miles S. Rapoport, Democrat, A Connecticut Party UNITED STATES SENATE  CANDIDATES
GERALD LABRIOLA, 62, Republican, retired pediatrician, State Senator from 1981-83, ran unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor in 1982 and for the Republican nomination for governor in 1982 and 1986.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN, 52, Democrat, United States Senator since 1991; State Attorney General from 1983-89, State Senator from 1971-81.
THE ISSUES
Mr.
Lieberman's TV advertising depicts him as an advocate for creating jobs, fighting crime and making Congress more accountable.
Dr.
Labriola, relying largely on handshaking and yard signs, assails Mr.
Lieberman for backing President Clinton's budget plan last year, calling it the largest tax increase in history.
Dr.
Labriola says Mr.
Lieberman "fakes right and votes left." ANALYSIS
Mr.
Lieberman has had a commanding lead in the polls from the beginning and a huge advantage in fund raising, allowing him to air television commercials that focus on his family and his achievements and do not mention his opponent.
Dr.
Labriola has had little money for television ads.
Some Democratic Party analysts have predicted the most lopsided victory in state history.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  SECOND DISTRICT CANDIDATES
SAM GEJDENSON, 45, Democrat, dean of the Connecticut delegation to the House of Representatives, seeking his eighth term.
EDWARD W. MUNSTER, 53, Republican, a retired statistician at Pfizer.
Served one two-year term in the State Senate before challenging Mr.
Gejdenson in 1992, a race he narrowly lost.
THE DISTRICT
The Second Congressional District is the state's largest, geographically, covering most of eastern Connecticut.
It has been in flux economically as military jobs have declined and as gambling and tourism jobs have increased with the rise of the Foxwoods casino in Ledyard.
THE ISSUES
Mr.
Munster campaigned last time on the argument that Mr.
Gejdenson had lost his local bearings after more than a decade in Congress.
This time, the debate has centered more on effectiveness.
Mr.
Munster's commercials attack Mr.
Gejdenson's attendance record for major votes.
Mr.
Gejdenson's commercials say Mr.
Munster failed to do much of note as a State Senator.
ANALYSIS
Mr.
Gejdenson did not appear to take Mr.
Munster seriously in 1992, but he is fighting hard this time, trading blow for blow in a negative campaign that seems to have shifted the advantage to Mr.
Gejdenson.
He has portrayed his Washington savvy as reaping huge benefits for the district in business for military contractors.
FIFTH DISTRICT CANDIDATES
GARY A. FRANKS, 41, Republican, seeking his third term, the first black Republican elected to the House of Representatives in 60 years.
Former labor-relations executive.
JAMES H. MALONEY, 46, Democrat, State Senator from Danbury since 1986. THE DISTRICT
The district is economically diverse, encompassing wealthy enclaves like Wilton and Ridgefield and blue-collar cities like Waterbury and Meriden.
Once a Democratic stronghold, it was seized by the Republicans in the 1984 Reagan landslide.
THE ISSUES
Mr.
Maloney, with far less name recognition or money than his opponent, has tried to portray Mr.
Franks as a Congressman more interested in gaining a national reputation than serving constituents.
Mr.
Franks has contended that Mr.
Maloney has no real agenda to pursue if elected.
ANALYSIS
Mr.
Franks was considered vulnerable in 1992, when Bill Clinton carried Connecticut in the Presidential election, but he won with a 43 percent plurality when two Democrats -- one running as an independent -- split the Democratic vote.
This year, he could benefit from having John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, on the ticket.
Mr.
Rowland represented the district from 1985 to 1991, and remains popular there.
OTHER CONGRESSIONAL RACES  (x denotes incumbents)
FIRST DISTRICT Barbara B. Kennelly, Democrat (X); Douglas T. Putnam, Republican
SECOND DISTRICT Sam Gedjensen, Democrat (X); Edward Munster, Republican; David Bingham, A Connecticut Party
THIRD DISTRICT Rosa L. DeLauro, Democrat (X); Susan Johnson, Republican
FOURTH DISTRICT Christopher Shays, Republican (X); Jonathan D. Kantrowitz, Democrat
SIXTH DISTRICT Nancy Johnson, Republican (X); Charlotte Koskoff, Democrat, A Connecticut Party;


Looking Back on 30,000 Games
WELCOME to my zoo," said Matthew (Pop) Shortell, ushering a guest into a room packed with more than a half a century's worth of memories. Hundreds of pictures and dozens of awards were filed away in boxes, plastered to the walls and stacked mountain-high on wooden book shelves.
Behind the oversized, elevated chair on which Mr.
Shortell has spent countless hours seated -- typing game reports and compiling endless statistics of every sport played in community of Ansonia for the past 57 years -- hang autographed pictures of former Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.


POSTINGS: The Octagon Tower; A Plan to Stabilize a Roosevelt Island Landmark
One of New York's most haunting ruins, the 155-year-old Octagon tower on Roosevelt Island, has long posed a vexing question to those who would restore it: To which incarnation should the landmark be returned?
To the design by Alexander Jackson Davis from the early 1830's, which was almost surely not followed exactly?
To its appearance when completed in 1839 as the New York City Lunatic Asylum?
To the time in 1878 when the low roof was replaced by a Victorian dome, designed by Joseph M. Dunn?
The Octagon is an eight-sided tower with a spectacular flying staircase that spirals around a 62-foot-high rotunda.
It once served as the hub between the south and west wings of a much larger building.
The wings were demolished in 1970.
The dome was lost in a 1982 fire that also ravaged the interior.


Dispatches From the Sex War
NO MAN'S LAND The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century.
Volume 3: Letters From the Front.
By Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar.
Illustrated. 476 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


Oct.2-Nov.5: Hate and Hurt; Nationwide Vigil Ends As Boys' Bodies Found And the Mother Is Charged
The ministers called for forgiveness and togetherness in the aftermath of the arrest last week of Susan Smith, the mother who claimed her 3-year-old and 14-month-old sons were taken by a carjacker, only to be charged in their murders when divers found the two boys at the bottom of a lake.
But in Union, S.C., where the hoax once rallied a whole community, the talk on the street was more about hate and hurt than healing.
People who see about one killing a year in their county of 30,000, who believe serious crime is a missing hubcap on the Oldsmobile, hissed, jeered and shouted hateful things -- "I hope you die, you baby killer," said one woman -- as Mrs.
Smith was driven away from the Union County Courthouse after being charged with murder.


Educating Just Plain Blokes
When the British Government decided to move higher education from a system that caters to the elite to a system that educates the masses, it didn't reckon so many of the masses would be interested.
Six years ago, when only one out of six high school graduates entered universities, the Government announced that times were changing.
It vowed to give more people the opportunity to get a university education and it set a target: One out of every three high school graduates would go on to higher education by the end of the century.
It didn't take nearly that long.
As the Government, which subsidizes higher education in Britain, encouraged expansion by increasing the funds it provides to universities by almost a third, the number of students rose from 261,900 in 1988 to 436,200 in 1993.


Few Takers for Tour of New S.R.O.
Aiming to quiet protests over plans to move homeless people into Euclid Hall, the managers of the building at Broadway and 86th Street have begun conducting weekly public tours to generate a more positive image to neighbors.
For the last month, on Thursdays at 10 A.M. and 6 P.M., visitors have seen offices, a model suite and recreation areas in the vacant, renovated north side of the building, which has been the focus of protests.


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; Rink Pollution
The real threat to Nancy Kerrigan may not have been Tonya Harding.
Tests conducted earlier this year in several Massachusetts ice arenas by WCVB, a Boston television station, showed sky-high carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide readings.
The highest numbers were recorded at Stoneham Arena, Kerrigan's home rink.
The primary culprit?
Motorized ice resurfacing machines (Zamboni is the best known), which often lack pollution controls.
Rinks don't usually recirculate their air, so the gases accumulate.
And figure skaters, hockey players and spectators at rinks from Sun Valley, Idaho, to Tampa Bay, Fla., have been hospitalized for exposure to these fumes, which can kill at high levels. (Vitas Gerulaitis, the tennis player, recently died of accidental carbon monoxide poisoning at a friend's house.)


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Wishful Politics Of Campaign '94
WHATEVER the exact outcome of Tuesday's midterm elections, the mandate for members of the next Congress is clear, based on the oratory and advertising of Campaign '94: They must push hard for a balanced budget, cut taxes and protect -- utterly and absolutely -- the sanctity of Social Security and Medicare.
They must get tough with welfare recipients, make crime a top priority, hold the line on social spending and keep the Government out of the health care system while repairing its flaws.


In a Four-Way Race in Connecticut, the Stratagems Seem Endless
Four candidates for governor of Connecticut each stand to draw more than 10 percent of the popular vote on Tuesday, according to polls released this week.
That may sound like a simple statistic, but political experts say that its implications, and the weird dynamic it has imposed on candidates and voters, is anything but simple.
Consider, to name just one voting group that has come feverishly into play in the campaign's final days, women voters.
Independent polls have shown that a significant percentage of Republican women who had supported John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate and front-runner, have grown disenchanted in recent weeks.
Mr.
Rowland's efforts to keep secret a police report about a domestic disturbance at his ex-wife's home in Middlebury earlier this year is considered the cause.


Emily H. Mitty, Jonathan Cappo
Emily Honore Mitty, the daughter of Drs.
Harold and Ethel Mitty of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Wheeler Cappo, a son of Eugene and Carolyn Cappo of Flushing, Mich., at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The Rev.
Louis Cappo, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony, and Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz took part in it.
Mrs.
Cappo, 29, is a product manager at the American Home Products Corporation, the pharmaceuticals and consumer-products company, in Madison, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband, and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.


Alison Bernhard, Kevin W. Hudson
Alison Ann Bernhard, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Bernhard Jr. of New Orleans, was married yesterday to Kevin Walter Hudson, a son of Dr.
Barbara W. Hudson and Walter Hudson of Baltimore.
The Rev.
Jeffrey H. Walker performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride and the bridegroom work at the Bankers Trust Company in New York, where she is a vice president in the financial-institutions capital-markets group and he is a managing director in the corporate capital-markets group.
Mrs.
Hudson graduated from the University of Alabama and received an M.B.A. from Tulane University.


E. L. Nicholson, J. V. McConnell Jr.
Elizabeth L. Nicholson of South Salem, N.Y., and James V. McConnell Jr. of St.
Thomas, United States Virgin Islands, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Caroline Wittwer, a minister of the United Methodist Church, performed the ceremony at the Sellecks Corners Chapel in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Mrs.
McConnell is a broker with the real estate firm of Houlihan/Lawrence in Pound Ridge.
She is a graduate of Finch College.
She is the daughter Mrs.
Mark Langham of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Langham.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania  The Last Weekend: Senate Races Where the Battle Has Been Intense; A War of Words On Social Security
The Senate candidates in Pennsylvania have become locked in a pitched battle over Social Security, a fight that defines their vast ideological differences.
Both candidates -- Senator Harris Wofford, a liberal Democrat, and Representative Rick Santorum, a conservative Republican -- began this unusually warm autumn day courting votes in Philadelphia.
Mr.
Santorum shook hands at the Italian Market in South Philadelphia, a must-stop on any political tour, before campaigning in Harrisburg with the Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, and going on to West Hazleton, where he received the endorsement of the City Council President, a Democrat.
Mr.
Wofford, meanwhile, joined a motorcade with Philadelphia labor leaders and met with residents of suburban Narberth to talk about his opposition to assault weapons.


Remembering the Titanic
More than 150 artifacts salvaged from the wreck of the Titanic are on view through April 2 at the National Maritime Museum in London.
The objects -- including letters, a steward's jacket and passengers' personal effects -- were recovered from the ocean floor around the wreck, which lies two and a half miles beneath the North Atlantic, off Newfoundland.
The intense cold, absence of light and low oxygen levels in the ocean bed have slowed the deterioration of the artifacts, which also include a cigarette case with cigarettes and a copy of The Southampton Echo dated April 9, 1912.


K. B. Maynard, D. R. Hamilton Jr.
Katherine Boyce Maynard, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Maynard of High Point, N.C., was married there yesterday to Donald Ross Hamilton Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Julian McClees Aldridge Jr. performed the ceremony at the Wesley Memorial United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Hamilton, 27, and her husband, 25, graduated from Duke University.
She was until recently an assistant in Raleigh, N.C., to Governor James Hunt.


Business Diary: October 30 - November 4
THE ECONOMY The Economy's Up, and Politicians Are in Trouble.
What Gives?
All those cliches are surely true: People vote their pocketbooks.
It's the economy, stupid.
And so on.
The economy's clearly on a roll -- just last week, in fact, came word that the unemployment rate had fallen to 5.8 percent, a four-year low.
You can't ask for more than that.
But if those fancy polls are right, voters are about to turn that conventional wisdom on its head and thrash the Democrats.
What's up?
Hard as it may be for the statisticians to swallow, the public just may not believe, or care about, the official data -- they see headlines about layoffs, they see their incomes stagnating, they see a tightfisted workplace.
As one economist put it, "Even in a nasty recession, 90 percent of the work force has jobs." So forget the G.D.P., the C.P.I., all the high-gloss numbers.
If voters feel shaky, they'll throw the bums out on Tuesday.


C. M. Axtmann, James K. Mueller
Connelle Marguerite Axtmann, a daughter of Dr.
Robert and Annabell Axtmann of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to James Keightly Mueller, the son of Warren and Martha-Jane Mueller of Dansville, Mich.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
The bride is a commercial writer and illustrator in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is a professor emeritus of chemical engineering at Princeton University.
Her mother is an artist.
The bride's first marriage was annulled.


Q and A
San Blas Islands
Q.
We will be cruising the southern Caribbean in December and will be going to the San Blas Islands.
Information about them seems hard to come by.
Can you help? -- Marcy Johnson, Fresno, Calif.


Williams Enters Plea
Dallas Cowboys offensive lineman ERIK WILLIAMS has agreed to plead no contest to a misdemeanor drunken driving charge, ending a grand jury investigation into an Oct. 24 accident.
In exchange for the plea, Williams's attorney said Friday, Dallas County prosecutors also agreed to recommend probation for Williams, who is out for the season because of torn knee ligaments suffered in the accident. (AP)


As Pope Visits Sicily, Mafia Sends Gruesome Warning to Priest
CATANIA, Sicily, Nov. 5
Hours after Pope John Paul II arrived here on a visit and urged Sicilians to stand firm against the Mafia, mobsters made clear what they thought of that sentiment in a gruesome but familiar way today, sending a lamb with its throat slit to the home of a Sicilian priest.
"This is how you will finish up," said a note attached to the dead animal.
The lamb was found hanging on the door of the Rev.
Gino Sacchetti, a prison chaplain and head of a drug rehabilitation center near Palermo on the northern coast of Sicily.
The note was viewed as a warning to the anti-Mafia priest, not to the Pope, police and church officials said.


West Coast Fisheries Are Also in Trouble
To the Editor:
Re "In New England Fish Country, the End of Fishing" (Gloucester Journal, Oct. 31): Americans are becoming aware of the sorry state of the nation's fisheries.
Not only is Georges Bank, off Cape Cod, being closed to commercial fishing, but restrictions on salmon fishing have been imposed on much of the West Coast, where several salmon species are in danger of extinction.


Lynn A. Lieff, Leslie P. Goldman
Lynn Alyce Lieff, a managed care specialist, is to be married today to Dr.
Leslie Philip Goldman, a gastroenterologist in Torrington, Conn.
Rabbi Simeon Glaser is to officiate at Congregation Beth Israel in West Hartford, Conn.
The bride works at Tokos Clinical Services, a maternity-care company in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Fay and Jack Siegel of Boynton Beach, Fla.


A Book Idea, Post Gutenberg
WITH "Alfred the Ant," the children's storytelling book he has written, illustrated and privately published, Jehan Clements wants to parlay his gift of invention in a more literal sense: the well-traveled purveyor of traditional tales and original yarns has nearly patented his book's unusual format and design.
Encouraging greater interaction between a storyteller and his or her audience, the 48-page, spiral-bound teacher's edition of "Alfred the Ant" is now available at many bookstores and retailers of educational materials.


Runner Is Thrilled to See Potholes as Well as His Competitors
In marathons in Russia, Mischa Gorbunov had been known to run into people.
Run head-on into them.
"Hey!" an angry runner would say, turning around after being bumped or having his heels stepped on.
"Are you blind? Didn't you see me here?"


Profile; He's Trying to Lift Westinghouse by Its Scruff
MIKE JORDAN swept into a hazardous-waste incinerator plant in Utah last year for a first-hand look at what had been billed as a promising environmental business.
To his amazement, the incinerator was shut down.
Workers there told him that they had only enough material to run the plant one day each week.
Because of the high cost of burning, generators of hazardous waste had found ways to greatly reduce their output.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Ellen Burstein, a former consumer reporter stricken with multiple sclerosis, misstated the source of financing for her nursing aides.
They are not covered by Medicaid; the family pays for her care.


Singles Network Serves Clients in 20's and Up
Regarding the story on Oct. 23 about singles, "How Singles Take Comfort in Their Lives," I would like to clarify that the clients of the Singles Network range in age from their mid-20's and up.
DAIL METZGER The Singles Network Hartsdale


Belford Commuter Ferry Proposal Becomes an Election Issue
A MONMOUTH COUNTY proposal for a New York-bound commuter ferry service out of this tiny Middletown Township fishing community, struggling to preserve its historic and residential identities, is now dead.
But the outcome of the Sixth District Congressional race could determine if the proposal will ever be resurrected.
And in an unusual election spinoff, a key county freeholder race and another for a seat on the Middletown governing body are focusing on the ferry development plan as well, the first time within memory that a single issue has figured so prominently in three hard-fought campaigns in the county.


Closest Living On the Planet: Ocean Depths
Jungles and rain forests, move over.
It turns out that the densest aggregations of animal life on this blue planet are found not on land but under the sea, a scientist reported last week.
Writing in the journal Nature, the scientist, Eric W. Vetter, says a submarine canyon off the California coast at San Diego swarms with crustaceans in densities far greater than any other known animal group on earth.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: CUOMO In a Fury of Campaigning, Candidates Pursue Last-Minute Votes; Led by Giuliani, Cuomo Surrogates Press Attacks on Pataki
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo continued yesterday to let Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and other high-profile surrogates level the most ferocious attacks on his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, as the Governor stuck determinedly to a more positive script while campaigning in Brooklyn and the Bronx.
In an event organized by the Cuomo campaign, Mr.
Giuliani appeared on the City Hall steps with one of his leading political antagonists, Public Advocate Mark Green, to argue that a Pataki administration would not set high ethical standards because of Mr.
Pataki's close relationship with United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Gooden Accepts Price Of Breaking the Rules
DWIGHT GOODEN says he accepts the blame for his problems.
Gooden, who was suspended for the 1995 season on Friday because of violations of the league's drug abuse policy, told The St.
Petersburg Times in an interview published yesterday: "Those are the rules. And you break the rules, that's the price you pay."
It is possible that Gooden, now a free agent, will never pitch for the Mets again -- or anyone else -- but he said: "To me, baseball is at this point in time nowhere in my mind right now. Who knows? Maybe this is what I need to get everything totally back on track."


Clinton Strategists See Gloom for Next 2 Years
The White House started looking beyond Election Day weeks ago, and President Clinton's aides, deeply troubled by what they foresee, have been debating ever since what their strategy for 1995 should be.
"Tuesday will be bad," one of Mr.
Clinton's top advisers said.
"We will lose a lot of ground. Wednesday will be almost pleasant. People will wake up to the fact that we have done better than we might have and better than a lot of people predicted. At least we hope so. But Thursday will be terrible because everyone will begin to realize what a really difficult two years lie ahead."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Mini-McDonald's Squeeze In But Hold Quarterpounder
McDonald's Corporation is introducing a smaller version of their restaurants -- McDonald's Express -- all over Manhattan.
One has already opened on Avenue of the Americas at 42d Street.


Allison Brown And Alan Kotin
Allison Brown, a daughter of Linda and Stephen Brown of New York, and Dr.
Alan Kotin, a son of Barbara and David Kotin of Rockville Centre, L.I., were married last evening.
Rabbi Barry Schwartz officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is an equities trader at Generic Trading Inc., a securities discount brokerage in New York.
Her father is vice president and senior counsel for the Champion International Corporation in New York.
Her mother teaches art at Public School 117 in Briarwood, Queens.


Bronx Community Boards
DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven.
Last Wednesday of month; next meeting Nov. 30, 6:30 P.M., Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
Chairman: George Rodriguez; District Manager: Oberto Crespo Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 2 Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of month; next meeting Nov. 30, 6 P.M., 1029 East 163d Street, between Southern Boulevard and Simpson Street, third floor; (718) 328-9125.
Chairman: Roland Lopez; District Manager: John Robert  Agenda: Mayor's budget cutbacks.
DISTRICT 3 Morrisania; next meeting Tuesday, Nov. 9, 6:30 P.M., J.H.S. 98, 1619 Boston Road; (718) 589-6300.
Chairwoman: Marcella R. Brown; District Manager: John W. Dudley  Agenda: Discussion about toy guns and why they shouldn't be used by neighborhood children and a new building that is being considered for homeless housing.
DISTRICT 4 East and West Concourse, Mount Eden, High Bridge, Concourse Village; next meeting Nov. 22, 6 P.M., 1650 Selwyn Avenue, Suite 11A; (718) 299-0800.
Chairman: Robert Hannibal Jr.; District Manager: Herbert Samuels Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 5 Mount Hope, Morris Heights, Fordham University Heights; next meeting Nov. 16, 6 P.M.; Our Lady of Mercy Church, 2496 Marion Avenue, between 188th Street and Fordham Road; (718) 364-2030.
Chairman: Kenneth Fogarty; District Manager: Adolpho Carrion.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 6 Bathgate, Belmont, Bronx Park South, Crotona Park North, East Tremont and West Farms; first Wednesday of month; next meeting Dec. 7, 6:30 P.M., St.
Barnabas Hospital, East 183d Street and Third Avenue, Main auditorium; (718) 579-6990.
Chairman: Julio E. Munoz; District Manager: Bobbi Salters  Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 7 University Heights, Norwood, Fordham, Bedford and Bedford Park; third Tuesday of month; next meeting November 22, 7 P.M.; Our Lady of Refuge Parish Center, 290 East 196th Street at Bainbridge and Briggs Avenues; (718) 933-5650.
Chairwoman: Nora Feury; District Manager: Rita Kessler  Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 8 Kingsbridge, Marble Hill, North Riverdale, Spuyten Duyvil, Fieldston; second Tuesday of month; next meeting Nov. 10, 7:30 P.M., Kingsbridge Heights Community Center, eastside of Bailey Avenue at 234th Street; (718) 884-3959.
Chairwoman: Joyce M. Pilsner; District Manager: Grace Belkin Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 9 Bronx River, Castle Hill, Clason Point, Harding Park, Parkchester, Bruckner, Soundview, Unionport; next meeting, Nov. 17, 7 P.M., Caldor Plaza, 1967 Turnbull Avenue; (718) 823-3034.
Chairwoman: Elizabeth Rodriguez; District Manager: Francisco Gonzalez Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 10 City Island, Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Country Club, Co-op City; third Thursday of month; next meeting Nov. 17, 7:30 P.M., Hebrew Hospital Home, 801 Co-op City Blvd.; (718) 892-1161.
Chairman: Tony Cannata; District Manager: James Vacca  Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 11 Allerton, Eastchester, Pelham Parkway, Morris Park; third Thursday of the month; next meeting Nov. 17, 8 P.M.; Mary Queen of Peace Council, 1919 Williamsbridge Road, between Neill and Rhinelander Avenues; (718) 892-6262.
Chairman: Frank Muccioli; District Manager: Thomas Lucania Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 12 Wakefield, Woodlawn, Williamsburg, Baychester, Eastchester; next meeting Nov. 17, 8 P.M., 4101 White Plains Road; (718) 881-4455.
Chairman: Richard Gorman; District Manager: Samuel Bea Jr.
Agenda: General discussion.
Schedules for community board meetings in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
Consumer credit, Sept., change, billions
$11.2
$10.0
Tues.
Wholesale trade, Sept., pct. chg.
2.7
1.2
Wed.
Nonfarm productivity, 3d qtr., pct. chg.
-2.5
1.8
Thurs.
Producer prices, Oct., pct. chg.
-0.5
0.2
This Week's Numbers
Tues.
3-year Treasury note auction
Wed.
10-year Treasury note auction
Thurs.
Bundesbank Council meeting
Fri.
Veterans' Day holiday


Denise E. Brodey, Jeffrey L. Kessler
Denise Ellen Brodey, an associate editor at Child magazine, and Jeffrey Lee Kessler, the president and founder of I. T. Direct, a direct response advertising agency, were married last evening.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Simeon Glaser performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Israel in West Hartford, Conn.
The bride, 27, who will be known as Denise Brodey-Kessler, is a graduate of Barnard College.
She is the daughter of Z. Riki and Dr.
James F. Brodey of West Hartford.
Her mother, a social worker in Farmington, is also a clinical instructor of marital and family therapy at the University of Connecticut Medical School and Health Center there.
Her father is a psychiatrist and the medical director of the Pain Management and Behavioral Medicine Center, both in Farmington.


Broadway Twofers, and One-and-a-Halfers
TICKETS to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the three TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and satellite booths at 2 World Trade Center and at Montague and Court Streets in Brooklyn Heights.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Montgomery Without Curses
MONTY The Lonely Leader, 1944-1945.
By Alistair Horne with David Montgomery.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Perking Up Pasta With Wild Mushrooms
REMEMBER when the only mushrooms were cultivated whitecaps?
Now markets offer wild mushrooms: portobello, shiitake and oyster mushrooms, orange chanterelles and porcini.
Porcini are boletus mushrooms, also known as cepes, Polish mushrooms or Steinpilz.
They are good dried, too, but they need to be soaked in hot water or chicken broth for about half an hour.


Streetscapes/Mills House No. 1 on Bleecker Street; A Clean, Airy 1897 Home for 1,560 Working Men
MILLS HOUSE NO. 1, opened in 1897 on Bleecker Street between Sullivan and Thompson Streets, set a standard for clean and sanitary accommodation for the poor and working classes that may never be matched, sheltering thousands who might otherwise have become tramps.
Converted to apartments in the 70's, the light, airy building has been at the center of a long legal dispute that has left most of the ground-floor stores empty.


THE QUIZ
They herald the spring and the dawn.
In song, they fly over rainbows.
Through the ages, poets, writers and musicians have called on them for inspiration.
To farmers, they are both boon and bane; to city dwellers, pests.
What do you know about these soaring creatures?
Take a flyer and see how many questions you can get right on the nose, er, beak.


Eternity Faithful To Old School Days
FOR those alumni who fear that class rings, license plates, T-shirts and bumper stickers can't quite express their eternal affection for their alma mater, a Michigan company is offering souvenirs to die for: fiberglass coffins in school colors -- say, Hoosier red or Aggie maroon.
James Kieszkowski, the owner of Oak Grove International in Manistee, Mich., says his company will customize coffins in school colors and with sports symbols.
"We've sold a number of caskets in Indiana that are red with a white interior," Mr.
Kieszkowski said.
Maroon coffins sell with Aggie fans from Texas A &amp; M, he said.
A coffin's inside lid can also be customized with a football going between the goalposts or a basketball being slam-dunked through the hoop.
To keep costs down, the company does not use logos, school lettering or other trademarked items, Mr.
Kieszkowski said.


Clancy vs. Buckley
To the Editor:
Right on, Christopher Buckley!
After attempting, unsuccessfully, to read Tom Clancy's "Debt of Honor," I concluded he must have been paid by the word.
The book is not only racist but unforgivably boring.
Shame on his editors for not having the courage to do their jobs -- and shame on Mr.
Clancy for milking the cash cow.
BERNICE SCHIMEL  Las Vegas, Nev.


Correction
A picture caption about the blues singer Big Joe Turner on Oct. 16 misstated the date of the scene.
The photograph was made in 1974, not the early 1980's; it was used in the 1979 documentary "Last of the Blue Devils."


THE ANGER: EVER DEEPER
We have become a "hot button" electorate, demanding solutions by slogan that appear easy to implement.
We punish political figures who do not promise such solutions by voting against them.
Then we are frustrated when their opponents, who may have run for office on the easy-answer ticket, cannot deliver the painless fix they promise.


Bruce D. Shalett and Lisa M. Roseff
Lisa Meredith Roseff, a daughter of Barbara and Dr.
Lionel Roseff of East Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Bruce Daniel Shalett, the son of Doris and Philip Shalett of Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Aaron Peduchowski performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Shalett, 28, is an associate in Japanese equities sales in New York at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the London investment bank.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and the bridegroom also received their M.B.A. degrees there.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in New York.
Her mother is a partner at Barnett Interiors, a design firm in Greenvale, L.I.


Rwanda Faces New War Unless International Force Is Sent, U.N. Aides Say
United Nations officials say that if this tiny country is to be spared another war, an international force must be quickly sent to the refugee camps in Zaire, where soldiers and militiamen of the former Rwandan Government are increasing their preparedness for battle.
Forces of the former Government are already making regular incursions into Rwanda and in some instances have ambushed the new Government's soldiers, the commander of the United Nations troops here, Maj.
Gen.
Guy Tousignant, said in an interview today.


Demon


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  PEACE HOPES IN ANGOLA  In a small town in Angola where fighting has continued despite a new treaty in the long-term civil war, there is some optimism that this time there will be peace.  12  A WOMAN'S SEARCH IN GUATEMALA  An American woman who has been on a hunger strike in Guatemala since Oct. 11, determined to find out the fate of her rebel husband, has brought uncomfortable attention to human rights violations there.  3


2 Arrested as Police Find a 'Cocaine Lab'
Two police officers responding to a report of a burglary at a West Harlem apartment building yesterday discovered instead what officials described as a cocaine lab and thousands of dollars in cash.
The officers, Cathy Meehan and Anthony Gonzalez, were sent to the apartment about 3:30 A.M. after a 911 call reporting a burglary in progress in an apartment at 61 Hamilton Terrace, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a Police Department spokesman.


Miami Slams Syracuse And Is First in the East
The thrill may be gone in Syracuse, but the swagger is definitely back at Miami.
Once regarded as the Big, Bad Wolf of college football, Miami, dispelling any notion that its program had been tamed, rolled over Syracuse this afternoon, 27-6.
The Hurricanes did it with a crushing defense that shut down the vaunted Syracuse option offense and with a heavyweight offense that bulldozed Syracuse at will in the second half.


'In Defense of Elitism'
To the Editor:
Roger Kimball owns up manfully that while "it is painful to admit it . . . Henry is right" when he states that "you could eliminate every woman writer, painter and composer from the cave man era to the present moment and not significantly deform the course of Western culture."


The Nation; For the Environment, Compassion Fatigue
THE 1990's could hardly have begun better for the national environmental movement.
A new Clean Air Act to clear the skies of toxic chemicals became law.
Polls indicated that Americans overwhelmingly supported tough environmental rules and said they would pay more for them.
Democrats elected a new team to the White House, in part because the Vice President was sympathetic to ecological concerns and wrote a best-selling book on the subject.
But midway through, the decade is shaping up as a period of turmoil for the environmental movement.
Membership and budgets have dropped for most of the national groups.
A well-organized counter-movement of landowners, city officials and industrial executives steamed into Washington and halted Congressional work this year on strengthening environmental laws.
They argued that environmentalists were exaggerating and using inconclusive data to frighten people and influence lawmakers.


The World; Here Comes the Clown. No Joke.
WHEN Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the energetic Russian extremist who likes to spit and throw rocks at protesters, struts his stuff across the United States this week there will be a huge temptation to laugh.
Don't.
He's sure to be offensive and clownish and captivatingly crude.
But it's time Americans realized he's not that funny.
The United States is, after all, a country he has denounced in nearly every speech he has ever delivered.


Phone Vandals Cut Off Community
Carlos Diaz, 28, a bus driver whose route runs up First Avenue in East Harlem, recalled his frustration two months ago when he was unable to reach his wife.
"I literally stopped every two blocks," he said.
"They were all out of service."
The experience taught him an important lesson: he bought a cellular phone.


From Ward of Court To Quest for Bench
GEORGE DARLOW was not your run-of-the-mill town drunk, nor is he a typical candidate as Tuesday's election approaches.
He is seeking the position as judge of the Probate Court for the district of Washington, which also includes the Litchfield County communities of Washington Depot, New Preston and Marble Dale.
Mr.
Darlow brings to the political race an unusual personal perspective.
It is that of having been an alcoholic with 15 years of his life virtually controlled by the court he now seeks to join.


Technology; 900,000 Striped Bass, and Not a Fishing Pole in Sight
TO Josh Goldman, it's all very simple.
On a display board, he draws one line, slanting upward -- that's the world demand for fish.
Below that, a second line, slanting down -- the wild supply, steadily being depleted.
The widening gap represents the fish the world will need from other sources.
And for reasons he is eager to enumerate, he insists that traditional fish farming will be unable to fill that gap.
But Mr.
Goldman says he has the solution, and with supreme confidence and the blinders of the true believer, he is out to prove it.


Assertive and Inspired by an Old Favorite
A METAL sculpture stands in front of the newly opened Coach Grill in Oyster Bay.
Inspection reveals a beautifully painted antique coach complete with passengers.
On the door of the carriage are the words "Viennese Coach." The artifact was salvaged from the Viennese Coach restaurant in Syosset, a North Shore landmark for 38 years until it burned in 1989.
Lennart Lundstrum, whose family owned the Viennese Coach, is keeping the tradition alive with the Coach Grill.
But diners expecting a Viennese Coach redux are in for surprises.
When the man at the next table asked for salmon with dill sauce, a standby at the old restaurant, he was told, "The Coach Grill is an American restaurant." Instead of the European classic it offers a "wood-roasted salmon filet dusted with dry mustard and fine herbs, surrounded by pumpkin vinaigrette, served on a bed of baby greens garnished with tomato concasse and toasted pumpkin seeds."


Bookshelf
I HADN'T MEANT TO TELL YOU THIS.
By Jacqueline Woodson.
Delacorte. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up) Here is a persuasive novel of friendship that transcends race and class, set in a once-thriving coal-mining town in Ohio, now a prosperous black suburb.
Marie, a popular black girl, befriends Lena, a new white arrival, and learns of her terrible plight.
THE BOY AND THE CLOTH OF DREAMS.
By Jenny Koralek.
Illustrated by James Mayhew.
Candlewick. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Once a boy had as his security blanket a cloth of dreams made by his grandmother.
It was accidentally torn, and he had nightmares until he forged his own courage.
The luminous illustrations are watercolor and cloth collage.


Struggle Over Gay Rights Moves to Statewide Level
Gay politicians and political issues have moved from the local to the statewide level this year, with referendums in Oregon and Idaho and candidates in California and New York attesting to the growing presence of homosexuals on the campaign landscape.
Oregon and Idaho are at center stage in the nation's struggle over whether homosexuals are entitled to civil-rights protection as a bona fide, vulnerable minority or have no such claim on the basis of behavior that many regard as wrong.


The Fertile Crescent Blooms Anew
When Abdul Latif Suleiman came here in the 1970's there were no farms or orchards along this narrow stretch of the Barada River, where it tumbles through the arid foothills above Damascus.
"You could not find a single vegetable plant, a single tree," said Mr.
Suleiman, 63, smiling proudly as he stood in the ragged shade of the apple orchard he planted 17 years ago.
Behind him, the steady pocketa-pocketa of a small engine was the only sound breaking the afternoon stillness as it pumped water from the brown river and spilled it among the muddy tangle of melon vines and eggplants.


Senator Voiced Concern Over Air Inspectors
Despite repeated denials by Senator Tom Daschle, new evidence shows that his office intervened directly with Federal aviation inspectors who had warned that an air charter company owned by a friend of his was unsafe.
Other new evidence shows that Senator Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, also personally pressed the Federal aviation inspectors' Washington supervisors with complaints that inspections of the company were unduly harsh.
In an article last month, The New York Times reported that Mr.
Daschle had undertaken a two-year effort to strip the United States Forest Service of authority to inspect air charter companies after aviation inspectors repeatedly warned that B&amp;L Aviation of Rapid City, S.D., was shoddily run and should be barred from doing Government business.


The Election: A Voters' Guide To the Candidates
UNITED STATES SENATE  CANDIDATES
FRANK R. LAUTENBERG, 70, Democrat.
Elected to the United States Senate in 1982; no experience in elective politics before that.
A millionaire businessman who co-founded one of the most successful computing services in the world, Automatic Data Processing.
Born in Paterson, now lives in Cliffside Park.
Has raised $7.4 million for this race.
GARABED (CHUCK) HAYTAIAN, 56, Republican.
An electrical engineer first elected to the State Assembly in 1981; Speaker of the Assembly since 1992, which makes him the third most powerful elected official in New Jersey.
Born in the Bronx, now lives in Independence, in rural Warren County.
Has raised $4.4 million.
--------------------
ANDREA LIPPI, independent
RICHARD J. PEZZULLO, Conservative Party
GEORGE PATRICK PREDHAM, independent
ARLENE GOLD, Natural Law Party
JOANNE KUNIANSKY, Socialist Workers Party
BEN GRINDLINGER, Libertarian Party
MICHAEL P. KELLY, independent THE ISSUES
Politically, the candidates are polar opposites -- Mr.
Lautenberg's politics are liberal to moderate and Mr.
Haytaian is a strict conservative.
The centerpiece of Mr.
Haytaian's campaign is a flat Federal income tax, and one of his campaign props is a slick brochure outlining 94 ways to cut waste and spending in Washington.
Mr.
Lautenberg says the tax plan is a fraud that would add $1 trillion to the national deficit over five years; he calls other Haytaian ideas unworkable or unoriginal.
Although both candidates have been in office a long time, each is trying to cast himself as the outsider and his rival as the career politician.
At times, however, Mr.
Lautenberg portrays himself as an inside outsider, saying that he would be able to do more for New Jersey as a third-term Senator than Mr.
Haytaian would as a novice in Washington.
ANALYSIS
Though polls throughout the campaign have shown Mr.
Lautenberg with a comfortable lead, the New Jersey electorate is notorious for last-minute volatility and there is still a large bloc of undecided voters.
Mr.
Lautenberg needs a good turnout from the traditionally Democratic urban areas.
A year ago, Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, lost to Christine Todd Whitman by about 25,000 votes out of 2.5 million votes cast, largely because he did poorly and she did surprisingly well on that kind of turf.
For Mr.
Haytaian to win, he must rally his bedrock of conservative voters and the rest of the Republican faithful, but as importantly, he must match Mrs.
Whitman's performance in urban areas, particularly among black voters.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  SECOND DISTRICT CANDIDATES
FRANK A. LOBIONDO, 48.
Republican from Vineland, a State Assemblyman who works as the operations manager for his family's trucking business.
A former member of the Cumberland County Board of Freeholders, first elected to the State Assembly in 1987.
Has earned a reputation as its most conservative member.
Sponsored law making "stalking" a crime.
Lost 1992 race for Congress against the Democratic incumbent, William J. Hughes.
LOUIS N. MAGAZZU, 37, Democrat from Vineland.
A lawyer, currently the solicitor for the city of Vineland; has never held elected office.
THE DISTRICT
Before 1974, the Second could be counted on to vote Republican.
But Mr.
Hughes rode to victory that year on the Watergate wave that swept dozens of Democrats into office.
In spite of his party label, his conservative politics and his support of environmental protection, anti-crime legislation and senior-citizen issues helped him hold on to that office for 20 years before he decided earlier this year to retire.
It is expected that with the popular Mr.
Hughes now off the political scene, the district will return a Republican to office.
THE ISSUES
Mr.
LoBiondo has campaigned unwaveringly on conservative beliefs: lower taxes, spending cuts and reduction of the Federal Government.
Mr.
Magazzu has stressed fighting crime as the main theme of his campaign, including championing gun control laws.
ANALYSIS
In land mass, southern New Jersey's sprawling Second District -- which encompasses all of Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem counties and parts of Gloucester and Burlington counties, is the largest in the state.
In politics, it is bedrock Republican and conservative.
In 1992, registered Republicans outnumbered Democrats 85,000 to 70,000 with about 150,000 unaffiliated voters.
If Mr.
LoBiondo loses, it will rank as a major Election Day upset.
The Republican candidate has raised more money than his opponent by a 3-to-1 margin and polls show him with at least a 30-point lead.
The race has significance beyond even the impressive boundaries of the Second.
Under the redistricting that reduced the New Jersey Congressional delegation to 13, Mr.
Hughes's lock on the Second District gave Democrats a 7-to-6 majority.
The majority will assuredly shift to the Republicans on Nov. 8.
In practice, it will give the Republicans little more than political bragging rights, but it will be another blow to the political psyche of New Jersey's Democrats, who in the last four years have also lost control of both chambers of the Legislature and the Governor's mansion.
EIGHTH DISTRICT CANDIDATES
HERB KLEIN, 64, a Democrat and a lawyer from Clifton.
Served in the State Assembly for four years in the 1970's.
Won Congressional seat two years ago in an expensive and bitter race.
A prominent Democratic fund-raiser between his two stints in elected office, Mr.
Klein spent more than $500,000 of his own money and $1.2 million overall in his victory two years ago.
BILL MARTINI, 47, a Republican and a lawyer from Clifton.
Served on Clifton City Council and is a Passaic County Freeholder; also a former Assistant United States Attorney for New Jersey.
THE DISTRICT
The Eighth was redesigned two years ago after New Jersey lost one of its 14 Congressional seats as a result of the 1990 Census.
When Representative Robert A. Roe, a 12-term Democrat, saw the new district lines, he decided to retire.
The district, once a haven for Democrats, is now highly competitive.
It includes the blue-collar urban centers of Paterson and Passaic, as well as suburban towns like Glen Ridge, Cedar Grove and Verona.
THE ISSUES
Both candidates say fear of crime is the chief concern of voters, with the economy, taxes and government spending also high on the list.
Mr.
Klein points to the recently enacted Federal crime bill as the first initiative coming out of Washington in years that offers real hope of increasing public safety.
Mr.
Martini calls the bill "pork laden," with programs that have little to do with crime-fighting.
He has said that only the certainty of prison sentences will reduce violent crime.
Mr.
Klein said he voted against the Clinton budget because it did not have enough spending cuts, and has consistently opposed tax increases that affect the middle class.
Mr.
Martini charges that his opponent later voted for all the spending proposals in the budget he opposed and that he repeatedly passed up opportunities to vote for further deficit reductions.
ANALYSIS
Leaders in both parties agree that this is the closest Congressional race in the state this year.
Both sides have spent heavily on campaign advertising and have been supported by visits from party luminaries from outside the state.
OTHER HOUSE RACES  (x denotes incumbents)
FIRST DISTRICT Robert E. Andrews, Democrat (X); James N. Hogan, Republican
THIRD DISTRICT James B. Smith, Democrat; H. James Saxton, Republican (X)
FOURTH DISTRICT Ralph Walsh, Democrat; Christopher H. Smith, Republican (X)
FIFTH DISTRICT Bill Auer, Democrat; Marge Roukema, Republican (X)
SIXTH DISTRICT Frank Pallone Jr., Democrat (X); Mike Herson, Republican
SEVENTH DISTRICT Karen Carroll, Democrat; Bob Franks, Republican (X)
NINTH DISTRICT Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat (X); Peter J. Russo, Republican
10TH DISTRICT Donald M. Payne, Democrat (X); Jim Ford, Republican
11TH DISTRICT Frank Herbert, Democrat; Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, Republican
12TH DISTRICT Joseph D. Youssouf, Democrat; Dick Zimmer, Republican (X)
13TH DISTRICT Robert Menendez, Democrat (X); Fernando A. Alonso, Republican


The Queen Mary
To the Editor: When the Queen Mary was a troop carrier during World War II she had an experience that could have changed J. M. Fenster's story about her ("An Ocean Liner Berthed and Burnished," Oct. 2) or indeed made it unwritable.
On one of her crossings in 1944, the Mary, as she was affectionately known, was ferrying a full complement of United States Army Air Forces personnel, mostly pilots, to their duties in England.
As she neared the end of her trip, sailing north through the Bay of Biscay in sparkling weather, lookouts aboard spotted a Nazi reconnaissance plane that in turn had seen and marked the ship as the incredibly valuable target she would be.
In those days, the Mary sailed by herself; she was too fast to travel in convoy.
There were no warships to protect her and not enough time for fighter pilots from Britain to reach her before enemy bombers struck; they would be too much for the Mary's own antiaircraft to handle.


Habitats/Upheaval on East 70th Street; Letting Light Into a Dark 1860's Brick Town House
RICK KAMINER stood shoulder to shoulder with the workmen, he -- the owner -- in a natty pinstripe suit and they -- the plumbers, the carpenter, the electrician -- in khakis and sweatshirts.
"Try adding them up again," he joked with one workman who had just handed him estimates for some additional work.


Sound Bytes; Age 16, and Success Is Sweet
MICHAEL SIMMONS went into business for himself when he was 12 years old, operating a computer bulletin-board out of his grandmother's home in Palm Springs, Calif.
At the time, he was too young to open a checking account and was refused entry at computer trade shows.
Today, at 16, Mr.
Simmons is president of Dataport Computer Services, which has five workers and an office in Palm Springs.


Alicia G. Clifton, Alan J. Chabot
Alicia Gorham Clifton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Clifton of Water Mill, L.I., was married yesterday to Alan James Chabot, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Richard Chabot of Longmeadow, Mass.
The Rev.
Robert Kennedy performed the ceremony at the Queen of the Most Holy Rosary Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Chabot, 30, was until recently an associate at Millsport, a sports marketing company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father and her mother, Alice Clifton, own Clifton Associates, a teacher placement agency for private schools, based in Water Mill.


Old Kremlin, New Kremlin
Russia lost one weak Finance Minister recently but gained another, causing a Deputy Prime Minister to resign in protest.
But today the Government's strongest market-minded reformer, Anatoly B. Chubais, was elevated to First Deputy Prime Minister, while the Prime Minister promised to continue a tough fight against inflation.
Does all this Kremlin maneuvering matter?
It does, of course, especially for the economy, and for the level of confidence of those who are thinking about lending or investing in Russia.


Only the Smart Survive Against the Bills' Smith
A generation ago, the Jets were preparing for a game with the Kansas City Chiefs and their future Hall of Fame defensive tackle, Buck Buchanan.
"Playing every play against Buck Buchanan is awful," said Sam DeLuca, the Jets' offensive guard.
"After an ordinary game, on Wednesday my aches start going away. After you play against Buck, on Thursday the aches are getting worse."


Penn Clinches Tie For Title Against Tigers
The Ivy League race came to an abrupt end today with Penn's 33-19 victory over Princeton coupled with Cornell's loss to Yale at New Haven.
The Quakers, who won their 19th game in a row and seventh this season, gained at least a tie for the title with two games left, against Harvard and Cornell.


Uneasy Seoul Reconsiders Its Relations With North Korea
Lee Jong Sik escaped from North Korea 45 years ago with her two young sons, leaving her husband and two brothers behind.
Now, a new agreement aimed at curbing North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons program promises to ease tensions on the Korean peninsula, offering hope for divided families.
But Mrs.
Lee is not counting on it.
"You just can't trust those people," said Mrs.
Lee, 69 years old, referring to the North Korean Government.
As for the chance of being reunited with her family, she said, "It will be almost impossible to meet them before I die."


The Little Record Labels That Could (and They Did)
THE HISTORY OF THE American recording industry can be seen as a series of land-grabs, gold rushes during which pockets of sound are discovered and feverishly mined until a richer lode is found.
One of the most significant of these outbreaks was the appearance in the late 1940's and 1950's -- overnight, like so many mushrooms -- of countless small independent record companies based in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York and other urban centers.
Fed and watered by the huge numbers of blacks who had swarmed to the cities for defense jobs during World War II, the indies, as they were called, pumped out dance music, hot blues and boogie-woogie records that the major labels usually just didn't bother with.
These small companies were often started by music-industry amateurs -- small businessmen, nightclub owners and hustlers, some of whom actually had a genuine ear for music, all of whom had an eye for the main chance.
Spurred by an amalgam of opportunism, megalomania, true love for music and sheer greed, they managed to document some of the most vigorous popular music ever recorded in America.
In the process, they called the tune that the entire industry eventually danced to.


Lebow's Vision
To the Sports Editor:
Unmentioned in the articles about the late Fred Lebow was what he did for women's running.


Judge Ito, Spare That Camera
LET'S HOPE JUDICIAL temperament prevails and an understandably exasperated Judge Lance A. Ito draws back from his threat to ban the camera from the O. J. Simpson trial.
That threat, which will be the subject of a hearing tomorrow, grew out of his annoyance at an inaccurate news report by a Los Angeles television station, not the actual courtroom coverage.
On calm consideration it may occur to the judge that punishing courtroom television for the doings of a local station would be like jailing a felon's blameless cousin who happens to be within reach: guilt by relationship or accessibility.
As friends of courtroom coverage, including The New York Times editorial page, have pointed out, it is a form of television least susceptible to distortion.
But critics, including Max Frankel, once the head of that editorial page and later executive editor of the newspaper, and now a columnist for The New York Times Magazine, find such reasoning superficial.
They see the television camera not as an extension of the press but as a new sort of monster with the ability to cloud viewers' minds.
"Images on a screen," Mr.
Frankel wrote, "draw us into the action; they pound the emotions, bypass the mind."


Holiday Inn Thailand
A recent agreement means Holiday Inn is about to become a huge presence in Thailand.
The new venture, between the Narai Hotel Company of Thailand and Holiday Inn Worldwide, calls for the development of 47 Holiday Inns throughout the country over the next decade.
Holiday Inn already operates five hotels in Thailand, including Bangkok and the resort destination of Phuket, and has plans to develop hotels in India, Indonesia and Nepal over the next few years.
TERRY TRUCCO


Voting Isn't Pretty, but Somebody Has to Do It; Those Good People
To the Editor:
Re "Here Come the Republocrats" (Op-Ed, Nov. 1): Ted Rall's explanation why he is abstaining from voting calls to mind a comment made by the humorist John Henry Faulk.
When asked to explain the consistent level of mediocrity in Washington, Faulk replied: "Congress is made up of bad politicians elected by good people who don't vote!" PHIL HALL  Bronx, Nov. 1, 1994


Computers That Tell Fairy Tales
IT is a statement that could send a purist into shock: "Students at the College of Wooster program computers to write Russian fairy tales."
But relax, the big bad wolf is not at the door.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Long Island  A CLOSE ONE: Tom Santoro rushed for two touchdowns and Ken Kraemer caught a 40-yard scoring strike from Jim Chase (14 of 25 for 261 yards) as MASSAPEQUA (7-0) won a sea-saw contest against its Conference I rival, FREEPORT (6-1), 32-28.
Bill Martin put Massapequa on the board first, booting field goals of 27 and 24 yards in the first two quarters.
Freeport answered in the second, with two Jimmy Jones touchdowns: a 1-yard dive and a 26-yard pass from Mike Leccesse, who later put Freeport in front in the third quarter, 20-6, with a 24-yard option run.
Santoro closed the gap to 20-12 when he scored from 8 yards out to cap the scoring in the third.
In the fourth quarter, Jones returned a kick 94 yards to help Freeport extend its lead to 28-12.
But Massapequa scored the game's last three touchdowns to complete the come-from-behind victory.
Santoro scored his second touchdown on a 9-yard run, Fred Garzon ran it in from 4 yards out and Kraemer caught a bomb from Chase.


Ghostly Spot, New Life . . .
When Pearl Fleming moved to Walton Avenue more than two decades ago, she would see the bustle around the Morrisania Hospital's emergency-room entrance and the students in the adjoining nursing school.
But for the last 18 years, her apartment window has looked out at enormous ghost buildings in an abandoned block surrounded by a 15-foot-high barbed-wire fence.
To some like Mrs.
Fleming, the deserted hospital, more than anything else, came to symbolize the misfortunes of Morrisania.
To others, the hospital represented abandonment of the South Bronx.


Tours, Teases and Teaching
IN THE best software for young children, and perhaps for adults too, there are no mistakes and no punishment.
Every wrong answer becomes an opportunity to learn something.
Here is some new software for children, much of it playful, some of it ponderously educational, much of it requiring CD-ROM and faster computers to deliver vast stockpiles of sound, photos, animation and movies.


The High Price of Free Excellence
THE poster-crammed bulleting boards, grubily clad undergraduates mingling in clumps and scent of old dust mixed with fresh paint bring to mind any of a hundred urban campuses.
But this isn't just any campus.
The students, a potpourri of races and ethnic groups, are among the most talented in America, and the curriculum is among the most demanding.
More striking, the only barrier to entry is the fierce competition for places in the freshman class.
For this is Cooper Union, a specialized college of art, architecture and engineering in Greenwich Village and the only private American college of its caliber that charges no tuition.


Nine Glossy Guides
As an alternative to conventional paper maps that get dog-eared and torn, the new City Slicker map series is laminated.
Among the nine cities in the line are New York City, Washington, Chicago, Boston and Orlando.
Each five-paneled map -- 21 by 10 inches when open, 4 by 10 when folded -- features a detailed street map on one side and an overview of the city on the other, and costs $4.95.
To order, call Hagstrom Map and Travel Center, 57 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 398-1222.


Alison Michel And Bruce Rubin
Alison Michel, a daughter of Barbara and Ronald Michel of Lake Hopatcong, N.J., was married last evening to Bruce Rubin, a son of Phyllis and Donald Rubin of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Dan Alder officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; N.Y.P.D. Blue
New York City police officers are turning in their powder blue shirts for navy blue ones.
With fashion so important in the city, why stop there?
Donna Karan and Norma Kamali could design a bodysuit for female officers.
Armani might redo the beat cop's outfit detective-style -- and deaccessorize the belt, please.
To further improve the quality of life, Mayor Giuliani might even empower police to go on fashion patrol, issuing tickets to badly dressed tourists who wear, say, Birkenstocks with socks.
Violators would be sentenced to buy new wardrobes, raising fashion consciousness in their hometown and raising profits in this one.


Even at 56, Jay Black Continues to Make Them Swoon
HIS fans include the John Gotti family and Richard M. Kessel.
Such a diversity of people flock to his performances that he holds the record for the most consecutive sellouts at the Westbury Music Fair, 17 as of last month's performance.
Because of the demand, an additional show has been added, for Nov. 25.
It being Thanksgiving weekend, he is afraid the sellout streak will end.
Fat chance.
On Long Island he has more loyal followers than a county executive.
Men rush to shake his hand.
Women rush to -- well . . .
"The cashier at OTB just gave me a pair of panties," he said the day after the October show.
"She was too embarrassed to toss them on stage last night." (But not too embarrassed to hand them over in broad daylight in an Offtrack Betting parlor.)


CRIME
A bullet can slow down your average hard-boiled detective, but a baby will drop him in his tracks.
John Marshall Tanner, the San Francisco investigator who specializes in missing persons and burning social issues in Stephen Greenleaf's thoughtful mysteries, gets a crash course in the biotechnology of baby making that really shakes him up in FALSE CONCEPTION (Otto Penzler, $22).
Uncommonly sensitive for someone in his trade, Tanner can be trusted to run a discreet background check on the woman his clients have chosen to carry their child, and you know that he'll bring an open mind to the politically murky ethics of artificial insemination and in vitro fertilization.
"Kids are always kids, in my experience, and I imagine it's true even in the embryonic stage," Tanner smoothly reasons.
But he doesn't count on falling for the surrogate mother -- who complicates everything by skipping town -- or on the strong feelings about paternity that are awakened by their affair.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ALLEGORICAL FABLE  THE TRAVELER'S TREE  By Bruno Bontempelli. New Press, $20.


Dancing on Air
A PASSION FOR WINGS  Aviation and the Western Imagination, 1908-1918.
By Robert Wohl.
Illustrated. 320 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $35.
FLYING OUT OF THIS WORLD  By Peter Greenaway.
Illustrated. 199 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $75.
Paper, $39.95.


Corrections
A picture caption and a theater listing on page 40 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the opening of the comedy "Me and Jezebel," at the Actors' Playhouse, have become outdated.
Because of the illness of the actor Randy Allen, the opening, originally scheduled for Wednesday, has been postponed.


To the Barricades of Egalite
Around the world, universities are wrestling with new challenges.
In countries where graduates find they have trained for careers in fields already crowded with professionals, many schools are shifting their emphasis to job training and workplace skills.
Some universities find themselves short of students; others have a surplus.
As institutions of higher learning struggle to find solutions, they are questioning long-held traditions and beliefs about their systems of higher education.
If French students were long thought to spend their time sitting around drinking coffee, smoking Gitanes and discussing philosophy, that image vanished in clouds of tear gas this spring when tens of thousands of them took to the streets to insist on their right to a well-paid job after they completed their studies.
The spark for the violent protests was a new law allowing employers to pay less than the legal minimum wage to those with technical diplomas.
Affected students were outraged.
They said they had been led to higher education by the promise of good jobs, but now were being told that their studies were worthless.
The Government quickly backed off, saying it had merely tried to fight unemployment, which affects one in four French youths between the ages of 18 and 25.
But the dispute helped focus on a more fundamental issue.
What is the purpose of higher education in France today?
Should youths be educated for the sake of being educated or should the emphasis be on preparing them for the workplace?
Traditionally, French universities had a somewhat elitist approach.
But since 1984 everyone who passes the baccalaureat examination at the end of high school has the right to a place at a university.
As a result, the number of students in higher education has jumped from 1.2 million in 1980 to 2 million this year.
Over this period, umemployment has continued to rise.
And since by law university students can study what they like, they are rarely guided toward degrees with better job prospects.
It is only when they complete their studies, then, that many discover they have not been prepared for the job market.
Officials in the Ministry of Higher Education conceded that they were under pressure from university rectors to limit the number of students and even to institute entry exams, and under pressure from the private sector to focus more on practical education.
But they said all efforts to bring change are politically explosive, not only because higher education is now considered a right, but also because universities absorb youths who might otherwise be unemployed.
"It's a critical situation," one ministry official said.
"The student needs to know if he's capable of doing a specific job, but the university doesn't answer that question. It's only posed when the graduate looks for a job and is told, 'You've done three years of law studies, but tens of thousands have done the same thing, so why should we choose you?' People are only now discovering that their blind faith in degrees is a fiction."
As a result, more students are now opting for two-year courses in so-called University Institutes of Technology because graduates from these schools are in greater demand than those from a conventional university.
It is not surprising, then, that they fought the wage cut.
Some experts believe students must change as much as universities.
"No one wants to stop studying before university," said Jean Barrans, a retired professor from Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse.
"Everyone wants a white-collar job and no longer accepts a blue-collar job." Professor Barrans also said that he felt French students had grown passive because only 20 percent work their way through the university.
The rest are supported by their parents or government grants.
"If they had to work to finance their studies, as in the United States," he said, "perhaps things would be better here." ALAN RIDING


SUNDAY: November 6, 1994; Lots More Drag Queens
As tobacco queens fade from sight, drag queens are becoming increasingly evident.
Whether these trends are connected is a subject for sophisticated social science.
In the simpler realm of economics Alex Heimberg, a.k.a.
Miss Understood, has started a business in Manhattan called Screaming Queens.
He provides drag queens for parties.
Their role is to amuse and entertain, like adults-only clowns.
The cost runs from $125 on up, and some clients are as straight as Rush Limbaugh.
"A women in New Jersey had us come to a party at a country club for her husband's 40th birthday," says Heimberg.
"We put a wig on him and sang 'Girls Just Wanna Have Fun.' They're going to be talking about us for years."


Mexican and a Kenyan Triumph in the Heat
On Wednesday, German Silva, a 26-year-old from Mexico attempting only his third race at 26.2 miles, had predicted victory in the New York City Marathon.
Yesterday, he followed through boldly, even though he made it more difficult than necessary.
Silva made a startling mistake when he took a premature turn into Central Park and had to scramble to defeat by two seconds his friend and training partner, Benjamin Paredes, in the time of 2 hours 11 minutes 21 seconds.


Portrait of the Artist as a Center Fielder
To understand Bernie Williams's approach to baseball, one need only understand his approach to life.
Both are filled with gentle rhythms and poetic flows, refreshing as the soft breezes that buffet the beaches of Puerto Rico, the island where Williams was born and now plays baseball for Arecibo Lobos el Norte when not tending to his summer job as center fielder for the New York Yankees.


Tower Air Inc.(TOWR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banner Aerospace (BAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CUBA'S HARD LINE WAVERS  Cubans have grown more openly critical of the Government as the economy fails, forcing the country to edge away from a hard line against political dissent and to try to improve its image.
A1


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in campaigns across the country.
VIRGINIA: As if the Senate race in Virginia was not confusing enough, consider this scene yesterday at the Norfolk airport: Oliver L. North, Gov.
George Allen and Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader in the Senate, found themselves face to face with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who had just arrived to campaign for Mr.
North's Democratic opponent, Senator Charles S. Robb.
"Bob Dole, what are you doing here?" Mr.
Jackson said in mock surprise as he met them in a narrow corridor.
Mr.
Jackson shook hands with all three Republicans as well as Mr.
North -- who has made little effort to campaign before black voters.


For Niners, A Soiree Before Big Showdown
They squeezed in their aerobic workout, their players reported not a single wound and their All-World receiver discovered a new energy food.
The San Francisco 49ers began contemplating Dallas as early as today's third quarter, scoring on the Washington Redskins in blurs, and now their countdown to the Cowboys is seven days and ticking.
"It's a game I pointed out on the calendar the day I signed," said the former Cowboy linebacker Ken Norton, who jumped ship last winter to San Francisco.


Thomaston Mills Inc.(TMSTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


SkyWest Inc.(SKYW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Associated Materials Inc., Dallas, an initial public offering of 2.37 million shares.
Bear, Stearns.


Where Hope Survives Only as a Basketball
THE LAST SHOT City Streets, Basketball Dreams  By Darcy Frey 231 pages.
A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
"People, they come down to Coney Island and they look at the boardwalk and all the rides and they say, 'Isn't that nice?' And then they see all those buildings behind them and they say, 'Gee, do people live back there?' Yeah, well, we live back here. There are people back here. There are lives going on here. Just because we're black doesn't mean we're stupid."
So speaks Joyce Thomas, the mother of one of the high-school basketball players whom Darcy Frey writes about so perceptively in "The Last Shot: City Streets, Basketball Dreams," a 1990's version of such 1970's factual reports as "The City Game: Basketball in New York" by Pete Axthelm and "Heaven Is a Playground" by Rick Telander.


Oxford Resources Corp.(OXFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 2 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
3001 Snow, J, 46M 3:25:09
3002 Bueringer, D, 43M 3:25:09
3003 Smith, P, 26M3:25:10
3004 Zimmer, O, 47M 3:25:10
3005 Rhodes III, L, 38M 3:25:10
3006 Dent, R, 30M 3:25:10
3007 Font Salles, J, 43M 3:25:12
3008 Olivares Avila, J, 56M 3:25:12
3009 Varnet, M, 33M 3:25:12
3010 Rivera Vazquez, J, 47M 3:25:13
3011 Chilain, E, 34M 3:25:13
3012 Hillenbrand, B, 27M 3:25:13
3013 Cornine, D, 37M 3:25:13
3014 Hemmerter, D, 43M 3:25:14
3015 Hellman, C, 33M 3:25:14
3016 Comel, G, 38M 3:25:15
3017 Bodin, P, 32M 3:25:17
3018 Ellison, S, 32M 3:25:18
3019 Brins, B, 48M 3:25:19
3020 Teisseire, J, 47M 3:25:20
3021 Leblond, J, 40M 3:25:20
3022 Steele, R, 44M 3:25:21
3023Guerra, J, 24M 3:25:21
3024 Kurath, J, 42M 3:25:22
3025 Taylor, S, 25M 3:25:23
3026 Stenner, R, 34M 3:25:23
3027 Harris, P, 33F 3:25:26
3028 Lorenzetti, P, 44M 3:25:27
3029 Wesonig, M, 45M 3:25:28
3030 Ukai, M, 30M 3:25:28
3031 Niederlohner, P, 39M 3:25:28
3032 Henig, K, 47M 3:25:28
3033 Calzada Garza, J, 30M 3:25:29
3034 Kollmann, E, 56M 3:25:30
3035 Kaald, P, 41M 3:25:30
3036 Rice, P, 34M 3:25:31
3037 Rivera, H, 51M 3:25:31
3038 Plancarte, L, 46M 3:25:31
3039 Goguet, J, 46M 3:25:31
3040 Tuenz, N, 41M 3:25:31
3041 Watson, M, 40M 3:25:33
3042 Kielczewski, A, 37M 3:25:33
3043 Kasten, K, 41M 3:25:33
3044 Lambert, M, 47M 3:25:34
3045 Rowe, T, 27M 3:25:35
3046 Freerksen, O, 39M 3:25:35
3047 Schulze-Hillert, W, 46M 3:25:35
3048 Keane, M, 33M 3:25:35
3049 Minowada, G, 33M3:25:35
3050 Porter, M, 46M 3:25:35
3051 Zaragoza, L, 35M 3:25:36
3052 Fiore, A, 26M 3:25:36
3053 Carney, G, 31M 3:25:36
3054Lundmark, D, 22M 3:25:37
3055 Limberg, M, 42M 3:25:37
3056 Ciotta, C, 38M 3:25:37
3057 Anliker, R, 46M 3:25:37
3058 Mischler, J, 33M 3:25:38
3059 Rondon Vargas, H, 48M 3:25:38
3060 Agata, R, 35M 3:25:38
3061 Ehrlich, R, 28M 3:25:39
3062 Ugarte Jr., R, 35M 3:25:39
3063 Bommer, S, 28M 3:25:39
3064 Smolenaars, G, 43M 3:25:40
3065 Granoff, M, 26M 3:25:40
3066 Kuhlmey, D, 56M 3:25:41
3067 Falck-Therkelsen, E, 53M 3:25:41
3068 North, L, 41M 3:25:41
3069 Popper, J, 26M 3:25:42
3070 Conquet, E, 61M 3:25:42
3071 Garcia De La Vega, A, 42M 3:25:42
3072 Kuijpers, H, 37M 3:25:43
3073 Dune, P, 41M 3:25:43
3074 Jones, K, 29F 3:25:44
3075 Fitzgerald, S, 25M 3:25:44
3076 Meldrum, C, 32F 3:25:45
3077 Christie, B, 33M 3:25:45
3078 Oka, K, 26M 3:25:46
3079 Moir, M, 39M 3:25:47
3080 Pedersen, N, 32M 3:25:48
3081 Maystre, M, 44F 3:25:49
3082 Rouissi, R, 34M 3:25:49
3083 Shiroma, H, 28M 3:25:50
3084 Oviedo Soria, J, 39M 3:25:50
3085 Dessagne, G, 42M 3:25:51
3086 Lemus, H, 35M 3:25:51
3087 Young, G, 30M 3:25:51
3088 Cuisnier, J, 39M 3:25:51
3089 Vitu, D, 38M 3:25:53
3090 Martinez Osornio, I, 47F 3:25:53
3091 De Rassenfosse, J, 42M 3:25:54
3092 Forster, L, 65M 3:25:54
3093Viglione, G, 41M 3:25:54
3094 Ammeson, B, 36M 3:25:54
3095 Hammond, J, 32M 3:25:55
3096 Foley, E, 37F 3:25:55
3097 Sano, F, 38M 3:25:55
3098 Acuna Herrera, J, 36M 3:25:56
3099 McBeth, S, 35M 3:25:56
3100 Drenovel, M, 42M 3:25:56
3101 Michalak, W, 50M 3:25:56
3102 Hajdu, A, 26M 3:25:56
3103 Twietmeyer, T, 32M 3:25:57
3104Murgo, G, 33M 3:25:58
3105 Mancel, G, 46M 3:25:58
3106 Hartung, J, 45M 3:25:58
3107 Pietrzak, F, 37M 3:25:59
3108 Dunbar, K, 36M 3:26:00
3109 Lecouleux, J, 49M 3:26:00
3110 Novelo, M, 37M 3:26:01
3111 Kimball, S, 39M 3:26:01
3112 Regehr, D, 38M 3:26:01
3113 Douard, B, 35M 3:26:02
3114 Cohen, L, 40M 3:26:05
3115 Chung, D, 38M 3:26:05
3116 Dominguez, J, 41M 3:26:05
3117 Neau, J, 31M 3:26:06
3118 Hoblin Jr, J, 37M 3:26:06
3119 Deitch, L, 29F 3:26:07
3120 Mueller, P, 51M 3:26:07
3121 Carlson Jr, D, 39M 3:26:09
3122 Salvi, I, 42M 3:26:09
3123 Duck, E, 26F 3:26:11
3124 Ota, H, 50M 3:26:11
3125 Brugmann, A, 37M 3:26:13
3126 Del Valle, P, 52M 3:26:13
3127 Solano, L, 50M 3:26:13
3128 Krasniewicz, J, 43M 3:26:13
3129 Quintana Soley, J, 49M 3:26:14
3130 Smith, A, 61M 3:26:15
3131 Haase, B, 46M 3:26:15
3132 Schmidt, A, 40M 3:26:15
3133 Rutkowski, M, 44M 3:26:15
3134 Dinowitz, J, 36M 3:26:15
3135 Urbanski, J, 31M 3:26:16
3136 Scarani, S, 26M 3:26:16
3137 Mirabella, P, 29M 3:26:17
3138 Braud, B, 38M 3:26:17
3139 Jonsson, J, 49M 3:26:18
3140 MacLaren, P, 33M 3:26:18
3141 Frueh, S, 34M 3:26:19
3142 Smith-Coker, K, 32F 3:26:19
3143 Andrianne, G, 49M 3:26:19
3144 Moore, T, 37M 3:26:19
3145 Consentino, F, 33M 3:26:20
3146 Willhoeft, J, 32M 3:26:20
3147 Voermans, A, 55M 3:26:21
3148 Gallaway, M, 26M 3:26:21
3149 Gormley, B, 31M 3:26:21
3150 Kerschbaumer, J, 50M 3:26:21
3151 Varone, P, 36M 3:26:21
3152 Rushen, J, 52M 3:26:22
3153 Meurant, J, 35M 3:26:22
3154 Pottier, J, 33M 3:26:22
3155 McNeill, J, 23M 3:26:23
3156 Jacobs, M, 36M 3:26:23
3157 Keenan, D, 34M 3:26:23
3158 O'Connor, L, 31M 3:26:24
3159 Kato, K, 25M 3:26:24
3160 Heijmans, T, 46M 3:26:25
3161 Huhtamaki, A, 48M3:26:25
3162 Regouin, P, 39M 3:26:25
3163 Zarate, L, 50M 3:26:25
3164 Leplang, D, 38M 3:26:26
3165 Stewart, R, 47F 3:26:26
3166 Dumesnil, P, 39M 3:26:26
3167 Liukkonen, A, 27F 3:26:27
3168 Williams, P, 29M 3:26:27
3169 David, J, 34M 3:26:27
3170 Varley, D, 47M 3:26:27
3171 Ludwig, J, 40M 3:26:28
3172 Purdy, J, 32M 3:26:28
3173 Krakovsky, M, 25M 3:26:28
3174 Gosselin, J, 27F 3:26:28
3175 Tschenn, J, 40M 3:26:29
3176 Markiewicz, R, 47M 3:26:29
3177 Simpkins, S, 42M 3:26:29
3178 Acuna, C, 38M 3:26:29
3179 Boscapomi, V, 43M 3:26:30
3180 Cremer, D, 48M 3:26:30
3181 Oda, K, 51M 3:26:31
3182 Otten, L, 29F 3:26:31
3183 Araiza, R, 37M 3:26:31
3184 Young, R, 33M 3:26:31
3185 Beaux, P, 37M 3:26:31
3186 Clarke, R, 39M 3:26:31
3187 Shurman, R, 51M 3:26:31
3188 Ferwerda, A, 53M 3:26:31
3189 Duteweerd, J, 31M 3:26:32
3190 Blacklock, R, 33M3:26:33
3191 James, R, 30M 3:26:33
3192 Mueller, R, 41M 3:26:34
3193 Phillips, P, 41M 3:26:34
3194 Martin, J, 43M 3:26:34
3195 Braghini, D, 30M 3:26:34
3196 Jimenez, E, 42M 3:26:35
3197 Ellis, S, 31M 3:26:35
3198 Jones, K, 24M 3:26:35
3199 Ward, T, 43M 3:26:36
3200 Levy, S, 43M 3:26:36
3201 Davin, G, 28M 3:26:36
3202 Piron, R, 42M 3:26:37
3203 Gorses, J, 43M 3:26:37
3204 Morenas, P, 29M 3:26:38
3205 Zwerling, S, 34M 3:26:38
3206 Hartikainen, H, 36M 3:26:38
3207 Rowe, K, 30F 3:26:39
3208 Baldassarri, J, 40F 3:26:39
3209 Schlelsman, J, 61M 3:26:39
3210 Wulf, C, 60F 3:26:40
3211 Del Bianco, E, 43M 3:26:40
3212 Kubicek, M, 32F 3:26:40
3213 Chernin, D, 46M 3:26:40
3214 Young, P, 32F 3:26:41
3215 Kerr, T, 36M 3:26:42
3216 Sinnott, M, 23M 3:26:42
3217 Carrasco, A, 29M 3:26:43
3218 Zirzow, J, 53M 3:26:43
3219 Swan, A, 54M 3:26:43
3220 Bagchus, G, 42M 3:26:44
3221 Ochoa Ugarte, J, 48M 3:26:44
3222 Van Bellinghen, V, 37M 3:26:45
3223 Dawson, P, 29F 3:26:45
3224 Siqueiros, F, 43M 3:26:46
3225 Prandin, A, 32M 3:26:46
3226 Santiago, J, 43M 3:26:47
3227 Baller, C, 60M 3:26:50
3228 Bakmaz, B, 50M 3:26:50
3229 Easton, N, 28F 3:26:51
3230 Stelkens, G, 51M 3:26:51
3231 Stembridge, K, 39F 3:26:52
3232 Dominicus, R, 30M 3:26:52
3233 Marrero, A, 31M 3:26:53
3234 Ross, J, 32M 3:26:53
3235 Hartmann, K, 19M 3:26:54
3236 Devos, J, 58M 3:26:54
3237 Verdouw, W, 37M 3:26:54
3238 Leahy, M, 27F 3:26:54
3239 Cattafesta, M, 39M 3:26:55
3240 Hohenhaus, W, 52M 3:26:55
3241 Cardis, M, 37M 3:26:55
3242 Krouchi, B, 44M 3:26:56
3243 Janssen, J, 44M 3:26:57
3244 Ohlson, E, 45M 3:26:57
3245 Tagliante, J, 43M 3:26:57
3246Assanti, U, 48M 3:26:57
3247 Brosed Urbano, M, 36M 3:26:58
3248 Knoebelsdorf, P, 54M 3:26:58
3249 Albertsen, M, 34M 3:26:58
3250 Contreras Espinoza, J, 42M 3:26:59
3251 Blauhut, R, 54M 3:26:59
3252Planard, J, 41M 3:27:01
3253 Okadera, H, 52F 3:27:02
3254 Porsborg, B, 36M 3:27:02
3255 Ruhrmann, H, 45M 3:27:04
3256 Cortes, J, 32F 3:27:04
3257 Wernke, G, 40M 3:27:05
3258 Heilmann, R, 36M 3:27:06
3259 Cunningham, C, 22F 3:27:07
3260 Lopez, J, 50M 3:27:07
3261 Hamm, D, 50M 3:27:08
3262 Hernandez, L, 25M 3:27:08
3263 Morris, R, 36M 3:27:08
3264 Murray Jr., J, 31M 3:27:08
3265 Weber, K, 48M 3:27:08
3266 Marino, J, 25M 3:27:09
3267 Lucius, F, 32F 3:27:09
3268 Theroude, R, 47M 3:27:09
3269 Santana, L, 34M 3:27:11
3270 Gonzalez, R, 46M 3:27:11
3271 Meier, K, 44M 3:27:11
3272 Contamin, M, 25M 3:27:12
3273 Oliveira, C, 33M 3:27:12
3274 Wally, G, 36M 3:27:12
3275 Minion, M, 37F 3:27:12
3276 Calderon, M, 39M3:27:12
3277 Vintcent, J, 24M 3:27:12
3278 Aichlseder, E, 56M 3:27:12
3279 Fernandez, F, 47M 3:27:13
3280 Bessette, S, 32M 3:27:14
3281 Blattmann, C, 38F 3:27:14
3282 Bukovel, S, 46M 3:27:14
3283 Maloney, C, 57M 3:27:14
3284 Hoogeveen, M, 39M 3:27:14
3285 Knight, J, 48M 3:27:15
3286 Atri Chueque, E, 35M 3:27:16
3287 Madariaga, J, 28M 3:27:17
3288 Franky, E, 39F 3:27:17
3289 Thoman, A, 32M 3:27:17
3290 Hompland, A, 48M 3:27:18
3291 Mertens, C, 44M 3:27:18
3292 Maczynski, J, 41M 3:27:18
3293 Dupont, G, 43M 3:27:18
3294 Sletten, R, 46M 3:27:19
3295 Berkani, A, 27M 3:27:19
3296Moon, T, 26F 3:27:19
3297 Soto, G, 52M 3:27:20
3298 Hamminga, J, 38F 3:27:20
3299 Siekmeier, L, 27M 3:27:20
3300 Klemm, J, 31M 3:27:21
3301 Mechineau, A, 25M 3:27:21
3302 Iaboni, R, 41M 3:27:21
3303 Meusburger, G, 56M 3:27:22
3304 Dall'Armellina, J, 27M 3:27:22
3305 Newman, C, 30M 3:27:22
3306 Reyl, C, 24M 3:27:22
3307 Gobbo, S, 31F 3:27:22
3308 DeVita, R, 38M 3:27:23
3309 Barjuan Escabia, R, 29M 3:27:23
3310 Poo Gutierrez, L, 36M 3:27:23
3311 Piccone Casa, E, 38M 3:27:23
3312 Fjaer, P, 42M 3:27:23
3313 Stumpf, W, 40M 3:27:23
3314 Bennett, C, 23M 3:27:24
3315 Hoelig, G, 40M 3:27:25
3316 Ilsley, D, 36M 3:27:25
3317 Tagliati, M, 34M 3:27:26
3318 Foerst, H, 32M 3:27:26
3319 Trubert, D, 30M 3:27:27
3320 Kelly, S, 38M 3:27:27
3321 Barnett, B, 45M 3:27:28
3322 Mas, J, 25M3:27:28
3323 Nomoto, A, 29F 3:27:28
3324 Atkin, D, 36M 3:27:28
3325 Mebarkia, T, 25M 3:27:29
3326 Minaya, R, 54M 3:27:29
3327Parker, D, 46M 3:27:30
3328 Lanteigne, E, 54M 3:27:31
3329 Soule, J, 40M 3:27:31
3330 Walker, R, 35M 3:27:31
3331 Rousset, G, 41M 3:27:32
3332 Bocquet, C, 38M 3:27:32
3333 Rizzo, J, 32M 3:27:32
3334 Doare, A, 44M 3:27:33
3335 Tolan, F, 41M 3:27:33
3336 Perito, S, 42M 3:27:33
3337 Hamadi, M, 43M 3:27:33
3338 Stange*, T, 25M 3:27:34
3339 Beach, E, 33M 3:27:34
3340 Helin, A, 44F 3:27:34
3341 Fuchs, A, 42M 3:27:35
3342 Mucelli, M, 29M 3:27:35
3343Peroux, J, 54M 3:27:35
3344 Pieri, M, 26M 3:27:35
3345 Van Vlodrop, J, 42M 3:27:36
3346 Ellenbogen, D, 36M 3:27:36
3347 Schnaars, S, 44M 3:27:36
3348 Freeman, S, 32M 3:27:37
3349 Bakker, R, 38M 3:27:37
3350 Turoff, H, 39M 3:27:37
3351 Deisenhammer, J, 45M 3:27:37
3352 Ibarra Hernandez, H, 41M 3:27:38
3353 Nobreus, P, 30M 3:27:38
3354 Comendardor, X, 36M 3:27:38
3355 Lordeus, L, 33M 3:27:38
3356 Flinn, M, 27M 3:27:38
3357 Bianconi, S, 34M 3:27:39
3358Peere, M, 36M 3:27:39
3359 Zeleznik, S, 30M 3:27:39
3360 Schoeler, F, 49M 3:27:39
3361 Vieth, C, 37F 3:27:39
3362 Sorensen, E, 29M3:27:40
3363 Kraft, G, 49M 3:27:40
3364 Rose, R, 41M 3:27:41
3365 Hermansson, C, 40M 3:27:42
3366 Bavendiek, S, 35M 3:27:42
3367 Paley, R, 43M 3:27:44
3368 Juras, J, 53M 3:27:45
3369 Mazza, J, 38M 3:27:45
3370 Holdeman, L, 43M 3:27:45
3371 Rainville, M, 30M 3:27:45
3372 Castaneda Salinas, J, 37M 3:27:45
3373 Humber, P, 44M 3:27:45
3374 Schweppe, S, 53M 3:27:46
3375 Ward, T, 29M 3:27:46
3376 Pearson, M, 33M 3:27:46
3377 Lawrenz, J, 39M 3:27:47
3378 Hartigan, B, 40M 3:27:48
3379 Sobbeke, J, 42M 3:27:48
3380 Kellert, G, 44F 3:27:48
3381 Wiesler, J, 35M 3:27:49
3382 Carder, N, 42F 3:27:49
3383 Britto, P, 42M 3:27:49
3384 Tiroch Dr, K, 40M 3:27:50
3385 Tauber, B, 23M 3:27:51
3386 Stadheim, E, 41M 3:27:51
3387 Halbaut, O, 37M 3:27:51
3388 Schwarz, H, 50M 3:27:51
3389Henry, J, 41M 3:27:51
3390 Tabeling, C, 36M 3:27:52
3391 Ciccolella, L, 37M 3:27:52
3392 Villasenor Cardoso, H, 42F 3:27:52
3393 Wax, P, 31M 3:27:53
3394 Steinhoff, R, 36M 3:27:54
3395 Apostolicas, P, 36M 3:27:54
3396 Bernstein, I, 33M 3:27:54
3397 Sausner, H, 44M 3:27:54
3398 Sieurin, L, 24M 3:27:54
3399 Melender Aguilar, E, 31M 3:27:54
3400 Mansue, B, 36M 3:27:55
3401 Weiss, C, 49F 3:27:55
3402 Tami, M, 27M 3:27:55
3403 Rood, K, 37M 3:27:55
3404 Konings, J, 42M 3:27:56
3405 Etourneau, J, 41M 3:27:56
3406 Wesley Gray, W, 51M 3:27:56
3407 Morales Camey, J, 32M 3:27:56
3408 Bildner, P, 26M 3:27:56
3409 Lasserre, A, 29M 3:27:56
3410 Genin, G, 50M 3:27:56
3411 Pesec, D, 45M 3:27:57
3412 Galmel, J, 32M 3:27:57
3413 Kelly, F, 36M 3:27:57
3414 Diachenko, L, 28F 3:27:57
3415 Creagh, M, 34M 3:27:57
3416 Gibbons, C, 40M 3:27:58
3417 Cline, D, 35M 3:27:58
3418 Kernn, U, 39M 3:27:58
3419 Honegger, M, 38M 3:27:59
3420 Reynes, J, 39M 3:28:00
3421 Wood, J, 44M 3:28:00
3422 Lebleu, J, 41M 3:28:00
3423 Lucid, S, 30F 3:28:01
3424 Meyer, G, 31M 3:28:01
3425 May, J, 41M 3:28:01
3426 Dippmann, I, 38F 3:28:01
3427 Blanc, A, 43M 3:28:01
3428 Brewer, P, 57M 3:28:01
3429 Mora Sanchez, J, 37M 3:28:02
3430 Schoetteldreier, F, 44M 3:28:02
3431 Aguero, W, 35M 3:28:03
3432 Desboeufs, N, 37F 3:28:03
3433 Meier, F, 33M 3:28:03
3434 Ohkubo, K, 27M 3:28:05
3435 Montes, H, 32M 3:28:05
3436 Lebaillif, M, 55M 3:28:05
3437 Hudgens, S, 39M 3:28:05
3438 Hidaleo, E, 32M 3:28:05
3439 Bernard, J, 49M 3:28:05
3440 Arends, M, 29M 3:28:06
3441 Gaye, M, 22M 3:28:06
3442 Van Pinxten, D, 41F 3:28:06
3443 Olmo, M, 43F 3:28:06
3444 D'Onofrio, T, 31M 3:28:07
3445 Resnick, J, 24M 3:28:08
3446 Veyret, J, 52M 3:28:08
3447 Lanciault, F, 46F 3:28:08
3448 Paniccia, S, 20M3:28:09
3449 Aulinas, J, 36M 3:28:09
3450 Pelcyger, E, 22M 3:28:09
3451 Ameille, J, 44M 3:28:10
3452 Vargas, A, 47M 3:28:10
3453 Figueroa Del Valle, L, 25F 3:28:11
3454 King, R, 40M 3:28:11
3455 Marzetti, G, 42M 3:28:12
3456 Brandtner, R, 46M 3:28:12
3457 Costa, J, 38M 3:28:12
3458 Hess, J, 26M 3:28:13
3459 Schmidlin, J, 32M 3:28:13
3460 Syracuse, R, 44M 3:28:14
3461 Dixon, R, 37M 3:28:14
3462 Gregory, D, 38M 3:28:14
3463 Duffy, R, 45M 3:28:14
3464 Gerold, K, 40M 3:28:15
3465 Twa, B, 37M 3:28:15
3466 Cornut, M, 50M 3:28:15
3467 Cilli, L, 28F 3:28:15
3468 Blake, N, 38M 3:28:16
3469 Mossberg, H, 50M 3:28:16
3470 Wyatt, J, 21M 3:28:16
3471 Thygesen, K, 44M 3:28:16
3472 Krawitt, B, 23M 3:28:16
3473 Heineman, J, 31M 3:28:16
3474 Skrabanja, A, 38M 3:28:17
3475 Le Moing, G, 42M 3:28:17
3476 DeLeo, F, 41M 3:28:17
3477 Salas, W, 45M 3:28:17
3478 Fernandez, S, 53M 3:28:18
3479 Dorvault, L, 41M 3:28:18
3480 Jancus, M, 33M 3:28:19
3481 Blazinic, P, 50M 3:28:19
3482 Nusbaum, H, 33M 3:28:19
3483 Lac, J, 50F 3:28:19
3484 Buhmann, D, 41M 3:28:19
3485 Delaney, J, 40M 3:28:20
3486 Thiry, R, 41M3:28:20
3487 Van Amerongen, W, 46M 3:28:21
3488 Sullivan, C, 27F 3:28:22
3489 Schrimmer, D, 38M 3:28:22
3490 Glass, A, 46M 3:28:22
3491 Spiers, R, 32M 3:28:23
3492 Malinoski, T, 34M 3:28:23
3493 Rutard, J, 45M 3:28:23
3494 Mikulec, M, 49M 3:28:23
3495 Wilson, C, 29M 3:28:23
3496 Lillos Buendia, M, 40M 3:28:24
3497 Fisch, M, 32M 3:28:24
3498 Clarke, J, 47M 3:28:25
3499 Apesteguia, B, 40M 3:28:26
3500 Risch, K, 48F 3:28:26
3501 Pittavino, D, 36M 3:28:26
3502 Servatius, P, 52M 3:28:27
3503 Remer, W, 39M 3:28:27
3504 Chadwick, R, 55M 3:28:27
3505 King, P, 30M 3:28:28
3506 Clark, M, 47M 3:28:28
3507 Fernandez Forner, C, 40M 3:28:28
3508 Ganic, N, 43M 3:28:28
3509 Somma, L, 28M 3:28:28
3510 Fernandez Forner, J, 38M 3:28:28
3511 Ngara, B, 50M 3:28:29
3512 Fernandez, P, 51M 3:28:29
3513 El-Ghazzali, S, 27M 3:28:29
3514 Gallardo Salazar, M, 33M 3:28:29
3515 Thygesen, A, 42F 3:28:29
3516 Baehr, S, 53M 3:28:29
3517 Aubourg, L, 28M 3:28:30
3518 Dietrich, K, 46M 3:28:30
3519 Corathers, M, 35M 3:28:32
3520 Mower, S, 40M 3:28:32
3521 Labroni, F, 32M 3:28:32
3522 Hendriksen, P, 41M 3:28:32
3523 Johnson, D, 42M 3:28:33
3524 Sole, A, 30M 3:28:33
3525 McKeever, C, 37M 3:28:33
3526 Appels, A, 46M 3:28:33
3527 Bang, J, 38M 3:28:33
3528 Hogenelst, R, 43M 3:28:34
3529 Young, J, 39M 3:28:34
3530Priest, M, 51M 3:28:35
3531 Neuls, P, 26M 3:28:35
3532 Kirschner, K, 26M 3:28:35
3533 Conboy, T, 33M 3:28:35
3534 Maldonado, A, 35M 3:28:35
3535 Andreachi, M, 54M 3:28:37
3536 Popper, A, 42M 3:28:37
3537 De Vries, D, 41M 3:28:38
3538 De Mari, S, 50M 3:28:38
3539 Johnson, K, 29M 3:28:38
3540 De Bonis, F, 23M 3:28:38
3541 Williams, K, 42M 3:28:38
3542 Schultz, M, 53F 3:28:38
3543 Ballinger, T, 35M 3:28:38
3544 McGale, D, 34M 3:28:38
3545 Noe, G, 31M 3:28:38
3546 Mo, R, 34M 3:28:38
3547 Berger, J, 42M 3:28:38
3548 Verola, J, 52M 3:28:38
3549 Schonwald, K, 45M 3:28:39
3550 Ottman, B, 39M 3:28:39
3551 Benvenuto, G, 36M 3:28:39
3552 Jimenez, J, 33M 3:28:39
3553 Bleichman, L, 49M 3:28:40
3554 Hoshour, R, 37M3:28:41
3555 Fishman, A, 33M 3:28:41
3556 Straffi, G, 34M 3:28:42
3557 Weintraub, N, 30M 3:28:42
3558 Bonnie, S, 30M 3:28:42
3559 Nicholson, M, 44M 3:28:43
3560 Harris, A, 33M 3:28:43
3561 Adcock, N, 45M 3:28:44
3562 Bischoff, C, 32M 3:28:44
3563 Evans, G, 44M 3:28:44
3564 Rimmer, M, 28M 3:28:45
3565 Jaime, E, 38M 3:28:45
3566 Wutzl, R, 30M 3:28:46
3567 Breddels, D, 35M 3:28:47
3568 Roettger, A, 30M 3:28:47
3569 Brown Jr., D, 31M 3:28:47
3570 Driscoll, E, 28M 3:28:47
3571 Rogers, D, 27M 3:28:48
3572 Hagner, S, 37M 3:28:48
3573 Languille, M, 46M 3:28:48
3574 Bellino, P, 37M3:28:48
3575 Oliveira Neto, O, 47M 3:28:50
3576 Thyge, D, 30M 3:28:50
3577 Zara, F, 35M 3:28:50
3578 Yang, S, 30F 3:28:50
3579 Villa, G, 29M 3:28:50
3580 Weilacher, T, 33M 3:28:50
3581 Brugnoni, M, 31M 3:28:50
3582 Robson, J, 34F 3:28:51
3583 Stilp, T, 40M3:28:51
3584 Diederich, B, 44M 3:28:51
3585 Schuster, C, 30M 3:28:51
3586 Greffier, C, 32M 3:28:52
3587 Hile, B, 34M 3:28:52
3588 Merghoub, S, 24M 3:28:52
3589 Sperazza, H, 36M 3:28:52
3590 Speraza, C, 37M 3:28:53
3591 Argoud, J, 45M 3:28:54
3592 Muller, J, 31M 3:28:54
3593 Goulin, P, 37M 3:28:54
3594 Dreyer, A, 26F 3:28:54
3595 Richard, P, 39M 3:28:54
3596 Burns, K, 36M 3:28:54
3597 Mazzone, D, 38M 3:28:54
3598 Weigert, M, 45M 3:28:55
3599 Estrada Vega, S, 55M 3:28:55
3600 Takacs, D, 34M 3:28:56
3601 Nsafoah, P, 27M 3:28:56
3602 McCluskey, I, 38M 3:28:57
3603 Avila Diaz, V, 45M 3:28:57
3604 Reiling, G, 44M 3:28:57
3605 Saez, H, 43M 3:28:57
3606 Heymach, J, 27M 3:28:57
3607 Sabbatino, A, 32M 3:28:58
3608 Boulet, G, 38M 3:28:58
3609 Van Den Hoogen, G, 46M 3:28:58
3610 Geynet, P, 37M 3:28:58
3611 Raeburn, J, 38M 3:28:58
3612 O'Nara, E, 26F 3:28:59
3613 Vallent, C, 40M 3:28:59
3614 Tami, R, 37M 3:28:59
3615 Huntley, P, 30M 3:28:59
3616 Adams, J, 33M 3:29:00
3617 Mongelluzzo, M, 38M 3:29:00
3618 Gengo, R, 42M 3:29:01
3619 Arndt, D, 37M 3:29:01
3620 Nicholson, M, 35M 3:29:01
3621 Nielsen, V, 48M 3:29:01
3622 Breen, P, 31M 3:29:02
3623 Fleming, M, 27M 3:29:02
3624 Baumann, M, 35F 3:29:02
3625 Guilbot, J, 31M 3:29:02
3626 Boningre, M, 30M 3:29:03
3627 Finand, B, 30M 3:29:05
3628 Brieden, W, 37M 3:29:05
3629 Gagnon, J, 27M 3:29:05
3630 Idil, M, 22M 3:29:06
3631 Ranallo, R, 39M 3:29:06
3632 Koster, H, 34M 3:29:06
3633 Nascimento, G, 53M 3:29:07
3634 Koehnke, W, 46M 3:29:08
3635 Bandiera, F, 38M 3:29:08
3636 Giesen, L, 35M 3:29:09
3637 Spisse, H, 51M 3:29:09
3638 Stolper, M, 23M 3:29:09
3639Campos, E, 39M 3:29:09
3640 Grace, W, 50M 3:29:09
3641 Whelan, J, 30M 3:29:10
3642 Cassell, R, 25M 3:29:10
3643 Maier, S, 51M 3:29:10
3644 Mueller, K, 26F 3:29:11
3645 Muller, H, 25M 3:29:11
3646 Bisson, M, 58M 3:29:11
3647 Orozco, J, 24M 3:29:11
3648 Towner, G, 31M 3:29:11
3649 Leclere, H, 25M 3:29:12
3650 Hollander, A, 38M 3:29:12
3651 Asari, Y, 47M 3:29:13
3652 Lee, F, 37M 3:29:13
3653 Bellamy, C, 30M 3:29:13
3654 Kalbhenn, R, 30M 3:29:13
3655 Delafield, J, 29M 3:29:13
3656 Hogan, K, 32M 3:29:13
3657 Reis, C, 55M 3:29:13
3658 Flesch, P, 43M 3:29:13
3659 Schweigert, G, 34M 3:29:14
3660 Nassetti, A, 34M 3:29:14
3661 Championi, M, 33M 3:29:15
3662 Scarano, P, 41M 3:29:16
3663 Merlo, M, 30M 3:29:16
3664 Mashkuri, J, 30M 3:29:16
3665 Gonsalvez, R, 45M 3:29:16
3666 Ullein, R, 39M 3:29:17
3667 Dijs, H, 36M 3:29:19
3668 Boisselier, P, 43M 3:29:19
3669 Morin, G, 45M 3:29:19
3670 Herrera Ortiz, A, 50M 3:29:19
3671 Fleming, I, 32M 3:29:19
3672 Finkelstein, A, 33M 3:29:20
3673 Lopez, C, 38M 3:29:20
3674 Bowers, G, 51M 3:29:20
3675 Leonhardt, A, 45M 3:29:21
3676 Larsen, P, 53M 3:29:21
3677 Ramirez Chavez, M, 33M 3:29:21
3678 Mulder, N, 25M 3:29:22
3679 Manzoni, U, 62M 3:29:22
3680 Watts, M, 28F 3:29:22
3681 Copin, F, 30M 3:29:22
3682 Bardoux, T, 31M 3:29:23
3683 Dwars, G, 47M 3:29:24
3684 Zoellner, P, 44M 3:29:24
3685 McRobie, M, 31M 3:29:24
3686 Pierre, J, 33M 3:29:25
3687 Hawkins, K, 37M 3:29:25
3688 Maslow, J, 39M 3:29:25
3689 Hover, M, 40F 3:29:25
3690 Nutt, J, 56M 3:29:25
3691 Strand, T, 60M 3:29:26
3692 Da Silva, J, 40M 3:29:26
3693 Lassoe, W, 33M 3:29:26
3694 Szigeti, P, 27M 3:29:27
3695 Torres, N, 36M 3:29:27
3696 Garcia, B, 47M 3:29:27
3697 Minton, P, 37F 3:29:28
3698 Van Rijn, N, 48M 3:29:29
3699 Green, D, 32M 3:29:30
3700 Serrano, G, 38M 3:29:30
3701 Eig, A, 25F 3:29:30
3702 Jonin, A, 44M 3:29:31
3703 Beirau, U, 53M 3:29:31
3704 Kennedy, J, 48M 3:29:31
3705 Walker, J, 41M 3:29:31
3706 Barlund, A, 30F 3:29:31
3707 Morales, I, 49M 3:29:31
3708 Lamb, A, 35M 3:29:31
3709 Merieux, J, 53M 3:29:32
3710 Brevad, B, 32M 3:29:32
3711 Leventhal, L, 41M 3:29:32
3712 Thomas, G, 44M 3:29:32
3713 Nichols, K, 33M 3:29:33
3714 Moyse, P, 40M 3:29:33
3715 Merz, A, 29M 3:29:33
3716 Chan, J, 30M 3:29:34
3717 Schaefer, D, 34M 3:29:34
3718 Paccaud, F, 23M 3:29:34
3719 Llamas, A, 43M 3:29:34
3720 Neuss, J, 57M 3:29:34
3721 Salazar Valadez, A, 40M 3:29:34
3722 Ebel, K, 57M 3:29:34
3723 Pryde, R, 33M 3:29:34
3724 Bourquin-De Giorgi, A, 33F 3:29:35
3725 Forest, R, 44M 3:29:35
3726 Kleipool, A, 35M 3:29:35
3727 Mathis, T, 35M 3:29:35
3728 Roberto, P, 36M 3:29:35
3729 Hilbert, M, 34M 3:29:35
3730 Aguero, F, 54M 3:29:36
3731 Peterson, M, 39F 3:29:36
3732 Jarka, T, 26M 3:29:36
3733 Tkacz, R, 38M 3:29:36
3734 Min, S, 28M 3:29:36
3735 Marrero, N, 48M 3:29:36
3736 Martinico, S, 43M 3:29:36
3737 Esseul, J, 50M 3:29:36
3738 Gonzalez, R, 54M 3:29:37
3739 Swift, T, 47M 3:29:37
3740 Burch, M, 28M 3:29:37
3741 Lopez, F, 23M 3:29:38
3742 Dix, L, 50M 3:29:39
3743 Del Grosso, R, 37M 3:29:39
3744 Sandvik, B, 45F3:29:39
3745 Killen, K, 35M 3:29:39
3746 Nehrbass, U, 29M 3:29:39
3747 Key, G, 35M 3:29:39
3748 Iglesias, C, 48M 3:29:39
3749Lambert, D, 40M 3:29:40
3750 Hjorth, O, 36M 3:29:40
3751 Benchabane, L, 37M 3:29:40
3752 Shandell, T, 33M 3:29:40
3753 Lochmatter, M, 46F 3:29:41
3754 Babilon, L, 45M 3:29:41
3755 Maury, C, 29M 3:29:42
3756 Lehmkuhl, T, 49M 3:29:42
3757 Kranzer, V, 42M 3:29:42
3758 Romeo, J, 45M 3:29:43
3759 Bruce, K, 36M 3:29:43
3760 Svendsen, A, 32M 3:29:44
3761 Chemin, J, 54M 3:29:44
3762 Marshall, P, 38M 3:29:44
3763 Castellano, J, 27M 3:29:45
3764 Sagnes, G, 52M 3:29:45
3765 Garcia Fabregat, J, 37M 3:29:45
3766 Bannwart, H, 35M 3:29:45
3767 Gorospe, M, 39M 3:29:45
3768 Cozzari, C, 43M 3:29:46
3769 Catalanotto, A, 37M 3:29:46
3770 Sgherza, A, 33M 3:29:46
3771 Beck, R, 33M 3:29:46
3772 Chaton, E, 38M 3:29:47
3773 Solberg, J, 52M 3:29:47
3774 Armitage, J, 23M 3:29:48
3775 Lichtenschopf, K, 40M 3:29:49
3776 Finan, M, 25M 3:29:49
3777 Simon, A, 24M 3:29:49
3778 Rienhardt, J, 35M 3:29:49
3779 Bogaz, B, 47M 3:29:50
3780 Marchano, C, 42M 3:29:50
3781 Schriver, G, 41M 3:29:50
3782 Larkin, T, 49M 3:29:50
3783 Tourmen, J, 43M 3:29:50
3784 Franco, A, 33M 3:29:51
3785 Polosse, R, 42M 3:29:51
3786 Rapp, B, 28F 3:29:51
3787 Lawson, T, 40M 3:29:51
3788 Dodge, S, 31F 3:29:51
3789 Tosado, J, 31M 3:29:51
3790 Schomberg, E, 40M 3:29:52
3791 Sorensen, S, 50M 3:29:52
3792 Dosal, J, 35M 3:29:52
3793 Simonetti, U, 54M 3:29:53
3794 Vargas, R, 29M 3:29:53
3795 Reyes Dieo, T, 28M 3:29:53
3796 Nystrom, L, 55M 3:29:53
3797 Rosendal, H, 36M3:29:53
3798 Oja, T, 49M 3:29:53
3799 Weber, J, 25M 3:29:55
3800 Lambert, G, 29M 3:29:56
3801 Bourgeois, G, 32M 3:29:56
3802 Jungwirth, K, 33M 3:29:57
3803 Rattazzi, L, 26M 3:29:57
3804 Paganelli, F, 48M 3:29:59
3805 Owens, J, 42M 3:29:59
3806 Fagnon, R, 39M 3:30:00
3807 Cappelletti, P, 41M 3:30:00
3808 Robinson, B, 36M 3:30:00
3809 McGuire, M, 40M 3:30:00
3810 Prevost, J, 46M 3:30:00
3811 Hernandez, J, 52M 3:30:01
3812 Nilsson, M, 32M 3:30:02
3813 Traven, J, 32M 3:30:02
3814 Hodge, J, 46M 3:30:02
3815 Melhado, D, 42M 3:30:02
3816 Kelleher, M, 24M 3:30:03
3817 Gay, F, 48M 3:30:03
3818 Van Slambrook, D, 36M 3:30:04
3819 Ambroggi, A, 35M 3:30:05
3820 O'Connor, J, 35M 3:30:05
3821 Brewer, D, 30M 3:30:06
3822 Hennessy, R, 36M 3:30:06
3823 Volkmeier, H, 49M 3:30:08
3824 Ortiz, A, 44M 3:30:09
3825 De Bock, A, 40M 3:30:10
3826 Tall, S, 32M 3:30:10
3827 Stolz, B, 30M 3:30:10
3828 Karstens, D, 46M 3:30:10
3829 Rechbauer, H, 37M 3:30:11
3830 Gonzalez, H, 37M 3:30:12
3831 Ratmeyer, R, 56M 3:30:13
3832 Hobson, B, 46M 3:30:15
3833 Di Nunzio, A, 51M 3:30:15
3834 Mascioli, F, 34M 3:30:15
3835Deutsche, D, 32M 3:30:16
3836 Keller, B, 44M 3:30:16
3837 Hanna, J, 27M 3:30:19
3838 Bastiaens, F, 43M 3:30:21
3839 Mazzucco, J, 41M 3:30:21
3840 Tonejec, I, 34M 3:30:21
3841 Silgado, J, 45M 3:30:22
3842 Hernandez, E, 32M 3:30:22
3843 Iturbe Barriga, F, 37M 3:30:22
3844 Hanko, R, 33M 3:30:23
3845 Savage, P, 40M 3:30:23
3846 Gravier, B, 31M 3:30:24
3847 Poggianti, F, 31M 3:30:25
3848 Martorana, J, 49M 3:30:28
3849 Rutsky Jr, W, 45M 3:30:30
3850 Caenen, M, 43M 3:30:30
3851 Kellert, K, 44M 3:30:30
3852 Anderson, C, 35M 3:30:31
3853 Takenouchi, N, 33M 3:30:31
3854 Heymann, J, 33M 3:30:31
3855 Ramirez Garcio, R, 37M 3:30:31
3856 Lastra Ruiz, L, 45M3:30:32
3857 Sander, W, 54M 3:30:33
3858 James, E, 48M 3:30:33
3859 Pruvot, S, 23M 3:30:34
3860 Reuter, T, 24M 3:30:34
3861 Mosby, D, 38M 3:30:34
3862 Hoskins, B, 23M 3:30:35
3863 Wellbrock, B, 40M 3:30:35
3864 Nolot, M, 40M 3:30:35
3865 McVeigh, F, 29M 3:30:35
3866 Guery, V, 34M 3:30:36
3867 Wright, A, 40M 3:30:36
3868 Wojtkowski, K, 55M 3:30:36
3869 Salas, R, 30M 3:30:37
3870 Schulman, T, 23M 3:30:37
3871 Rieser, J, 50M 3:30:39
3872 Kroon, C, 63M 3:30:39
3873 McCarthy, R, 39M 3:30:40
3874 Erre, R, 39M 3:30:40
3875 Blansjaar, H, 47M 3:30:41
3876 Ellmer, P, 38M 3:30:41
3877 Deluga, E, 30M 3:30:42
3878 Brorson, R, 30M 3:30:42
3879 Wilson, M, 48M 3:30:43
3880 Thomassen, G, 44M 3:30:43
3881 Reagan, P, 36M 3:30:43
3882 Fradera, M, 36M 3:30:44
3883 Ivaldi, D, 33M 3:30:44
3884 Weber, U, 45M 3:30:44
3885 Nolf, M, 42M 3:30:45
3886 Decroix, F, 47M 3:30:45
3887 Stern, M, 41M 3:30:46
3888 Gallo, F, 42M 3:30:46
3889 Narducci, J, 32M 3:30:46
3890 Gonzalez, J, 48M 3:30:47
3891 Ladrix, J, 40M 3:30:47
3892 Katz, L, 42M 3:30:48
3893 Walschap, R, 51M 3:30:48
3894 Maclean, D, 22M 3:30:49
3895 Dendorfer, O, 28M 3:30:50
3896 Patterson, W, 32M 3:30:51
3897 Jackson, P, 39M 3:30:52
3898 McDonald, D, 30M 3:30:52
3899 Rossi, F, 35M 3:30:53
3900 Goddard, S, 34M 3:30:53
3901 Sucaud, J, 38M 3:30:53
3902 Bobrowski, K, 56M 3:30:54
3903 Stahl, B, 29M 3:30:54
3904 Salzman, A, 27F 3:30:55
3905 Pacaud, D, 43M 3:30:55
3906Ponzellini, A, 38M 3:30:55
3907 Tafoya, S, 38M 3:30:55
3908 Cimaglia, A, 42M 3:30:55
3909 Gonzalez, M, 48M 3:30:57
3910 Foust, T, 27M 3:30:58
3911 Cho, J, 28M 3:30:59
3912 Denolf, L, 30M 3:30:59
3913 Berglund, E, 54M 3:31:00
3914 Hamilton, L, 34F 3:31:01
3915 Price, L, 46M 3:31:01
3916 Walick, D, 23M 3:31:01
3917 Rame, D, 37M 3:31:01
3918 Goetz, S, 30M 3:31:02
3919 Daniel, J, 49M 3:31:04
3920 Sahm, W, 64M 3:31:04
3921 Omiccioli, L, 33M 3:31:05
3922 Vincent, J, 33M 3:31:05
3923 Maciol, M, 36M 3:31:05
3924 Cooper, R, 36M 3:31:06
3925 Crosby, G, 38F 3:31:06
3926 Mastrocolla, O, 44M 3:31:06
3927 Thompson, D, 61M 3:31:06
3928 Schroeder-Schroeer, A, 41M 3:31:07
3929 Tranel, P, 26M 3:31:07
3930 Etts, K, 33M 3:31:07
3931 Wateau, S, 37M 3:31:08
3932 Espo, P, 31M 3:31:08
3933 Velazquez, J, 43M 3:31:08
3934 Fishman, M, 42M 3:31:08
3935Schernewski, W, 52M 3:31:09
3936 Barbe, M, 32M 3:31:09
3937 Schmalz, G, 40M 3:31:09
3938 Plogmann, U, 49M 3:31:09
3939 McCready, B, 58M 3:31:09
3940 Karas, E, 27M 3:31:09
3941 Ledwick, T, 37M 3:31:10
3942 Siedler, H, 51M 3:31:11
3943 Brown, W, 32M 3:31:11
3944 Lopez Saynez, J, 33M 3:31:11
3945 Stottele, M, 34M 3:31:11
3946 Vafi, J, 28M 3:31:12
3947 Varga, A, 44F 3:31:12
3948 Levin, M, 31M 3:31:12
3949 Labonski, P, 26M 3:31:13
3950 Le Frapper, J, 37M3:31:13
3951 Wildgoose, M, 41M 3:31:13
3952 Daneels, L, 39M 3:31:14
3953 Romero, J, 54M 3:31:14
3954 Denier, T, 37M 3:31:15
3955 Tafelski, R, 54M 3:31:15
3956 Woodworth, B, 33M 3:31:15
3957 Cheymol, B, 42M 3:31:16
3958 Suarez-Valle, E, 29M 3:31:16
3959 Kaiser, P, 47M 3:31:17
3960 Visser, P, 40M 3:31:17
3961 Wenzel, A, 27M 3:31:17
3962 Ekblom, J, 50M 3:31:17
3963 Zellers, L, 33M 3:31:18
3964 Le-Berre, M, 32M 3:31:18
3965 Fishnaller, H, 33M 3:31:18
3966 Lucherini, A, 33M 3:31:18
3967 Plangger, P, 41M 3:31:19
3968 Burmeister, M, 36M 3:31:19
3969 Munoz, G, 39M 3:31:19
3970 Leech, D, 33M 3:31:20
3971 Beckford, A, 31M 3:31:20
3972 Bijsterbosch, J, 43M 3:31:21
3973 Jones, D, 48M 3:31:22
3974 Czech, J, 39M 3:31:23
3975 Wehrheim, J, 22M 3:31:23
3976 Houarner, J, 46M 3:31:24
3977 Aguilar, J, 47M 3:31:24
3978 Andersen, L, 31M 3:31:24
3979 Zucek, M, 46M 3:31:24
3980 Robinson, G, 39M 3:31:24
3981 Hiroki, T, 39M 3:31:25
3982 Lancaster, P, 33M 3:31:25
3983 Myrick, K, 35F 3:31:25
3984 Garcia, P, 41M 3:31:25
3985 Van Bon, C, 45F 3:31:26
3986 Morrison, J, 38M 3:31:26
3987 Melchioretto, J, 37M 3:31:26
3988 Dahn, W, 38M 3:31:27
3989 De Jong, D, 45M 3:31:28
3990 Mercurio, G, 36M 3:31:28
3991 Iwachow, E, 48M 3:31:29
3992 Hoch, D, 47M 3:31:29
3993 Johnston, P, 40M 3:31:29
3994 Pignata, G, 49M 3:31:29
3995 Serk, H, 55M 3:31:29
3996 Bihel, F, 32M 3:31:29
3997 Peterstorfer, H, 32M 3:31:30
3998 Barone, D, 36M 3:31:31
3999 Alkema, H, 25M 3:31:31
4000 Ojeda, G, 19M 3:31:31
4001 Lazcano, J, 35M 3:31:32
4002 De Winter, T, 30M 3:31:33
4003 Aronoff, P, 30M 3:31:33
4004 Weidmann, W, 44M 3:31:33
4005 Eberhardt, D, 47M 3:31:34
4006 Stone, J, 45M 3:31:34
4007 Voges, J, 22M 3:31:34
4008 Hendrickx, J, 46M 3:31:34
4009 Straessle, C, 35M 3:31:35
4010 Schmidt, J, 42F 3:31:36
4011 Vassaliere, M, 49M 3:31:36
4012 Gorucah, I, 34M 3:31:36
4013 Poggemann, G, 40M 3:31:37
4014 Minetti, L, 44M 3:31:37
4015 Biddle, D, 35F 3:31:37
4016 Menault, J, 44M 3:31:37
4017 Torres, J, 39M 3:31:37
4018 Bargueno, P, 54M 3:31:38
4019 Schlosser, E, 50M 3:31:38
4020 Marszalkowski, K, 44M 3:31:38
4021 Mavarro, J, 34M 3:31:39
4022 Chapiro, A, 29M 3:31:39
4023 Wenger, M, 40M 3:31:40
4024 Littink, A, 41M 3:31:41
4025 Erb, D, 39M 3:31:42
4026 Pyden, J, 37M 3:31:42
4027 Gugger, S, 50M 3:31:42
4028 Casaux, P, 29M 3:31:42
4029 Norskov, J, 27M 3:31:43
4030 Paternoster, T, 37M 3:31:43
4031 Vilchis, M, 29M 3:31:43
4032 Caporaso, K, 38M 3:31:43
4033 Joyce, M, 38M 3:31:44
4034 Jones, S, 35M 3:31:44
4035 Toledo, M, 42M 3:31:44
4036 Thuis, R, 45M 3:31:44
4037 Woods, S, 43M 3:31:44
4038 Zaschkoda, D, 52M 3:31:44
4039 Panico, C, 38F 3:31:44
4040 Donnelly, M, 31M 3:31:44
4041 Dohne, G, 34M 3:31:45
4042 Henne, K, 35M 3:31:45
4043 Lucas, C, 33M 3:31:45
4044 Heagney, M, 30M 3:31:45
4045 Schaefer, U, 48M 3:31:46
4046 Kramsky, E, 40M 3:31:46
4047 Guglielmetto, G, 41M 3:31:47
4048 Clarke, H, 41M 3:31:48
4049 Burggraaf, G, 37M 3:31:49
4050 Buffett, F, 56M 3:31:49
4051 Boone, P, 43M 3:31:49
4052 Nobriga, J, 45M 3:31:50
4053 Rodriguez, L, 43M 3:31:50
4054 Gribetz, J, 42F 3:31:50
4055 Gerla, M, 51M 3:31:50
4056 Ines Monclus, J, 37M 3:31:51
4057 Marquez, O, 50M 3:31:51
4058 Silvestro, M, 36M 3:31:51
4059 Oreilly, D, 45M 3:31:52
4060 Janet, D, 40M 3:31:52
4061Webb, W, 28M 3:31:53
4062 Dixon, R, 27M 3:31:53
4063 De Ruyter, A, 24M 3:31:53
4064 Masson, R, 46M 3:31:54
4065 Fleury, M, 25M 3:31:54
4066 Stroud, S, 46M 3:31:54
4067 Zisswiller, J, 37M 3:31:54
4068 Lubell, P, 27F 3:31:55
4069 Van Zomeren, T, 46M 3:31:55
4070 Lewis, C, 46M 3:31:56
4071 Troyer, B, 33M 3:31:57
4072 Shipley, W, 45M 3:31:57
4073 Fradon, J, 37M 3:31:57
4074 Castro, M, 34M3:32:00
4075 Bennett, R, 36M 3:32:00
4076 Flores, A, 32M 3:32:00
4077 Koenig, G, 39M 3:32:02
4078 Berleux, A, 43M 3:32:03
4079 Bellon, D, 27M 3:32:03
4080 Moore, K, 25M 3:32:03
4081 Gauthier, T, 30M 3:32:04
4082 Volas, M, 41M 3:32:05
4083 Kennedy, G, 50M 3:32:05
4084 Boutry, J, 39M 3:32:06
4085 Mertens, F, 38M 3:32:06
4086 Nichols, A, 34M 3:32:07
4087 Cedo, P, 48M 3:32:07
4088 Forman, D, 41M 3:32:07
4089 Doherty, E, 37F 3:32:08
4090 Swift, N, 28F 3:32:08
4091 Redd, G, 30M 3:32:09
4092 Coleman, D, 30F 3:32:09
4093 Weir, H, 30M 3:32:09
4094 Miller, L, 36F 3:32:09
4095 Bakkal, M, 44M 3:32:10
4096 De Keijzer, M, 30M 3:32:10
4097 Clasby, C, 24M 3:32:10
4098 Bussmann, J, 41M 3:32:11
4099 Fusco, I, 33M3:32:11
4100 Del Grosso, G, 42M 3:32:12
4101 Ercolano, C, 30M 3:32:13
4102 Peuser, R, 40M 3:32:14
4103 Hopkinson, J, 24M 3:32:14
4104 Bagur, A, 45M 3:32:15
4105 Cassan, T, 31M 3:32:15
4106 Meissner, A, 59M 3:32:15
4107 Anede, D, 44M 3:32:16
4108 O'Halloran, V, 37M 3:32:16
4109 Shapiro, J, 28M 3:32:16
4110 Benz, B, 41M 3:32:17
4111 Porre, H, 39M 3:32:17
4112 Ford, G, 41F 3:32:17
4113 Bohn, J, 46M 3:32:17
4114 Biggers, T, 32M 3:32:18
4115 Haglund, C, 26M 3:32:18
4116 Sundberg, S, 50M 3:32:18
4117 Eriksson, L, 42M 3:32:18
4118 Strout, D, 43M 3:32:19
4119 Digneo, V, 31M 3:32:19
4120 Merges, J, 39M 3:32:19
4121 Yates, J, 34M 3:32:19
4122 Holt, M, 39F 3:32:19
4123 Rolland, P, 36M 3:32:20
4124 De Lesdain, O, 27M 3:32:20
4125 Langer, H, 51M 3:32:20
4126 Barros, J, 35M3:32:21
4127 James, M, 32F 3:32:21
4128 Pineiro, R, 32M 3:32:21
4129 Smyth, M, 49M 3:32:21
4130 Giraud, M, 49M 3:32:21
4131 Mandelbaum, C, 37M 3:32:22
4132 Foster, D, 39M 3:32:22
4133 Schmitt, H, 47M 3:32:23
4134 Horat, E, 41M 3:32:23
4135 Dothard, R, 52M 3:32:24
4136 Crawford, B, 40M 3:32:25
4137 Mante, M, 40M 3:32:25
4138 Aguilar, A, 46M 3:32:25
4139 Troice, S, 40M 3:32:26
4140Cohen, B, 33M 3:32:26
4141 Smith, R, 37M 3:32:26
4142 Kenney, J, 38F 3:32:26
4143 Stallone, R, 50M 3:32:27
4144 Pilsch, L, 47M 3:32:28
4145 Iwase, S, 28M 3:32:28
4146 Irigoyen, W, 31M 3:32:28
4147 King, D, 47M 3:32:28
4148 Dubois, T, 49M 3:32:28
4149 Zippenfenig, M, 25M 3:32:29
4150 Pilz, O, 35M 3:32:29
4151 Smith, M, 36M 3:32:30
4152 Lara Salas, J, 24M 3:32:31
4153 Blyth, M, 41M 3:32:31
4154 Gousman Jr., F, 40M 3:32:31
4155 Elliott, W, 39M 3:32:32
4156 Van Steyn, G, 41M 3:32:32
4157 Stickle, E, 53F 3:32:32
4158 Stanley, D, 46M 3:32:32
4159 Leenen, M, 32M 3:32:33
4160 Piscitello, A, 50M 3:32:34
4161 Sherbo, D, 43M 3:32:34
4162 Gandolfo, A, 50M 3:32:34
4163 Easton, M, 45M 3:32:34
4164 Glesnes, O, 42M 3:32:34
4165 Stratford, T, 38M 3:32:34
4166 Lysot, S, 43M 3:32:34
4167 Chapiro, E, 38M 3:32:34
4168 Paget, J, 43M 3:32:35
4169 Cheng, N, 44M 3:32:35
4170 Pinion, W, 39M 3:32:36
4171 Goodman, J, 24M 3:32:36
4172 Matter, M, 29M 3:32:36
4173 Haus, M, 41M 3:32:38
4174 Peace, J, 43M 3:32:40
4175 Leservoisier, T, 29M 3:32:41
4176 Guiraud, P, 36M 3:32:41
4177 Fay, C, 28M 3:32:41
4178 Ensz, C, 47M 3:32:42
4179 Camolez, J, 48M 3:32:42
4180 Chubb Sauvayre, S, 34F 3:32:42
4181 Jacques, G, 43M 3:32:43
4182 Zitti, C, 33F 3:32:43
4183 Stingel, J, 38M 3:32:43
4184 O'Grady, T, 31M 3:32:44
4185 Bouet, P, 39M 3:32:44
4186 Beaupere, F, 39M 3:32:44
4187Oest, P, 28F 3:32:44
4188 Goldmann, B, 48M 3:32:44
4189 Roberts, B, 43M 3:32:45
4190 Kempkes, P, 34M 3:32:45
4191 McCreery, D, 32M3:32:45
4192 Rinaudello, G, 42M 3:32:45
4193 Schaerer, K, 53M 3:32:46
4194 Verdegem, J, 37M 3:32:46
4195 Baumann, R, 40M 3:32:46
4196 Andrade, E, 31M 3:32:46
4197 Younger Jr, W, 43M 3:32:48
4198 Kiefer, P, 38M 3:32:48
4199 Kugler, J, 39M 3:32:48
4200 Lid, T, 52F 3:32:48
4201 Natsch, L, 36M 3:32:50
4202 Dattys, L, 30M 3:32:50
4203 Ruiz, R, 54M 3:32:50
4204 Kaaijk, G, 48M 3:32:51
4205 Borgers, J, 44M 3:32:51
4206 Colon, P, 55M 3:32:51
4207 Johnson, P, 36M 3:32:52
4208 Atty, F, 45M 3:32:53
4209 Amoros Ortin, J, 46M 3:32:53
4210 Jansen, E, 47M 3:32:55
4211 Benistand, J, 37M 3:32:55
4212 Mueller, S, 53M 3:32:56
4213 Reschke, S, 27M 3:32:56
4214 Johnson, D, 26M 3:32:57
4215 Cherel, H, 29F 3:32:57
4216 Byner, N, 42M 3:32:58
4217 McBride, M, 42M 3:32:58
4218 Casey, S, 39F 3:32:58
4219 Sherry, G, 39M 3:32:58
4220 Lerche, J, 42M 3:32:58
4221 Zwetsloot, T, 26M 3:32:59
4222 Schmoekel, P, 31M 3:33:00
4223 Nahass, R, 37M 3:33:00
4224 Hayashi, Y, 39M 3:33:00
4225Brandt, P, 54M 3:33:00
4226 Marquet, P, 27M 3:33:00
4227 Nahass, G, 36M 3:33:01
4228 Petersen, M, 28M 3:33:01
4229 Barbas, L, 39M 3:33:01
4230 Sonntag, M, 38M 3:33:01
4231 Plaza, D, 31M 3:33:02
4232 Littmann, B, 35M 3:33:02
4233 Herman, D, 28M 3:33:02
4234Haviland, K, 33M 3:33:03
4235 Hunter-Jr, C, 58M 3:33:05
4236 Welsh, T, 29M 3:33:05
4237 Ericsson, R, 50M 3:33:05
4238 Behr, R, 43M3:33:05
4239 Elhandour, C, 42M 3:33:05
4240 Lash, L, 43F 3:33:06
4241 Ouwehand, C, 44M 3:33:06
4242 Arnott, M, 36M 3:33:07
4243 Holoszyc, M, 41M 3:33:07
4244 Rebollo, H, 29M 3:33:08
4245 Albert, A, 60F 3:33:09
4246 Scalzi, D, 46M 3:33:09
4247 Angulo, G, 44M 3:33:10
4248 Roche, G, 46M 3:33:10
4249 Killeen, J, 35M 3:33:11
4250 Tiozzo, A, 49M 3:33:12
4251 Hampton, J, 48F 3:33:12
4252 Eisner, A, 30M 3:33:12
4253 Zwiener, J, 39M 3:33:12
4254 Peralta, N, 38M 3:33:12
4255 Auday, B, 37M 3:33:12
4256 Lassooy, P, 46M 3:33:12
4257 Agudelo, J, 30M 3:33:12
4258 Fagan, M, 43M 3:33:13
4259 Vacca, W, 45M 3:33:13
4260 Reuchlein, A, 53M 3:33:13
4261Poeschl, G, 43M 3:33:14
4262 Willert, V, 31M 3:33:15
4263 Meseberg, U, 53M 3:33:15
4264 Waelti, J, 37M 3:33:15
4265 Seidner, B, 41F 3:33:15
4266 Dequesne, G, 52M 3:33:15
4267 Lythgoe, K, 33F 3:33:16
4268 Santagata, J, 28F 3:33:16
4269 Handley, L, 26F 3:33:16
4270 Olsson, H, 46M 3:33:17
4271 Davis, M, 36M 3:33:17
4272 Hays, M, 49M 3:33:17
4273 Bruegel, J, 41M 3:33:18
4274 Forker, L, 41F 3:33:19
4275 Rautianen, M, 45M 3:33:19
4276 Buckheim, M, 56M 3:33:19
4277 Lord, D, 26M 3:33:19
4278 Cordone, R, 45M 3:33:20
4279 Gibbs, D, 37M 3:33:20
4280 Moncada, M, 34M 3:33:20
4281 Gottschalk, H, 51M 3:33:20
4282 Bolster, J, 39M 3:33:21
4283 Giacomantonio, K, 31F 3:33:21
4284 Gomez, L, 35M 3:33:21
4285 Dumortier, C, 40M 3:33:22
4286 Ellis, D, 32M 3:33:23
4287 Loland, M, 47M 3:33:23
4288 O'Csay, H, 33M 3:33:23
4289 Frazier, D, 34M 3:33:24
4290 King, W, 50M 3:33:25
4291 Kohnert, G, 53M 3:33:26
4292 Liebowitz, J, 31M 3:33:26
4293 Anthony, M, 36M 3:33:27
4294 Cornou, P, 51M 3:33:27
4295 Muencheberg, P, 28F 3:33:27
4296 Rocca, P, 29M 3:33:27
4297 Timmins, L, 25F 3:33:27
4298 Montfort, D, 30M 3:33:28
4299 Duclaux-Plassais, T, 42M 3:33:28
4300 Gustafsson, B, 40M 3:33:28
4301 Ben Slamia, H, 43M 3:33:29
4302 Johnston, R, 39M 3:33:29
4303 Chauarria, O, 42M 3:33:30
4304 Wassink, A, 36M 3:33:30
4305 Dopler, A, 32M 3:33:30
4306 Danel, P, 40M 3:33:30
4307 Bremond, D, 53M 3:33:31
4308 Kofman, A, 26M 3:33:31
4309 Becker, R, 30M 3:33:32
4310 Ramaker, J, 47M 3:33:33
4311 Davila Sanchez, J, 40M 3:33:33
4312 Wandtke, H, 34M 3:33:33
4313 De Vries, M, 36M 3:33:33
4314 Biesen, H, 52M 3:33:34
4315 Bone, L, 43M 3:33:34
4316 Feige, M, 45F 3:33:35
4317 Schatte, J, 47M 3:33:35
4318 Pasche, B, 58M 3:33:36
4319 Keane, V, 29F 3:33:36
4320 Rosenkranz, L, 29M 3:33:36
4321 Cahill, J, 70M 3:33:38
4322 Tedesco, S, 30F 3:33:38
4323 Amelung II, D, 44M 3:33:38
4324 Linares Estrada, R, 63M 3:33:39
4325 Pichler, J, 56M 3:33:39
4326 Olmedo Zorrilla, R, 50M 3:33:39
4327 Werkhoven, C, 42M 3:33:40
4328 Duvernois, M, 39M 3:33:41
4329 Hovey, B, 35M 3:33:41
4330 Featherston, K, 28F 3:33:41
4331 Costello, S, 27M 3:33:42
4332 Anderson, A, 55M 3:33:42
4333 Destret, J, 34M 3:33:42
4334 Desalle, B, 41M 3:33:43
4335 Burns, T, 35M3:33:43
4336 Tauber, G, 46M 3:33:43
4337 Freitas, A, 59M 3:33:43
4338 Helik, R, 39M 3:33:44
4339 Cardozo, J, 36M 3:33:44
4340Hurst, P, 32M 3:33:45
4341 Meza Pimentel, F, 39M 3:33:45
4342 Garcia Llave, A, 42M 3:33:45
4343 Moskowitz, D, 42M 3:33:45
4344 Kudler, R, 44M 3:33:45
4345 Heuser, H, 55M 3:33:47
4346 Karlsson, S, 40M 3:33:47
4347 Piepul, J, 47M 3:33:47
4348 Yamada, K, 51M 3:33:48
4349 Urena, L, 27M 3:33:48
4350 Andrade, M, 50M 3:33:48
4351 Guimaraes, B, 38M 3:33:49
4352 Pettersen, J, 33M 3:33:49
4353 Moonen, T, 32M 3:33:49
4354 Bossert, K, 23F 3:33:50
4355 Haupt, H, 36M 3:33:50
4356 Niemeier, K, 35M 3:33:51
4357 Panzarino, L, 25F 3:33:52
4358 Oliveto, W, 36M 3:33:52
4359 Franceschini, M, 21F 3:33:52
4360 White, G, 36M 3:33:54
4361 Luckner, J, 41M 3:33:54
4362 Percheron, J, 44M 3:33:54
4363 Lampasona, G, 60M 3:33:54
4364 Morrison, A, 28M 3:33:55
4365 Esprit, P, 37M 3:33:55
4366 Rodriguez, J, 40M 3:33:55
4367 Montenegro, L, 49M 3:33:56
4368 Long, T, 25M 3:33:56
4369 Stagg, K, 35M 3:33:56
4370 Halbach, H, 30M 3:33:56
4371 Gonzalez, L, 60M 3:33:57
4372 Saxton, P, 41M 3:33:57
4373 Martinez, M, 33M 3:33:59
4374 James, A, 30M 3:33:59
4375 Sanchez Fernandez, S, 47M 3:33:59
4376 Spaventa, A, 37M 3:33:59
4377 Lambert, D, 40M 3:33:59
4378 Broussard, V, 34F 3:34:00
4379 Mueller, W, 44M 3:34:00
4380 Lodi, M, 44M 3:34:00
4381 Bermetz, K, 40M 3:34:00
4382 Arenas, F, 47M 3:34:00
4383 Lopez, C, 43M 3:34:01
4384 Valero, B, 47M 3:34:01
4385 Rickard, M, 33M 3:34:02
4386 Commandeur, P, 45M 3:34:02
4387 Slater, L, 31F 3:34:02
4388 De Troyer, L, 41M 3:34:03
4389 Osorio, L, 44F 3:34:03
4390 Myers, M, 25F3:34:03
4391 Westphal, K, 24M 3:34:03
4392 Rodriguez, F, 43M 3:34:03
4393 Poncelet, B, 29M 3:34:04
4394 Kuehn, P, 38M 3:34:04
4395 Koole, M, 30M 3:34:04
4396 Barber, F, 42M 3:34:04
4397 Grollman, M, 26M 3:34:05
4398 Browne, K, 40M 3:34:06
4399 Sinilaine, A, 44M 3:34:06
4400 Akiyama, T, 52M 3:34:06
4401 Tognetti, A, 53M 3:34:06
4402 Jacobs, R, 41M 3:34:07
4403 Gammons, D, 23F 3:34:07
4404 Edgar, D, 39M 3:34:07
4405 Berrajain, J, 36M 3:34:09
4406Saulet, R, 46M 3:34:09
4407 Purvis, N, 28M 3:34:10
4408 Tanaka, K, 30M 3:34:12
4409 Bottalico, M, 36M 3:34:12
4410 Marousis, C, 37M 3:34:13
4411 Joyce, M, 25F 3:34:13
4412 Hiriart, R, 42M 3:34:14
4413 Lovenholm, A, 52M 3:34:15
4414 Russo, P, 28M 3:34:15
4415 Kingston, H, 37F 3:34:15
4416 Nemecek, P, 29M 3:34:16
4417 Santos, G, 28M 3:34:16
4418 Waterston, D, 48M 3:34:17
4419 Becus, L, 24F 3:34:17
4420 George, M, 41M 3:34:17
4421 Lentz, B, 47M 3:34:18
4422 Galvin, B, 46M 3:34:18
4423 Zell, N, 40M 3:34:18
4424 Garcia, A, 26M 3:34:18
4425 Thomson, G, 35M 3:34:18
4426 Casati, M, 32M 3:34:18
4427 Nelson, G, 40M 3:34:19
4428 Bernstein, M, 27M 3:34:19
4429 Jossand, E, 36M 3:34:19
4430 Schluter, P, 27M 3:34:19
4431 Lane, M, 43M 3:34:19
4432 Gaebler, D, 35M 3:34:19
4433Sebbag, M, 50M 3:34:20
4434 Moroney, R, 39M 3:34:20
4435 Algios, M, 33M 3:34:20
4436 Garrido Alfonseca, J, 44M 3:34:20
4437 Greene, M, 36M 3:34:20
4438 Steffens, F, 46M 3:34:21
4439 Buchina, M, 35M 3:34:21
4440 Walters, G, 41M 3:34:21
4441 O'Donnell, D, 42M 3:34:21
4442 Glasenberg, I, 37M 3:34:21
4443 Cheboud, D, 47M 3:34:22
4444 Stauffer, B, 28M 3:34:22
4445 Teti, T, 40M 3:34:22
4446 Charpentier, J, 37M 3:34:22
4447 Mulkerrins, C, 41M 3:34:22
4448 Ballan, C, 29F 3:34:22
4449 Ruhin, P, 51M 3:34:22
4450 Riedijk, M, 24M 3:34:23
4451 Jakob, J, 34M 3:34:23
4452 Armentrout, D, 55M 3:34:23
4453 Weeda, C, 43M 3:34:23
4454 Diaz, J, 46M 3:34:23
4455 Ugolini, G, 33M 3:34:23
4456 Taes, L, 40M 3:34:24
4457 Garside, K, 37M 3:34:24
4458 Boileau, A, 38M 3:34:24
4459 Kergresse, J, 45M 3:34:24
4460 O'Dea, K, 30M 3:34:25
4461 Jackson, G, 26M 3:34:25
4462 Bartholdsson, G, 48F 3:34:25
4463 Buck, J, 52M 3:34:26
4464 Giles, M, 35M 3:34:27
4465 Meili, A, 50M 3:34:28
4466 Montecchio, O, 52M 3:34:28
4467 Viard, P, 32M 3:34:28
4468 Willey, D, 27M 3:34:28
4469 Hamer, P, 41M 3:34:28
4470 Evans, J, 43M 3:34:28
4471 Fiedler, R, 35M 3:34:28
4472 Tranchant, R, 43M 3:34:29
4473 Ornstein, B, 24M 3:34:29
4474 Kranz, P, 54M 3:34:29
4475 Rosenberg, M, 42M 3:34:29
4476 Ojinaga, G, 34M 3:34:30
4477 Ahern, D, 40M 3:34:30
4478 Edwards, J, 40M 3:34:30
4479 Beasley, R, 30M 3:34:30
4480 Orellana, A, 34M 3:34:30
4481 Whittington, A, 46M 3:34:31
4482 Leistner, W, 53M 3:34:31
4483 Descamps, D, 45M 3:34:31
4484 Sagafe, G, 43M 3:34:31
4485 Main, S, 29M 3:34:31
4486 Bosch, J, 44M 3:34:32
4487 Yu, W, 59F 3:34:32
4488 Mosqueda, A, 25F 3:34:33
4489 Verschraegen, E, 40M 3:34:33
4490 Holmes, R, 43M 3:34:34
4491 Aceves Gonzalez, J, 41M 3:34:34
4492 Aitbenhaddou, B, 32M 3:34:35
4493 Wiendels, J, 42F 3:34:35
4494 Ropertz, I, 37M 3:34:35
4495 Whitehead, D, 49M 3:34:35
4496 Ringer, R, 35M 3:34:36
4497 Lute, N, 51M 3:34:36
4498 Kamil, H, 51M 3:34:36
4499 Dingus, T, 30M 3:34:37
4500 Watters, J, 42M 3:34:37
4501 Cuny, M, 32M 3:34:37
4502 Vitse, J, 37M 3:34:37
4503 Kayser, C, 42M 3:34:37
4504 Gardner, T, 24M 3:34:38
4505 Devine, D, 55M 3:34:38
4506 Polte, R, 35M 3:34:38
4507 Polman, B, 29M 3:34:38
4508 Bonilla Miranda, L, 50M 3:34:38
4509 Boylan, P, 42M 3:34:39
4510 Smith, D, 22M 3:34:39
4511 Nilsson, E, 50M 3:34:40
4512 Collard, P, 44M 3:34:40
4513 Locher, M, 19M 3:34:40
4514 Cruz, V, 38M 3:34:40
4515 Snook, K, 42M 3:34:41
4516 Elsner, C, 36M 3:34:41
4517 Cubik, L, 32M3:34:41
4518 Trautwein, T, 37M 3:34:41
4519 Haine, M, 49F 3:34:42
4520 Miller, G, 37M 3:34:42
4521 Jaramillo, J, 39M 3:34:42
4522 Doust, A, 25M 3:34:42
4523 Thomann, M, 31M 3:34:43
4524 Snyder, M, 21M 3:34:43
4525 Hook, C, 25F 3:34:43
4526 Sofield, J, 52M 3:34:43
4527 Landbeck, D, 30M 3:34:44
4528 Cisle, D, 40F 3:34:44
4529 Le Mouroux, P, 36M 3:34:44
4530 Elsman, B, 34M 3:34:45
4531 Maciel, M, 47M 3:34:46
4532 Villegas, J, 26F 3:34:47
4533 Rodriguez Cuellar, A, 32M 3:34:47
4534 Gurbach, J, 31M 3:34:48
4535 Richter, D, 21F 3:34:49
4536 Lips, P, 26M 3:34:49
4537 McWilliam, B, 47M 3:34:50
4538 Julson, C, 29M 3:34:50
4539 Deanesi, A, 36M 3:34:50
4540 Rodriguez, A, 45M 3:34:50
4541 Wells, P, 56M 3:34:51
4542 Wuethrich, H, 42M 3:34:51
4543 Antonio, V, 31M 3:34:51
4544 Le-Yondre, P, 40M 3:34:51
4545 Porter, P, 45M 3:34:51
4546 Plutta, G, 46M 3:34:52
4547 Francis, J, 43M 3:34:52
4548 Pernat, R, 36M 3:34:53
4549 Tindel, N, 30M 3:34:53
4550 Tonner, C, 38M 3:34:53
4551 Sargenti, M, 25M 3:34:53
4552 Lajous, G, 37M 3:34:54
4553 Ashburner, J, 36M 3:34:54
4554 Perham, K, 37M 3:34:54
4555 Athey, R, 33M 3:34:55
4556 Miodownik, N, 57M 3:34:55
4557 Heronneau, G, 30M 3:34:55
4558 Heykoop, C, 40M 3:34:56
4559 Boyd, B, 56M 3:34:56
4560 Hickey, M, 26F 3:34:57
4561 Koelemy, W, 39M 3:34:57
4562 Nironi, C, 38M 3:34:57
4563 Dunfey, R, 43M 3:34:57
4564 Osorio Gonzalez, F, 29M 3:34:57
4565 Furlin, D, 44M 3:34:58
4566 Gaspercic, M, 28F 3:34:58
4567 Fox, J, 24M 3:34:59
4568 Serriere, G, 33M 3:34:59
4569 Dezuani, M, 39M 3:35:00
4570 Laday, C, 33M 3:35:00
4571 Zonnevijlle, D, 27M 3:35:00
4572 Bommer, M, 41M 3:35:01
4573 Saborio, C, 36M 3:35:01
4574 Brinkberg, P, 34M 3:35:02
4575Fischel, P, 46M 3:35:02
4576 Lagelius, B, 31M 3:35:02
4577 Greene, D, 28M 3:35:02
4578 Gouw, P, 28M 3:35:03
4579 Pinto, W, 37M 3:35:03
4580 Wagner, W, 42M 3:35:03
4581 Kuepper, H, 58F 3:35:04
4582 Best, M, 42M 3:35:04
4583 Amezcua, A, 20M 3:35:04
4584 Bazzarini, S, 35M 3:35:05
4585 Martin, J, 53M 3:35:05
4586 Gebeyehou, D, 42F 3:35:05
4587 Bonaparte, E, 38M 3:35:06
4588 Guenther, G, 29M 3:35:06
4589 De Haro, A, 38M 3:35:08
4590 Bowman, J, 29M 3:35:08
4591 Blakkisrud, O, 44M 3:35:08
4592 Hagerty, P, 27M 3:35:09
4593 Warrak, R, 41M 3:35:10
4594 Cervone, L, 37M 3:35:10
4595 Blossfeld, J, 57M 3:35:10
4596 Cardot, P, 41M 3:35:10
4597 Komaroff, W, 28M 3:35:10
4598 Cook, D, 58M 3:35:10
4599 Hoyos, L, 22M 3:35:11
4600 Vargas, H, 47M 3:35:11
4601 Weintraub, R, 36M 3:35:11
4602 Dawson, G, 61M 3:35:12
4603 Senechal, C, 48M 3:35:12
4604Desmarais, R, 51M 3:35:12
4605 Bertasi, M, 39M 3:35:13
4606 Marzi, G, 29M 3:35:13
4607 Hiebert, D, 34F 3:35:13
4608 Soto, D, 29M 3:35:13
4609 Marchese, D, 29M 3:35:13
4610 Frick, D, 40M 3:35:13
4611 Rydberg, P, 28M 3:35:14
4612 Motta, C, 36M 3:35:14
4613 Tesselaar, A, 34F 3:35:14
4614 Round, C, 33M 3:35:14
4615 Amisson, T, 44M 3:35:14
4616 Chin, S, 35M 3:35:15
4617 Meuric, D, 32M 3:35:15
4618 Precht, S, 51M 3:35:15
4619 Ponkenell, G, 30M 3:35:16
4620 Kilton, R, 25M 3:35:16
4621 Puglisi, J, 55M 3:35:17
4622 Augustine, J, 30M 3:35:17
4623 Mackie, J, 46M 3:35:17
4624 Anderson, B, 33F 3:35:18
4625 Tomczak, N, 29F 3:35:20
4626 Bergonzi, P, 31M 3:35:20
4627 Aguilar, R, 42M 3:35:21
4628 Schmalz, P, 40M 3:35:21
4629 Donegan*, R, 34M 3:35:22
4630 Bardon, G, 35M 3:35:22
4631 Carey, J, 33M 3:35:22
4632 Forrest, C, 47M 3:35:23
4633 Muscarella, G, 28M 3:35:23
4634 Peters, W, 29M 3:35:23
4635 Nicolay, A, 29M 3:35:24
4636 Hamilton, J, 42M 3:35:24
4637 Faherty, D, 49M 3:35:24
4638 Clarke, J, 37F 3:35:24
4639 Murphy, E, 38M 3:35:24
4640 Parnas, H, 36M 3:35:24
4641 Meehan, M, 30M 3:35:25
4642 Wittlin, D, 28M 3:35:25
4643 Michielli, M, 31M 3:35:25
4644 Honan, R, 44M 3:35:26
4645 Young, J, 27M 3:35:26
4646 DiMaio, M, 30M 3:35:26
4647 Astier, J, 41M 3:35:26
4648 Wolkoff, L, 31M 3:35:26
4649 Marechal, P, 35M 3:35:26
4650 Boez, P, 36M 3:35:27
4651 Dominguez, F, 47M 3:35:27
4652 Portal, M, 43M 3:35:27
4653 Bertran, J, 40M 3:35:28
4654 Barton, M, 42M 3:35:28
4655 Schroeder, M, 28M 3:35:28
4656 Peron, G, 35M 3:35:28
4657 Vijlbrief, F, 55M 3:35:28
4658 Horne, C, 43M 3:35:28
4659 Chevallier, P, 27M 3:35:29
4660 Koentopp, H, 55M 3:35:29
4661 Westphal, F, 25M 3:35:29
4662 Pennisi, P, 42M 3:35:29
4663 Vaughan, B, 23M 3:35:29
4664 Forese, J, 29F 3:35:29
4665 Walthall, K, 25M 3:35:30
4666 Bennett, L, 24F 3:35:30
4667 Zaveckas Jr, D, 29M 3:35:30
4668 Priemer, W, 44M 3:35:31
4669 Riley, F, 43M 3:35:31
4670 Gochko, E, 36M 3:35:31
4671 Balbos, M, 28M 3:35:32
4672 Munoz, H, 43M 3:35:32
4673 O'Connor, S, 30M 3:35:32
4674 Blomeier, H, 50M 3:35:32
4675 Robinet, C, 47M 3:35:32
4676 Bronscheer, M, 42M 3:35:33
4677 Rapp, B, 28M 3:35:33
4678 Galinier, J, 40M 3:35:33
4679 Jacobs Iii, D, 37M 3:35:33
4680 Gottesfeld, S, 32M 3:35:33
4681 Losardo, G, 39M 3:35:33
4682 Kimura, I, 59M 3:35:34
4683 Nekadi, N, 40M 3:35:35
4684 Richardson, B, 30M 3:35:35
4685 Dunn, D, 43M 3:35:37
4686 Wicklein, F, 41M 3:35:37
4687 Flower, J, 56M 3:35:37
4688 Vernegeol, S, 20M 3:35:37
4689 Jercic, E, 42F 3:35:37
4690 Lawlor, T, 47M 3:35:38
4691 Benter, C, 40M 3:35:38
4692 Haag, P, 43M 3:35:38
4693 Gysel, R, 50M 3:35:38
4694 Klein, P, 47M 3:35:38
4695 Preux, E, 35M 3:35:38
4696 Schweigert, W, 44M 3:35:38
4697 Schmidt, W, 41M 3:35:38
4698 Correa, G, 35M 3:35:39
4699 Ziebold, T, 33M 3:35:39
4700 Macintosh, A, 26F 3:35:40
4701 Rindflesh, M, 48M 3:35:40
4702 Gonzalez, M, 42M 3:35:40
4703 Silvestro, D, 54M 3:35:40
4704 Goodstein, R, 36F 3:35:40
4705 Curts, J, 31M 3:35:40
4706 Huesing, B, 41M 3:35:40
4707 Meunier, J, 35M 3:35:40
4708 Movhib, R, 20M 3:35:41
4709 Currie, D, 48M 3:35:41
4710 Moore, B, 35M 3:35:41
4711 Montes, J, 52M 3:35:42
4712 Kalb, J, 24M 3:35:42
4713 Thompson, W, 30M 3:35:42
4714 Mangiaracina, G, 30M 3:35:43
4715 Bourguet, R, 47M 3:35:44
4716 Bontemps, D, 44M 3:35:44
4717 Gerg, J, 32M 3:35:44
4718 Bosson, G, 38M 3:35:44
4719 Hartman, H, 28M 3:35:45
4720 Becker, J, 40M 3:35:45
4721 Jaldefeldt, P, 33M 3:35:45
4722 Greaney, P, 40F 3:35:45
4723 Pruvost, P, 31M 3:35:46
4724 Gliatta, D, 24M 3:35:46
4725 Mauritz, J, 49M 3:35:46
4726 Selin, E, 27M 3:35:48
4727 Kochmeister, M, 40M 3:35:49
4728 Catania, V, 44M 3:35:49
4729 Vaccaro, D, 26M 3:35:49
4730 Fontijn, R, 38M 3:35:50
4731 Nowell, P, 32M 3:35:51
4732 Contreras Meza, C, 43M 3:35:51
4733 Bouman, E, 29F 3:35:52
4734 Ericsson, A, 47M 3:35:52
4735 Snik, H, 30M 3:35:53
4736 Gill, I, 41M 3:35:53
4737 Hagermancritser, H, 26F 3:35:54
4738 Thevot, C, 37M 3:35:54
4739 Mag, D, 25M 3:35:54
4740 Blumberg, E, 18M 3:35:55
4741 Davila, C, 47M 3:35:55
4742 Poffenroth, G, 47M 3:35:55
4743 Strife, K, 22F 3:35:56
4744 Armitage, W, 42M 3:35:56
4745 Donnelly, D, 34M 3:35:56
4746 Allen, C, 38M 3:35:57
4747 D'Hanens, F, 30M 3:35:57
4748 Sullivan, W, 40M 3:35:58
4749 Farell, L, 49M 3:35:58
4750 Hellen, M, 36M 3:35:59
4751 Bachmann, V, 26F 3:35:59
4752 Herrera, M, 35M 3:36:00
4753 Bouzi, F, 31M 3:36:00
4754 Zook, J, 40M 3:36:00
4755 Belsito, M, 38M 3:36:01
4756 Raves, T, 40M 3:36:03
4757 Dietz, W, 56M 3:36:03
4758 Mueller, A, 59M 3:36:04
4759 Stopfer, J, 41M 3:36:04
4760 Jarlsbo, O, 33M 3:36:04
4761 Ryerson, D, 46M 3:36:04
4762 Strothotto, P, 40M 3:36:04
4763 Dresner, J, 40M 3:36:05
4764 Giot, R, 47M 3:36:05
4765 Schmidt, J, 55M 3:36:05
4766 Sikora, R, 30M 3:36:06
4767 Poulain, J, 47M 3:36:06
4768 Zecirovic, I, 49M 3:36:06
4769 Hill, C, 46M 3:36:07
4770 Lehmann, J, 54M 3:36:07
4771Hotter, J, 33M 3:36:08
4772 Schulz, H, 48M 3:36:08
4773 Dercole, J, 46M 3:36:09
4774 Sarubbi, P, 52M 3:36:09
4775 Mades, M, 34M 3:36:09
4776 Delorenzo, D, 53M 3:36:09
4777 Guiraud, S, 39M 3:36:09
4778 Kuk, P, 39M 3:36:09
4779 Costa, R, 35M 3:36:10
4780 Corredor, F, 47F 3:36:10
4781 Plasman, A, 28M 3:36:11
4782 Pypers, L, 43M 3:36:11
4783 Kohler, D, 50M 3:36:12
4784 Johnson, T, 44M 3:36:12
4785 Derks, G, 27M 3:36:13
4786 Becker, A, 50M 3:36:13
4787 Rimoldi Renteria, A, 47M 3:36:14
4788 O'Brien, D, 38M 3:36:16
4789 Souillard, A, 39M 3:36:16
4790 Mueller, S, 26M 3:36:16
4791 Salomons, B, 36M 3:36:16
4792 Ciaramicoli, P, 42M 3:36:17
4793 Marin, Y, 27F 3:36:17
4794 Kamp, L, 33M 3:36:17
4795 Thompson, C, 29M 3:36:17
4796 Martin, M, 31M 3:36:18
4797 Kriel, J, 36M 3:36:18
4798 Flores, F, 48F 3:36:18
4799 Hutfless, M, 52M 3:36:18
4800 Dion, P, 34M 3:36:18
4801 Burke, J, 31M 3:36:19
4802 Stawiecki, J, 44F 3:36:19
4803 Willkehr, M, 27M 3:36:20
4804 Van Winckel, K, 39M 3:36:21
4805 Espinosa, N, 43M 3:36:21
4806 Zimeri, G, 30M 3:36:21
4807 Milner, P, 28M 3:36:22
4808 Tytens, G, 51M 3:36:22
4809 Ortega, J, 22M 3:36:22
4810 Langens, G, 43M 3:36:23
4811 Antonioni, G, 41M 3:36:23
4812 Duggan, S, 46M 3:36:23
4813 Partridge, C, 41M 3:36:23
4814 Spiler, M, 39M 3:36:24
4815 Dufourmont, F, 29M 3:36:24
4816 Nakamura, K, 28M 3:36:25
4817 Wilson, G, 45M 3:36:25
4818 Cleffi, G, 42M 3:36:25
4819 Borges, J, 36M 3:36:26
4820 Eddy, S, 28F 3:36:26
4821 Schramm, E, 42M 3:36:27
4822 Pulina, G, 52M 3:36:27
4823 Deunf, G, 44M 3:36:28
4824 Ruiz, J, 40M 3:36:28
4825 Fountain, B, 38M 3:36:28
4826 Arias Alvarez, J, 43M 3:36:28
4827 Noonan, K, 29F 3:36:29
4828 Opsahl, R, 62M 3:36:29
4829 Shostrom, J, 40M 3:36:29
4830 Imeri, F, 30M 3:36:29
4831 Carter, J, 34M 3:36:29
4832 Dagon, A, 48M 3:36:29
4833 Michler, P, 39M3:36:30
4834 Platt, D, 30M 3:36:30
4835 Andersen, K, 49M 3:36:30
4836 Jimenez, L, 27M 3:36:30
4837 Doyle, J, 38M 3:36:30
4838Horn, K, 36M 3:36:32
4839 Guarino, A, 37M 3:36:32
4840 Kitslaar, A, 39M 3:36:32
4841 Wong, E, 28M 3:36:32
4842 Mulshine, B, 40M 3:36:33
4843 Borges, J, 21M 3:36:33
4844 Applegate, W, 29M 3:36:34
4845 Shilling, D, 40M 3:36:34
4846 Nummer, T, 31M 3:36:34
4847 Wimenitz, G, 36M 3:36:34
4848 Reinders, L, 23M 3:36:34
4849 Cardoso, M, 34M 3:36:35
4850 Caro, E, 34M 3:36:35
4851 Dagostino, V, 31M 3:36:35
4852 Knuth, M, 41F 3:36:35
4853 Graebener, J, 40M 3:36:35
4854 Luisi, V, 40M 3:36:35
4855 Angelini, U, 51M 3:36:36
4856 Richard, N, 21F 3:36:36
4857 Williams, B, 41M 3:36:36
4858 Fjeldstad, J, 40M 3:36:37
4859 Payan, Y, 50M 3:36:37
4860 Yokouchi, M, 47M 3:36:37
4861 Snell, D, 32M 3:36:38
4862 Hillegers, J, 45M3:36:38
4863 Uhl, R, 42M 3:36:38
4864 Vogel, T, 56M 3:36:38
4865 Yilma, F, 29M 3:36:38
4866 Lande-Sannes, H, 20M 3:36:39
4867Krijger, W, 55M 3:36:39
4868 Gardin, G, 38M 3:36:39
4869 Calvo Argenal, F, 24M 3:36:39
4870 Taft, S, 49M 3:36:39
4871 Barcelo, F, 52M 3:36:40
4872 Costello, G, 39M 3:36:41
4873 Azevedo Jr, R, 41M 3:36:41
4874 Blondel, C, 36M 3:36:41
4875 Paez, J, 30M 3:36:41
4876 Philippon, F, 40M 3:36:42
4877 Giachino, D, 36M 3:36:42
4878 Albertini, D, 28M 3:36:42
4879 Hamadouche, C, 45M 3:36:42
4880 Sternberger, P, 28M 3:36:43
4881 Aurine, M, 40M 3:36:43
4882 Connolly, J, 34M 3:36:43
4883 Fernandez, F, 44M 3:36:43
4884 Grillo, L, 27F 3:36:44
4885 Mueller, G, 42F 3:36:45
4886 Peruzy, A, 32M 3:36:45
4887 Pere, F, 28M 3:36:45
4888 Ennett, M, 39M 3:36:45
4889 Walsh, A, 27F 3:36:45
4890 James, J, 46M 3:36:46
4891 Kjellgren, H, 23M 3:36:46
4892 Dyrby, B, 50M 3:36:46
4893 Morlot, P, 34M 3:36:47
4894 Schulz, G, 41M 3:36:47
4895 Riedijk, H, 43M 3:36:48
4896 Moskowitz, F, 39F 3:36:48
4897 Weisberg, E, 29F 3:36:49
4898 Lynch, F, 29F 3:36:49
4899 Browning, T, 40M 3:36:49
4900 Costello, S, 24M 3:36:49
4901 Humphries, M, 27M 3:36:51
4902 Kerbellec, H, 34M 3:36:52
4903 Hartman, G, 37M 3:36:52
4904 Uyttewaal, P, 44M 3:36:53
4905 Moore-Martin, G, 30M 3:36:53
4906 Rosini, A, 27M 3:36:53
4907 Koeppa, M, 39M 3:36:53
4908 Round, F, 39M 3:36:54
4909 Cardenas Sigala, A, 44M 3:36:54
4910 Takeichi, A, 46F 3:36:54
4911 Fuchs, H, 44M 3:36:55
4912 Kressel, A, 35M 3:36:55
4913 Lopez, L, 23M 3:36:55
4914 Kelsey, E, 24F 3:36:56
4915 Prost, J, 31M 3:36:56
4916 Joudart, J, 40M 3:36:56
4917 Frommhagen, R, 30M 3:36:56
4918 Knapp, K, 41M 3:36:57
4919 Diaz, J, 31M 3:36:58
4920 Vaillant, C, 38M 3:36:58
4921 Tanke, D, 50M 3:36:58
4922 Rodriguez Miranda, F, 48M 3:36:59
4923 Berwind, C, 26M 3:36:59
4924 Molyneux, S, 47M 3:36:59
4925 Desko, M, 40M 3:37:00
4926 Stoecker, W, 40M 3:37:00
4927 Becher, H, 56M 3:37:00
4928 Penta, L, 34F 3:37:00
4929 McCoy, R, 35M 3:37:00
4930 Bozentka, N, 36M 3:37:00
4931 Gayet, J, 62M 3:37:00
4932 Clavurier, N, 45M 3:37:00
4933 Smith, K, 26M 3:37:00
4934 Feldmann, N, 28M 3:37:01
4935 Karp, M, 35M 3:37:01
4936 Steiner, W, 44M 3:37:02
4937 Rowe, W, 24M 3:37:02
4938 Churlet, D, 42M 3:37:02
4939 Hanley, W, 37M 3:37:02
4940Newman, A, 26M 3:37:02
4941 Schilling, L, 40M 3:37:02
4942 Sullivan, S, 36M 3:37:03
4943 Nordal-Pedersen, E, 43F 3:37:03
4944 Imperiali, C, 35M 3:37:04
4945 Kager, P, 38F 3:37:04
4946 Sheppard, S, 37M 3:37:04
4947 Spano, J, 38M 3:37:04
4948 Katz, C, 34M 3:37:05
4949 Dessereau, T, 33M 3:37:05
4950 Stephenson, J, 26M 3:37:05
4951 Ziegler, L, 40F 3:37:06
4952 Cunningham, J, 35M 3:37:06
4953 Kry, L, 28M 3:37:06
4954 Secrest, M, 30M 3:37:06
4955 Olvera Garcia, E, 42M 3:37:07
4956 Berner, F, 39M 3:37:07
4957 Langer, M, 33M 3:37:08
4958 Oishi, S, 50M 3:37:08
4959 Miura, D, 34M 3:37:08
4960 Ramos, L, 32M 3:37:09
4961 Van Nispen, E, 48M 3:37:09
4962 Rosenberg, F, 39M 3:37:09
4963 Howard, M, 29M 3:37:10
4964 Bernhard, R, 45M 3:37:10
4965 Gasparro, P, 25M 3:37:10
4966 Regnier, P, 46M 3:37:10
4967 Granberg, A, 45M 3:37:11
4968 Taylor, R, 26M 3:37:12
4969 Santiago, F, 43M 3:37:12
4970 Donahue, A, 40F 3:37:13
4971 Stockton, G, 36F 3:37:13
4972 Gumbley, P, 35M 3:37:13
4973 Deiro, I, 38M 3:37:14
4974 Theobald, K, 31M 3:37:14
4975 Powers, S, 53M 3:37:14
4976 Ascione, M, 23M 3:37:14
4977 Raetze, F, 34M 3:37:16
4978 Eikenes, R, 44M 3:37:16
4979 Modonesi, E, 34M 3:37:16
4980 Welker, R, 30M 3:37:17
4981 Cooke, C, 33M 3:37:18
4982 Duffy, G, 31M 3:37:18
4983 Pfersich, T, 39M 3:37:18
4984 Waters, K, 56M 3:37:19
4985 Perinet, S, 30F 3:37:19
4986 Senatore, J, 38M 3:37:20
4987 Bernard, D, 40M 3:37:20
4988 Walsh, B, 26M 3:37:21
4989 Hofmann, H, 38M 3:37:21
4990 Coulter, J, 33M 3:37:21
4991 Martin Del Campo, G, 36M 3:37:21
4992 Rehnman, A, 39M 3:37:22
4993 Rouet, F, 24M 3:37:22
4994 Toscano, F, 42M 3:37:22
4995 Tringali, J, 41M 3:37:22
4996 Sepulveda Lopez, R, 43M 3:37:23
4997 Wheeler, R, 35M 3:37:23
4998 Belmonte, D, 31F 3:37:23
4999 Rodzel, O, 40M 3:37:23
5000 Herfindal, T, 47M 3:37:24
5001 Katt, M, 37F 3:37:24
5002 Bohrisch, J, 31M 3:37:24
5003 Gonzalez-Yepez, M, 28F 3:37:25
5004 Lodoen, K, 44F 3:37:25
5005 Benazet, H, 33M 3:37:25
5006 Guttman, M, 32M 3:37:25
5007 Rocke, K, 51M 3:37:25
5008 Kruschel, H, 46M 3:37:25
5009 Perathoner, P, 45M 3:37:26
5010 Das, L, 46M 3:37:26
5011 Kramer, R, 25M 3:37:26
5012 Di Sarno, D, 40M 3:37:27
5013 Sasamoto, W, 32M 3:37:27
5014 Lewis, R, 50M 3:37:28
5015 Petersen, N, 34M 3:37:28
5016 Romero, G, 34M 3:37:28
5017 Robier, J, 38M 3:37:28
5018 Bauer, K, 45M 3:37:29
5019 Baron, J, 44M 3:37:29
5020 Patzer, A, 37M 3:37:30
5021 Le Castrec, R, 41M 3:37:31
5022 Montouchet, S, 35M 3:37:32
5023 Hafner, P, 41M 3:37:32
5024 Haugland, O, 38M 3:37:32
5025 Meyer, D, 23M 3:37:33
5026 Hudson Prieto, E, 44F 3:37:33
5027 Berglund, P, 40M 3:37:33
5028Schmidt, H, 52M 3:37:33
5029 Pina, J, 44M 3:37:34
5030 Dick, H, 28F 3:37:34
5031 Bourlet, L, 40M 3:37:34
5032 O'Connor, J, 43M 3:37:34
5033 Kirchhofer, T, 28M 3:37:34
5034 Roesen, T, 28M 3:37:34
5035 Wolf, D, 28M 3:37:34
5036 Smart, E, 36F 3:37:34
5037 Mjelde, J, 46M 3:37:34
5038 Verbrugghe, B, 47M 3:37:34
5039 Baptiste, M, 49M 3:37:35
5040 Ballocci, R, 45M 3:37:35
5041 Jett, J, 36M 3:37:36
5042 Robbins, A, 38M 3:37:36
5043 Baer, M, 43M 3:37:36
5044 Vaugrenard, T, 36M 3:37:37
5045 Chanel, P, 33M 3:37:37
5046Puleo, D, 34M 3:37:38
5047 Defendenti, R, 44M 3:37:39
5048 Van Bergen, M, 47M 3:37:39
5049 Gironda, W, 34M 3:37:39
5050 Lottenburger, J, 30M 3:37:40
5051 Shipway, M, 52M 3:37:40
5052 Trolle, C, 27M 3:37:41
5053 Bachmann, J, 34M 3:37:42
5054 Corn, S, 43M 3:37:42
5055 Pena, E, 43M 3:37:42
5056 Sonntag, P, 36M 3:37:42
5057 Matthews, B, 46M 3:37:42
5058 A-Moo-Ha, C, 50M 3:37:43
5059 O'Donnell, K, 33F 3:37:43
5060 Godtfredsen, P, 53M 3:37:43
5061 Roolvink, W, 44M 3:37:43
5062 Petzold, P, 47M 3:37:43
5063 Mellergaard, N, 30M 3:37:44
5064 Lang, J, 30F 3:37:44
5065 Anderson, J, 28F 3:37:45
5066 Gilhuley, K, 37F 3:37:46
5067 Wilcox, D, 31M 3:37:46
5068 Vlootman, M, 31M 3:37:47
5069 Dougherty, M, 43M 3:37:47
5070 Samuelian, T, 48M 3:37:47
5071 Bader, J, 28M 3:37:47
5072 Humer, E, 41M 3:37:47
5073 Kosem, D, 44M 3:37:48
5074 Cougard, A, 44M 3:37:48
5075 Sanders, J, 45M 3:37:48
5076 Everett, J, 26M 3:37:48
5077 Lobe, J, 34M 3:37:48
5078 Cipriano, S, 39M 3:37:48
5079 Gustafson, C, 36M 3:37:49
5080 Velten, T, 43M 3:37:49
5081 Levin, S, 41M 3:37:50
5082 Ritz, M, 25M 3:37:50
5083 Cetinich, M, 43M 3:37:50
5084 Lechevallier, J, 34M 3:37:50
5085 Elias, A, 41M 3:37:51
5086 Rowsey, T, 28M 3:37:51
5087 Tsubota, H, 45M 3:37:51
5088 Heineck, J, 27M 3:37:51
5089 Correa Viola, C, 33M 3:37:52
5090 Millan, A, 38M 3:37:52
5091 Steiner, G, 29M 3:37:52
5092 Maubert, O, 29M 3:37:52
5093 McCallion, K, 48M 3:37:53
5094 Sharp, A, 30F 3:37:53
5095 Buettel, T, 44M 3:37:54
5096 Nittel, H, 44M 3:37:54
5097 Patchen, G, 28M 3:37:54
5098 Osadjan, A, 29F 3:37:55
5099 Steinmaurer, D, 53M 3:37:56
5100 Cordewener, L, 44M 3:37:56
5101Ackerman, R, 47M 3:37:57
5102 Rippert, G, 53M 3:37:57
5103 Lodewijk, P, 43M 3:37:57
5104 Hennig, A, 36M 3:37:57
5105 Darrow, C, 32F 3:37:58
5106 Norgate, M, 32M 3:37:59
5107 Beaufils, D, 38M 3:37:59
5108 Bjaaland, K, 45F 3:37:59
5109 Felix, E, 42M 3:37:59
5110 Chartier, F, 53M 3:38:00
5111 Pena, I, 47M 3:38:01
5112 Cote, B, 44M 3:38:01
5113 Ricov, J, 38M 3:38:01
5114 Rothenberg, M, 37M 3:38:01
5115 Ross, J, 58M 3:38:01
5116 Lagstein, M, 51M 3:38:02
5117 Corregano, G, 35M 3:38:02
5118 Cozette, P, 47M 3:38:02
5119 Sotomayor, J, 32M 3:38:02
5120 Brannstrom, R, 45M 3:38:03
5121 Nelis, C, 43M 3:38:03
5122 Hernandez, L, 52M 3:38:03
5123 Sherman, A, 34M 3:38:03
5124 Cohen, D, 45M 3:38:03
5125 Bumb, J, 40M 3:38:04
5126 Morris, S, 28M 3:38:04
5127 Peterson, G, 34M 3:38:04
5128 Fattore, J, 34M 3:38:04
5129 Dixon, D, 67M 3:38:04
5130 Morgan, R, 34M 3:38:04
5131 Benoit, J, 27M 3:38:05
5132 Loewe, A, 26M 3:38:06
5133 Trujillo, J, 36M 3:38:06
5134 Snyder, P, 34M 3:38:07
5135 Nosco, J, 32M 3:38:07
5136 Taks, G, 36M 3:38:07
5137 Canning, J, 31M 3:38:07
5138 Jost, C, 40M 3:38:07
5139 Jauli Davila, S, 46M 3:38:08
5140 Norris, J, 41M 3:38:08
5141 Fazio, C, 29F 3:38:08
5142 Garstman, A, 57M 3:38:08
5143 Castrataro, L, 29F 3:38:09
5144 Varella, A, 51M 3:38:09
5145 De Leon Villanueva, R, 33M3:38:09
5146 Rosati, A, 25M 3:38:09
5147 Regan, J, 36M 3:38:09
5148 Van Es, W, 30M 3:38:10
5149 Hansen, B, 55M 3:38:10
5150 Omaggio, T, 38M 3:38:10
5151 Ollivier, J, 43M 3:38:11
5152 Wespi-Pitter, T, 36M 3:38:11
5153 Puckett, J, 32M 3:38:11
5154 Wiesenberg, N, 33M 3:38:11
5155 Roberts, D, 38M 3:38:12
5156 Amsterdam, D, 32M 3:38:12
5157 Whitmer, L, 43F 3:38:12
5158 Gerner, D, 50M 3:38:13
5159 Bouthenet, M, 48M 3:38:13
5160 Welch, H, 28F 3:38:13
5161 Leininger, S, 26M 3:38:13
5162 Leinonen, T, 50M 3:38:13
5163 Gonzalez, R, 23M 3:38:13
5164 Lagabarre, P, 52M 3:38:14
5165 Byrnes, B, 26M 3:38:14
5166 Crawford, D, 35F 3:38:15
5167 Johnson, R, 38M 3:38:15
5168 Laurence, D, 37M 3:38:16
5169 Voges, M, 25M 3:38:16
5170 Sytton, D, 34M 3:38:16
5171 Schuette, H, 39M 3:38:17
5172 Benjamin, J, 32M 3:38:17
5173 Nation, E, 39M 3:38:18
5174 Villar, D, 37M 3:38:18
5175 Schulte, G, 50M 3:38:18
5176 Van Rijn, P, 33M 3:38:18
5177 Krammer, J, 43M 3:38:19
5178 Ehrlich, J, 34M 3:38:19
5179 McGovern, K, 31M 3:38:19
5180 Bueno, G, 52M 3:38:19
5181 Teitell, M, 35M 3:38:19
5182 Wong, J, 27M 3:38:19
5183 Huebner, R, 46M 3:38:19
5184 King, C, 41F 3:38:19
5185 Marino, M, 36M 3:38:19
5186 Washington, P, 36M 3:38:20
5187 Atkinson, R, 35M 3:38:20
5188 Frisch, J, 45M 3:38:20
5189 King, D, 30M 3:38:20
5190 Morrow, S, 36M 3:38:21
5191 Patterson, T, 28M 3:38:21
5192 Foutrier, V, 26F 3:38:21
5193 Davitt, P, 40M 3:38:22
5194 Kenny, J, 32M 3:38:22
5195 Komain-Eg, V, 34M 3:38:22
5196 Kooistra, G, 39F3:38:24
5197 DiDomenico, J, 35M 3:38:24
5198 Hernandez, P, 36M 3:38:24
5199 Michie, J, 56M 3:38:25
5200 Reilly, C, 30M 3:38:25
5201 Vestbo, S, 43M 3:38:26
5202 Diehl, R, 33M 3:38:26
5203 Pascal, J, 58M 3:38:26
5204 Labonski, B, 26F 3:38:27
5205 Kurmaskie, J, 32M 3:38:27
5206 Raineteau, J, 47M 3:38:27
5207 Hemon, R, 50M 3:38:28
5208 Stolick, R, 51M 3:38:28
5209 Meridith, R, 38M 3:38:28
5210 Brewer, R, 41M 3:38:29
5211 Rutherford, T, 37M 3:38:29
5212 Drolez, D, 55F 3:38:29
5213 Van Eijzeren, L, 36M 3:38:30
5214Rysdyk, H, 35M 3:38:30
5215 Hagin, G, 32M 3:38:30
5216 Wenmark, W, 46M 3:38:30
5217 Van Dijk, E, 40M 3:38:31
5218 Alcaide Andreu, X, 44M 3:38:31
5219 Merle, J, 44F 3:38:31
5220 Cristoforoni, A, 63M 3:38:31
5221 Dalayrac, D, 31M 3:38:32
5222 Lee, R, 46M 3:38:32
5223 Uil, H, 48M 3:38:32
5224 Daudon, P, 30M 3:38:32
5225 Lamige, A, 32M 3:38:33
5226 Harreau, M, 44F 3:38:33
5227 Roudaut, Y, 33M 3:38:34
5228 Lachaux, J, 39M 3:38:34
5229 Hensel, T, 35M 3:38:35
5230 Roudaut, Y, 39M 3:38:35
5231 Pheulpin, D, 41M 3:38:35
5232 Maggi, P, 34M 3:38:35
5233 Fredberg, P, 49M 3:38:35
5234 Paquet, P, 46M 3:38:36
5235 Beaurain, P, 38M 3:38:36
5236 Rodriguez, S, 41M 3:38:36
5237 Thibon, A, 41M 3:38:36
5238 Zand, J, 49M 3:38:37
5239 Calmthout, G, 39M 3:38:37
5240 Pujado Solano, J, 30M 3:38:38
5241 Van Bergen, E, 42M 3:38:38
5242 Granfield, B, 43M 3:38:38
5243 Barron, J, 34M 3:38:38
5244 Johansson, S, 29M 3:38:39
5245 Garey, J, 26M 3:38:39
5246 Koch, R, 43M 3:38:39
5247 Griffioen, J, 30M 3:38:40
5248 Richard, F, 43M 3:38:40
5249 Solano Tellez, N, 41M 3:38:40
5250 Casadei, G, 30M 3:38:40
5251 Rouiller, B, 41M 3:38:40
5252 Houlind, J, 44F 3:38:41
5253 Sneekes, H, 31M 3:38:41
5254 Ichizaki, S, 26F 3:38:41
5255 Urschel, R, 49M 3:38:41
5256 Rinaldi, P, 38M 3:38:41
5257 Clark, B, 37M 3:38:41
5258 Spindler, E, 38M 3:38:42
5259 Suarez, R, 42M 3:38:42
5260 Leonard, A, 50M 3:38:42
5261 Moore, R, 33M 3:38:43
5262 Najera, G, 34M 3:38:43
5263 Cadden, P, 29M 3:38:44
5264 Peterson, K, 35F 3:38:44
5265 Vignali, G, 43M 3:38:44
5266 Vazquez Vazquez, R, 39M 3:38:44
5267 Sirieix, B, 34M 3:38:44
5268 Dodd, D, 39M 3:38:44
5269 Hudson, C, 34M 3:38:44
5270 Prendergast, D, 26M 3:38:45
5271 McCarty, C, 39M 3:38:45
5272 Bork, P, 51M 3:38:46
5273 Schmoekel, A, 31F 3:38:47
5274 Notarnicola, J, 29M 3:38:47
5275 Goldmann, H, 45M 3:38:47
5276 Kobayashi, T, 39M 3:38:47
5277 Huijsing, J, 42M 3:38:47
5278 Riccio, J, 60M 3:38:48
5279 Manzi, V, 34M 3:38:48
5280 Graff, P, 29M 3:38:49
5281 Foltyn, M, 45M 3:38:49
5282 Rick, S, 31M 3:38:49
5283 Genty, J, 57M 3:38:49
5284 Dayton, A, 31M 3:38:50
5285 Mann, E, 42M 3:38:50
5286 Rolon Ortiz, C, 45M 3:38:50
5287 Splick, R, 36M 3:38:50
5288 Sullivan, K, 26M 3:38:50
5289 Rubio, N, 39M 3:38:50
5290 Duda, R, 30F 3:38:51
5291 Hidalgo, E, 56M 3:38:51
5292 Garcia, R, 39M 3:38:51
5293 Marcus, D, 42M 3:38:51
5294 Fain, T, 36M 3:38:52
5295 Harvey, W, 28M 3:38:53
5296 Goodson, S, 36M 3:38:53
5297 Posila, H, 39M 3:38:54
5298 Clark, N, 41F 3:38:54
5299 Gengo, G, 46M 3:38:55
5300 Workowski, K, 35F 3:38:55
5301 Hilibrand, A, 30M 3:38:55
5302 Macalena Jr, A, 41M 3:38:56
5303 David, G, 46M 3:38:56
5304 Obelkevich, D, 51M 3:38:56
5305 Krouham, A, 35M 3:38:56
5306 Shelley, E, 33F 3:38:56
5307 Pierce, G, 30M 3:38:57
5308 Griffiths, K, 25F 3:38:57
5309 Torres, J, 22M 3:38:57
5310 Harbour, B, 27M 3:38:58
5311 Prince, G, 37M 3:38:58
5312 Ravix, R, 30M 3:38:58
5313 Yamane, M, 28M 3:38:58
5314 Van Der Woude, J, 41M 3:38:59
5315 Kirk, J, 44M 3:38:59
5316 Bouwens, A, 40M 3:38:59
5317 Gefflaut, S, 45M 3:39:00
5318 Janitz, R, 42M 3:39:00
5319 Rabinowitz, D, 43M 3:39:00
5320 Lavigne, Y, 54F 3:39:01
5321 Babey, L, 31M 3:39:01
5322 Ozer, S, 48M 3:39:01
5323 Yokoi, M, 44M 3:39:01
5324 Jochen, M, 39M 3:39:02
5325 Green, S, 24F 3:39:02
5326 Stakel, F, 25M 3:39:02
5327 Cabany, P, 42M 3:39:03
5328 Gervasio, J, 25M 3:39:03
5329 Etancelin, T, 35M 3:39:04
5330 Alegre, E, 32M 3:39:04
5331 Tumidajewicz, C, 40M 3:39:04
5332 Boete, M, 46M 3:39:04
5333 Hogge, M, 30F 3:39:05
5334Storey, C, 34M 3:39:05
5335 Voithofer, J, 41M 3:39:05
5336 Jung, H, 59M 3:39:05
5337 Walz, A, 56M 3:39:05
5338 Caicedo, J, 41M 3:39:05
5339 Lindberg, P, 42M 3:39:06
5340 Mennitt, P, 29F 3:39:06
5341 Soules, D, 31M 3:39:07
5342 Hones, J, 23M 3:39:07
5343 Nantel, K, 40F 3:39:07
5344 Sauber, F, 27M 3:39:07
5345 Levin, Z, 31M 3:39:07
5346 Lucas, T, 29M 3:39:07
5347 Fraser, K, 28F 3:39:08
5348 Parkard Jr, R, 27M 3:39:08
5349 Kwak, D, 48M 3:39:08
5350 Karstens, J, 54M 3:39:08
5351 Schwartz, S, 36M 3:39:08
5352 Kerloc'H, M, 41M 3:39:09
5353 Perre, A, 25F 3:39:09
5354 Nowling, S, 43M 3:39:10
5355 Ferguson, M, 41M 3:39:11
5356 Ocampo Sanchez, A, 45M 3:39:11
5357 Conilh, M, 56M 3:39:11
5358 Krols, P, 34M 3:39:12
5359 Guerriero, G, 36M 3:39:12
5360 Wolcott, R, 40M 3:39:12
5361 Stodter, D, 34M 3:39:12
5362 Allen, J, 36F 3:39:13
5363 Gielen, J, 47M 3:39:13
5364 Nicht, R, 39M 3:39:14
5365 Gotto, T, 24F3:39:14
5366 Ahmed, J, 46M 3:39:14
5367 Seferlis, A, 31M 3:39:14
5368 Murphy, E, 49M 3:39:15
5369 Guiley, D, 32M 3:39:15
5370Malech, L, 49M 3:39:16
5371 Shumway, C, 28M 3:39:17
5372 Nouet, D, 35M 3:39:17
5373 Brands, H, 46M 3:39:17
5374 De Jong, B, 27M 3:39:18
5375 Ramirez, L, 45F 3:39:18
5376 Cheneau, R, 49M 3:39:18
5377 Theobald, J, 41M 3:39:19
5378 Seraile, W, 53M 3:39:20
5379 Davies, M, 48M 3:39:20
5380 Gelderblom, H, 31M 3:39:20
5381 Drouillard, P, 39M 3:39:20
5382 Gilmartin, M, 39M 3:39:21
5383 Napolitano, E, 48M 3:39:21
5384 Block, S, 36M 3:39:21
5385 Lee, P, 37M 3:39:21
5386 Craft, R, 43M 3:39:22
5387 Ryder, S, 35M 3:39:23
5388 Ruppelt, B, 34F 3:39:23
5389 Schlittler, P, 39M 3:39:23
5390Bruggeman, H, 41M 3:39:23
5391 Smith, G, 35M 3:39:24
5392 Bahilik, D, 28M 3:39:24
5393 Pusch, A, 27M 3:39:24
5394 DeBaedts, E, 55M3:39:24
5395 Roe, S, 45F 3:39:24
5396 Tanazawa, M, 25M 3:39:24
5397 Debell, M, 27M 3:39:24
5398 Moog, K, 56M 3:39:24
5399 Reuschel, W, 50M 3:39:25
5400 Jones, D, 29M 3:39:25
5401 Driessen, W, 47M 3:39:25
5402 Courts Jr, J, 56M 3:39:25
5403 Vollmer, K, 34F 3:39:26
5404 Calfati, S, 42M 3:39:26
5405 Mueller, R, 50M 3:39:26
5406 Nicolaas, F, 47M 3:39:28
5407 Poster, B, 39M 3:39:28
5408 Lecoultre, E, 44M 3:39:29
5409 Higgins, K, 29F 3:39:29
5410 Le Gall, G, 45M 3:39:29
5411 Hemmer, J, 29F 3:39:29
5412 Smith, R, 58M 3:39:30
5413 Utne, L, 30F 3:39:30
5414 Nordenstrom, N, 30M 3:39:30
5415 Price, F, 55M 3:39:31
5416 Lombard, B, 28M 3:39:31
5417 Terboss, J, 46M 3:39:31
5418 Luger, K, 26M 3:39:31
5419 Loefstedt, N, 30M 3:39:31
5420 Amador Leon, R, 31M 3:39:31
5421 Athey, R, 30F 3:39:31
5422 Schikora, K, 53M 3:39:32
5423 Boutin, P, 49M 3:39:32
5424 Pantucci, P, 52M 3:39:32
5425 Fry, E, 36F 3:39:32
5426 Arango, L, 60M 3:39:33
5427 Schauland, K, 43M 3:39:34
5428Limbach, P, 39M 3:39:34
5429 Molina, L, 42M 3:39:35
5430 Falk, J, 26F 3:39:35
5431 Moreno, D, 41M 3:39:35
5432 Oda, K, 42M 3:39:35
5433 O'Reilly, S, 48M 3:39:36
5434 Baena, E, 43M 3:39:36
5435 Dominguez, E, 43M 3:39:36
5436 Abbett, J, 41M 3:39:36
5437 Fechtner, J, 43M 3:39:37
5438 Mazzone, D, 39M 3:39:37
5439 RUNNER NO. 7896, 35M 3:39:38
5440 Faivre, C, 50M 3:39:38
5441 Nittel, L, 51M3:39:38
5442 Maki, R, 42M 3:39:38
5443 Collins, C, 25M 3:39:39
5444 Leik, F, 56M 3:39:39
5445 Cheillon, S, 25F 3:39:40
5446 Vallet, M, 33M 3:39:40
5447 Kervella, P, 41M 3:39:41
5448 Ralph, C, 31M 3:39:41
5449 Dohmann, A, 34F 3:39:41
5450 Hamilton, T, 28M 3:39:42
5451 Eckhardt, J, 40M 3:39:43
5452 Lockhorst, H, 46M 3:39:43
5453 Boulet, P, 38M 3:39:44
5454 Gossenreiter, R, 34M 3:39:44
5455 Anstey, K, 48M 3:39:44
5456 Hoogenboezem, G, 41M 3:39:45
5457 Chomut, M, 51M 3:39:45
5458 Antuori, R, 46M 3:39:45
5459 Polidori, J, 50M 3:39:45
5460 Compean Valadez, A, 35M 3:39:45
5461 Lockman, V, 32F 3:39:45
5462 Hernandez, C, 39M 3:39:45
5463 Walsh, C, 41M 3:39:45
5464 Vollmer, F, 40M 3:39:46
5465 Fukami, M, 29F 3:39:46
5466 Barr, M, 26F 3:39:47
5467 Mraz, D, 43M 3:39:47
5468 Fritsch, R, 50F 3:39:47
5469 Fallon, M, 35M 3:39:48
5470 Lang, A, 49M 3:39:48
5471 Shaffran, A, 29M 3:39:48
5472 Berta, G, 41M 3:39:48
5473 Strelzyk, H, 48M 3:39:49
5474 Wilhelm, B, 37M 3:39:49
5475 Kumper, A, 37M 3:39:50
5476 Roberts, T, 41M 3:39:50
5477Sancho Rodrigo, M, 23F 3:39:50
5478 Bois, C, 28M 3:39:50
5479 Scarpa, P, 39M 3:39:51
5480 Ekstrom, J, 53M 3:39:51
5481 Moore, J, 39M 3:39:51
5482 Velazquez, P, 31M 3:39:52
5483 Langarica Duenas, F, 34M 3:39:52
5484 Goldgrub, D, 52M 3:39:52
5485 Harradine, L, 59M3:39:52
5486 Maguis, M, 40M 3:39:52
5487 Battaglini, J, 36M 3:39:52
5488 Miller, A, 45M 3:39:53
5489 Vizcaino, J, 43M 3:39:53
5490 Zils, R, 50M 3:39:54
5491 Dunphy, E, 48M 3:39:55
5492 Sauna, R, 27M 3:39:55
5493 Lesage, R, 50M 3:39:55
5494 Eckardt, D, 31M 3:39:56
5495 Rohner, P, 37M 3:39:57
5496 Liporace, D, 36M 3:39:57
5497 Ruggiero, M, 36F 3:39:57
5498 Pent, G, 23M 3:39:58
5499Azares, A, 43F 3:39:58
5500 Ricca, J, 27M 3:39:59
5501 Morales Mancilla, J, 29M 3:39:59
5502 Budin, M, 51M 3:39:59
5503 Cane, D, 47F 3:39:59
5504 Sasse-Thometzek, R, 42M 3:39:59
5505 Potapczyk, L, 44M 3:40:00
5506 Schenck, T, 37M 3:40:00
5507 D'Andrea, I, 41M 3:40:00
5508 Green, G, 32M 3:40:01
5509 Dudick, A, 47M 3:40:01
5510 Babakhanian, A, 28F 3:40:01
5511 Wynn, R, 36M 3:40:02
5512 Bremner, N, 34M 3:40:02
5513 Simms, M, 36M 3:40:02
5514 Albright, A, 34M 3:40:03
5515 Paul, F, 37M 3:40:03
5516 Falkner, R, 35M 3:40:03
5517 Andermahr, H, 54M 3:40:03
5518 Mizrahi, D, 41M 3:40:04
5519 Gervais, T, 29M 3:40:04
5520 Lewis, D, 28M 3:40:04
5521 Fraimout, J, 37M 3:40:04
5522 Primo, J, 25M 3:40:04
5523 Fumero Patino, T, 31M 3:40:05
5524 Wesson, C, 40M 3:40:06
5525 Samuels, R, 51M 3:40:06
5526 Parisi, R, 34M 3:40:08
5527 Zink, B, 37F 3:40:08
5528 Atkins, Z, 25M 3:40:08
5529 Staecker, I, 49F 3:40:08
5530 Soentgerath, P, 45M 3:40:09
5531 Trinidad, E, 49M 3:40:10
5532 Del Vecchio, D, 45M 3:40:10
5533 Aguilera, J, 50M 3:40:10
5534 Walker, D, 29M 3:40:11
5535 Leyva Reyes, G, 39M 3:40:11
5536 Falkner, A, 29M 3:40:11
5537 Edelenbos, N, 32F 3:40:11
5538 Klerk De, A, 59M 3:40:11
5539 Pirello, R, 45M 3:40:11
5540 Jousseaume, C, 34F 3:40:11
5541 Moriarty, J, 30M 3:40:12
5542 Bailleul, P, 34M 3:40:12
5543 Watson, J, 40M 3:40:12
5544 Irwin, J, 34M 3:40:12
5545Raima, R, 53M 3:40:13
5546 Boettcher, H, 44M 3:40:13
5547 Maslow, R, 37M 3:40:13
5548 Mulherin, J, 40M 3:40:14
5549 Dellong, F, 58M 3:40:14
5550 Gentile, F, 50M 3:40:14
5551 Comte, B, 34F 3:40:14
5552 Milda, J, 44M 3:40:15
5553 Kirchner, D, 33M 3:40:15
5554 McGraw, J, 41F 3:40:15
5555 Lloberes, A, 52M 3:40:15
5556 Johnson, G, 25M 3:40:15
5557 Landis, S, 28M 3:40:15
5558 Kouwenhoven, M, 31M 3:40:16
5559 Palumbo, T, 44M 3:40:16
5560 Pearce, B, 40F 3:40:16
5561 Bielak, B, 41M 3:40:16
5562 De Wolf, L, 32M 3:40:16
5563 Paradeiser, A, 38M 3:40:16
5564 Gregorio, D, 38M 3:40:16
5565 Grail, W, 38M 3:40:17
5566 Korpi, M, 35M 3:40:18
5567 Manzi, J, 32M 3:40:18
5568 Neuhausel, T, 25F 3:40:18
5569 Berton, O, 29M 3:40:19
5570 Henry, A, 30F 3:40:19
5571 Oosterhuis, J, 48M 3:40:19
5572 Nippa, M, 37M 3:40:19
5573 Nino, R, 49M 3:40:19
5574 Sudhoff, H, 37M 3:40:20
5575 Puoti, M, 50M 3:40:20
5576 Johnson, J, 42M 3:40:21
5577 Vesin, A, 50M 3:40:21
5578 Colon, J, 44M 3:40:21
5579 Van Den Burg, J, 30M 3:40:22
5580 La Piedra, S, 36M 3:40:22
5581 Clark, V, 27M 3:40:22
5582 Hermelin, P, 39M 3:40:23
5583 Aluja, L, 31M 3:40:24
5584 Johnson, M, 25F 3:40:24
5585 Ballarin, X, 34M 3:40:24
5586 Mehnert, D, 45F 3:40:25
5587 Bounine, J, 47M 3:40:25
5588 Robinson, N, 35F 3:40:25
5589 Mattar, L, 37M 3:40:26
5590 Boehm, B, 43M 3:40:26
5591 Tenenti, D, 46M 3:40:26
5592 Denivry, C, 42M 3:40:27
5593 Tjernberg, S, 40F 3:40:27
5594 Blasco Soler, M, 47M 3:40:27
5595 Vincent, M, 28F 3:40:27
5596 Zandvoort, C, 41M 3:40:28
5597 Gaughran, S, 30M 3:40:28
5598 Tubb, A, 33M 3:40:28
5599 Birchall, S, 55M 3:40:28
5600 Caillon, J, 40M 3:40:29
5601 Sperl, G, 44M 3:40:29
5602 Kaufman, E, 35F 3:40:29
5603 Wolvetang, R, 32M 3:40:29
5604 Steinhoff, R, 61M 3:40:29
5605Reddyhoff, J, 46M 3:40:29
5606 Jensen, H, 31M 3:40:29
5607 Saffer, I, 24M 3:40:29
5608 Edwards, G, 49M 3:40:29
5609 Peterson, S, 37M 3:40:29
5610 Grigorian, S, 30M 3:40:29
5611 Richard, P, 34M 3:40:29
5612 Sobe, F, 37M 3:40:29
5613 Haynes, G, 46M 3:40:31
5614 Rowsey, P, 39M 3:40:31
5615 Kamiya, E, 56F 3:40:32
5616 Van Veen, H, 53M 3:40:32
5617 Spant, D, 43M 3:40:32
5618 Stifter, F, 32M 3:40:33
5619 Hopeck, S, 52M 3:40:33
5620 Fernandez, E, 53M 3:40:33
5621 Siegel, J, 29M 3:40:33
5622 Sylvester, D, 39M 3:40:33
5623 McGroddy, M, 26F 3:40:34
5624 LoPresti, L, 31F 3:40:34
5625Sotell, C, 32F 3:40:34
5626 Allen, G, 39M 3:40:34
5627 Mahoney, T, 33M 3:40:35
5628 Priewe, H, 39M 3:40:35
5629 Vonk, R, 53M 3:40:35
5630 Bouju, B, 23M 3:40:35
5631 Veenendaal, A, 39M 3:40:35
5632 Augeneder, R, 35M 3:40:36
5633 Ofek, Y, 44M 3:40:36
5634 Kushen, R, 32M 3:40:36
5635 Vos, W, 39M 3:40:36
5636 Prost, R, 27M 3:40:37
5637 Abramo, J, 32M 3:40:37
5638 Klimke, R, 43M 3:40:37
5639 Fournier, P, 40M 3:40:37
5640 Jimenez Mata, E, 38M 3:40:38
5641 Krauss, L, 24F 3:40:38
5642 Amalfi, F, 44M 3:40:38
5643 Franco, O, 47M 3:40:38
5644 Ideker, R, 24F 3:40:38
5645 Thompson, C, 38M 3:40:38
5646 Brown, C, 39M 3:40:39
5647 Brown, M, 36M 3:40:40
5648 Bolembach, J, 41M 3:40:41
5649 Joffe, A, 33M 3:40:41
5650 Shackleton, S, 27M 3:40:41
5651 Goolsby, F, 37M 3:40:41
5652 Marzen, L, 33M 3:40:42
5653 Berkenkemper, D, 27M 3:40:42
5654 Precht, R, 50F 3:40:42
5655 Schofield, P, 35M 3:40:43
5656 Gentile, N, 29F 3:40:43
5657 Leibensperger, F, 49M 3:40:43
5658 Babel, R, 39M3:40:43
5659 Belair, P, 45M 3:40:44
5660 Gianfreda, B, 47M 3:40:44
5661 Mannix, W, 42M 3:40:44
5662 Doyle, K, 27F 3:40:45
5663 Sinclair, M, 41M 3:40:45
5664 Regis, J, 38M 3:40:46
5665 Gifford, S, 33M 3:40:46
5666 Crump, N, 57M 3:40:46
5667 Miller Sr., T, 47M 3:40:47
5668 Lemoine, P, 36M 3:40:47
5669 Fueloep, G, 45M 3:40:47
5670 Otter, D, 43M 3:40:47
5671 Bolliger, A, 55M 3:40:48
5672 Maniere, J, 43M 3:40:48
5673 Guerout, J, 50M 3:40:48
5674 Shapiro, P, 50M 3:40:49
5675 Cohen, D, 39M 3:40:50
5676 Perez Perez, J, 37M 3:40:50
5677 Butcher, J, 45M 3:40:51
5678 Brayshaw, J, 47M3:40:51
5679 Gonzalez Nava, S, 45M 3:40:51
5680 Gotschi, R, 47M 3:40:52
5681 Schoen, J, 32M 3:40:53
5682 Marion, D, 44M 3:40:53
5683 Urban, W, 43M 3:40:53
5684 Arnold, P, 30M 3:40:53
5685 Sancehz Gaertner, M, 26F 3:40:54
5686 Heijningen, C, 38M 3:40:54
5687Akimoto, R, 49F 3:40:54
5688 Saraiva, V, 47M 3:40:54
5689 Brewer, K, 27M 3:40:54
5690 Hooper, S, 25M 3:40:55
5691 Platteeuw, J, 42M 3:40:55
5692 Turner, L, 36F 3:40:55
5693 Moses, E, 51M 3:40:55
5694 Carboni, L, 19M 3:40:56
5695 Tochijara Pulido, A, 46M 3:40:56
5696 Dutheil, D, 23M 3:40:57
5697 Davila, J, 36M 3:40:57
5698 Saint Onge, J, 50M 3:40:58
5699 Bajenaru, P, 53M 3:40:58
5700 Hocking, D, 38M 3:40:58
5701 Letendre, A, 45M 3:40:58
5702 Monica, S, 33M 3:40:59
5703 Cummings, G, 47M 3:40:59
5704 Lalioui, D, 39M 3:40:59
5705 Hofmann, W, 35M 3:40:59
5706 Chan, T, 40M 3:40:59
5707 Gallagher, B, 54M 3:40:59
5708 Paciarelli, J, 46F 3:40:59
5709 Evans, T, 52M 3:40:59
5710 Brito, R, 38M 3:41:00
5711 Veeser, M, 48F 3:41:00
5712 Kluge, A, 53M 3:41:00
5713 Fusaro, C, 27F 3:41:00
5714 Koenig, J, 45M 3:41:01
5715 Bruton, T, 35M 3:41:01
5716 Anttila, R, 34M 3:41:01
5717 Kramer, B, 36M 3:41:01
5718 Grubba, D, 54M 3:41:02
5719 Reffay, J, 40M 3:41:02
5720 Sornoza, M, 31M 3:41:02
5721 Johansson, L, 47M 3:41:03
5722 Winn, M, 20F 3:41:03
5723 Westlund, R, 27M 3:41:03
5724 Garibay, R, 50M 3:41:03
5725 Radtke, W, 61M 3:41:04
5726 Palmer, N, 37M 3:41:04
5727 Ruf, H, 32M 3:41:05
5728 Lamothe, P, 45M 3:41:05
5729 Zyko, W, 52M 3:41:06
5730 Donnelly, D, 25M 3:41:06
5731 Coburn, D, 34M 3:41:07
5732 Dibonaventura, M, 33F 3:41:07
5733 Torres, M, 24M 3:41:07
5734 Wojtkowski, A, 28F 3:41:08
5735 Looney, K, 27M 3:41:08
5736 Kreider, T, 41M 3:41:08
5737 Gross, S, 30M 3:41:08
5738 Hume, C, 48M 3:41:08
5739 Araneo, L, 59M 3:41:09
5740 O'Neil, S, 25M 3:41:09
5741 McGann, G, 45M 3:41:09
5742 Bengert, S, 42F 3:41:09
5743 Slemp, L, 28F 3:41:10
5744 Scholaert, D, 49M 3:41:11
5745 Cauchois, B, 38M 3:41:11
5746 Grossarth, B, 45M 3:41:11
5747 Eichinger, H, 45M 3:41:11
5748 Pettersson, C, 40M 3:41:12
5749 Gill, K, 24M 3:41:12
5750 Nagel, M, 48M 3:41:12
5751 Jungnickl, W, 37M 3:41:12
5752 Simonet, J, 43M 3:41:13
5753 Vanneman, M, 37M 3:41:13
5754 Mahle, F, 56M 3:41:13
5755 Cranston, R, 27M 3:41:13
5756 Hernandez, J, 40M 3:41:14
5757 Selemon, M, 35M 3:41:15
5758 Silva, N, 49M 3:41:15
5759 Brauner, L, 48M 3:41:15
5760 Zorita, I, 46M 3:41:16
5761 Gherst, R, 19M 3:41:16
5762 Bondrille, J, 61M 3:41:16
5763 Shenk, S, 51M 3:41:17
5764 Lohmeier, D, 39M 3:41:17
5765 Fontaine, J, 42M 3:41:18
5766 Felgitscher, H, 21M 3:41:18
5767 Raether, M, 34F 3:41:18
5768 Pelzmann, H, 46M 3:41:18
5769 Coln, A, 27M 3:41:18
5770 Marc, J, 40M 3:41:19
5771 Lapisardi, P, 31M 3:41:19
5772 Cosson, A, 54M 3:41:19
5773 Borre, G, 50M 3:41:19
5774 Montanez, E, 41M 3:41:19
5775 Fleischli, C, 58M 3:41:19
5776 Fiore, A, 30F 3:41:20
5777 Talvijoki, K, 34M 3:41:20
5778 Rodriguez, J, 30M 3:41:21
5779 Brennan, K, 32F 3:41:21
5780 Blaker, J, 35M 3:41:21
5781 Salzmann, H, 57M 3:41:21
5782 Krabbendam, D, 41M 3:41:22
5783 McGivern, F, 28F 3:41:22
5784 Gordon, S, 51M 3:41:22
5785 Hernandez, F, 23M 3:41:23
5786 Utens, J, 40M 3:41:23
5787LaPar, J, 26F 3:41:23
5788 Van Wagner, S, 49M 3:41:23
5789 Kuenzig, M, 32M 3:41:23
5790 Eaton, S, 32M 3:41:24
5791 Blum, A, 40M 3:41:24
5792 Vorlop, C, 44M 3:41:24
5793 Wobig, R, 29M 3:41:25
5794 Perino, G, 40M 3:41:25
5795 Taylor, D, 26M 3:41:25
5796 Underhill, C, 35M 3:41:25
5797 Hall, S, 34M 3:41:25
5798 Adelstein, J, 42M 3:41:25
5799 Sarmento, W, 37M 3:41:25
5800 Van De Pol, J, 48M 3:41:26
5801 Tacke, G, 46M 3:41:26
5802 Cottin, C, 40M 3:41:26
5803 Gonzales Algarin, C, 56M 3:41:27
5804 Warrick, J, 28F 3:41:27
5805 Villareal, H, 20M 3:41:27
5806 Sablayrolles, P, 44M 3:41:28
5807 Verhoeven, T, 27F 3:41:28
5808 Glebke, S, 22M 3:41:28
5809 Holihan, T, 37M 3:41:29
5810 Van Beek, M, 32M 3:41:29
5811 Kemp, M, 28F 3:41:29
5812 Glismann, A, 37F 3:41:29
5813 Schibig, H, 54M 3:41:30
5814 Decombes, W, 39M 3:41:30
5815 Andersson, P, 40M 3:41:30
5816 Kirby, D, 44M 3:41:31
5817 Riegel, W, 45M 3:41:31
5818 Ferguson, K, 33F 3:41:32
5819 Amen, J, 34M 3:41:33
5820 Gillet, P, 41M 3:41:33
5821 Leblanc, P, 41M 3:41:33
5822 Lehmann, M, 33M 3:41:34
5823 Belloncle, S, 50M 3:41:34
5824 Julien, C, 44M 3:41:34
5825 Noonan, W, 23M 3:41:35
5826 Berger, W, 31M 3:41:35
5827 Eduardo, I, 36M 3:41:35
5828 Vannoote, E, 30M 3:41:35
5829 Spencer, T, 29F 3:41:35
5830 Fleischanderl, G, 29M 3:41:36
5831 Janas, A, 42M 3:41:36
5832 Breque, B, 37M 3:41:36
5833 Donahue, K, 34M 3:41:36
5834 Desmons, G, 47M 3:41:36
5835 Leblanc, A, 34M 3:41:37
5836 Martres, A, 44M 3:41:37
5837 Costa Junior, J, 36M 3:41:37
5838 Tunon, E, 51M 3:41:37
5839 Martin, T, 46M 3:41:38
5840 Vroklage, S, 43M 3:41:38
5841 Borra, M, 37M 3:41:38
5842 Turner, G, 35M 3:41:38
5843 Jones, G, 41M 3:41:39
5844 Reitman, M, 51M 3:41:39
5845 Schnieders, M, 40M 3:41:39
5846 Marten, R, 31M 3:41:39
5847 Schmidt, H, 50M 3:41:39
5848 Guene Torres Varga, A, 39F 3:41:40
5849 Schaffhauser, J, 43M 3:41:41
5850 Hendershot, D, 47M 3:41:41
5851 Radola, J, 36M 3:41:41
5852 Puespoek, P, 47M 3:41:42
5853 Wiest, P, 38M 3:41:42
5854 Morita, H, 57M 3:41:44
5855 Schneider, C, 28M 3:41:44
5856 Perez Andres, T, 41M 3:41:44
5857 Reynolds, W, 36M 3:41:44
5858 Paquette, J, 30M 3:41:45
5859 Sanabria, E, 46M 3:41:45
5860 Mook, B, 34M 3:41:46
5861 Van Opdorp, K, 53M 3:41:47
5862 Flanakin, L, 32M 3:41:47
5863 Kazan, S, 33M 3:41:47
5864 Russo, F, 41M 3:41:48
5865 Cahill, J, 52M 3:41:48
5866 Rojas, J, 34M 3:41:48
5867 Priesner, R, 25M 3:41:48
5868 Ehrlich, J, 28F 3:41:49
5869 Ludwig, M, 54M 3:41:49
5870 McIntosh, R, 43M 3:41:49
5871 Rodriguez, A, 43M 3:41:49
5872 Perez, R, 31M 3:41:49
5873 Masseur, M, 26M 3:41:50
5874 Degel, M, 21M 3:41:50
5875 Hansson, H, 39F 3:41:50
5876 Helot, S, 45M 3:41:50
5877 Pronk, J, 38M 3:41:50
5878 Solbakken, T, 32M 3:41:50
5879 Mazzola, J, 40M 3:41:50
5880 McPherson, A, 48M 3:41:50
5881 Goddard, J, 34F 3:41:51
5882 Lubow, A, 32M 3:41:51
5883 Rogina, M, 39M 3:41:51
5884 Bouesnel, A, 26M 3:41:51
5885 Kerner, B, 43M 3:41:51
5886 Licht, W, 44M 3:41:51
5887 DiFranco, E, 24F 3:41:51
5888 Aadnevik, A, 47M 3:41:52
5889 Bratschi, H, 34M 3:41:52
5890 Lombardo, A, 32M 3:41:52
5891 Jans, A, 42M 3:41:53
5892 Butler, K, 52M 3:41:53
5893 Schubert, D, 41F 3:41:53
5894 Jacobs, S, 33M 3:41:54
5895 Griffith, M, 31F 3:41:55
5896 Miller, S, 35M 3:41:55
5897 Donovan, M, 27M3:41:55
5898 Bittman, M, 44M 3:41:55
5899 Martinez, R, 45M 3:41:56
5900 Bentley, J, 25M 3:41:56
5901 Pena Guerrero, M, 35F 3:41:56
5902 Bartolotta, A, 43M 3:41:57
5903 Pierce, T, 37M 3:41:57
5904 Quadri, O, 44F 3:41:57
5905 Duffing, L, 34F 3:41:58
5906 Moseley, H, 29F 3:41:58
5907 Swiss, D, 37M 3:41:58
5908 Schlagenhoff, D, 57M 3:41:58
5909 Ihrman, B, 45M 3:41:59
5910 Machard, F, 30M 3:41:59
5911 Bristeau, R, 50M 3:41:59
5912 Le Hebel, R, 44M 3:42:00
5913 Oestberg, O, 46M 3:42:00
5914 Krul, E, 54M 3:42:00
5915 Naranjo, J, 38M 3:42:01
5916 De Keirsmaker, M, 39M 3:42:01
5917 Van De Walle, J, 45M 3:42:01
5918 Cabanes, J, 38M 3:42:01
5919 Gunning, D, 35F 3:42:02
5920 Palha, L, 52M 3:42:02
5921 Van Hauten, H, 52M 3:42:03
5922 Gudim, F, 50M 3:42:03
5923 Bodian, R, 39M 3:42:03
5924 Ribeiro, J, 35M 3:42:03
5925 Moretti, W, 27M 3:42:03
5926 Olsen, E, 44M 3:42:04
5927 Hansen, H, 37F 3:42:05
5928 Gallagher, R, 43M 3:42:05
5929 Looijer, R, 54M 3:42:05
5930 Sel, H, 52M 3:42:06
5931 Hood*, L, 36F 3:42:07
5932 Keegan, P, 28M 3:42:07
5933 Opera, S, 43M 3:42:07
5934 Scheineson, I, 39M 3:42:07
5935 Genin, R, 43F 3:42:08
5936 Brown, C, 27M 3:42:08
5937 Tysnes, O, 38M 3:42:08
5938 Vlietman, T, 41M 3:42:08
5939 Heinhuis, D, 37M 3:42:08
5940 Veltman, B, 51M 3:42:08
5941 Tibavisky, G, 38M 3:42:09
5942 Colaizzo, P, 30M 3:42:09
5943 McBride, B, 33M 3:42:09
5944 Hennessy, P, 28M 3:42:09
5945 Kramer, H, 46M 3:42:09
5946 Henry, G, 33M 3:42:09
5947 Gassier, D, 34M 3:42:10
5948 Vibe, H, 35M 3:42:10
5949 Horst, E, 60M 3:42:10
5950 Mora, G, 31M 3:42:10
5951 Santo, J, 35F 3:42:10
5952 Velina, P, 57M 3:42:10
5953 Cooper, J, 27M 3:42:11
5954 Guillier, G, 48M 3:42:11
5955 Walsh, J, 28F 3:42:11
5956 Richter, J, 40M 3:42:11
5957 Bopp, D, 38M 3:42:12
5958 Ganzi, J, 40M 3:42:12
5959 Utasi, L, 31F 3:42:12
5960 Fuentes, R, 37M 3:42:12
5961 Fishman, L, 47M 3:42:12
5962 Tassiello, R, 36M 3:42:12
5963 Bongiorno, C, 39F 3:42:13
5964 Pelckmans, I, 55M 3:42:13
5965 Stefanick, G, 35M 3:42:13
5966 Delves, J, 48M 3:42:14
5967 Johnson, J, 33F 3:42:14
5968 Manzi, M, 37M 3:42:14
5969 Coutel, J, 39M 3:42:14
5970 Taduschewski, A, 28M 3:42:14
5971 Toro, A, 29F 3:42:14
5972 Van Staalduinen, J, 31M 3:42:15
5973 Cosmedy, A, 28F 3:42:15
5974 Morard, J, 32M 3:42:15
5975 Bronson, S, 45F 3:42:15
5976 Yoshida, N, 29M 3:42:16
5977 Kearney, L, 28F 3:42:17
5978 Demko, M, 29M 3:42:17
5979 Weber, P, 34M 3:42:18
5980 Gelderen, A, 36M 3:42:19
5981 Pedreira, C, 44M 3:42:19
5982 Kilburg, K, 56M 3:42:20
5983 Inoue, K, 25M 3:42:20
5984 Ragazzi, M, 35M 3:42:20
5985 Hatch, J, 25M 3:42:21
5986 Robinett, K, 45M 3:42:21
5987 Cook, E, 31F 3:42:22
5988 Lorenzen, K, 32M 3:42:22
5989 Moore, I, 30M 3:42:23
5990 Janning, M, 31M 3:42:23
5991 Ruiz, R, 31M 3:42:23
5992 Ivashchenko, V, 45M 3:42:24
5993 Regan, J, 38M 3:42:24
5994 D'Andrea, M, 30M 3:42:24
5995 Salha, S, 68M3:42:24
5996 Vree, H, 45M 3:42:25
5997 Fuhrmann, H, 56M 3:42:25
5998 Judd, C, 48M 3:42:25
5999 Afkhami, A, 28M 3:42:25
6000 Tafoya, J, 39M 3:42:26


Two Runners Are Dead From Cardiac Arrest
Two men participating in the 25th running of the New York City Marathon suffered heart attacks and died yesterday.
The first runner died after collapsing at the finish line.
The runner was identified by his bib number as Pierre Marguet, a citizen of Switzerland and a resident of Brooklyn.


Unions Block Nonunion Training Efforts
To the Editor:
Jeffrey Grabelsky and Fred Kotler of Cornell University (letter, Oct. 31), responding to your Oct. 24 news article about discrimination against a nonunion builder on Long Island, disguise reality by raising bogus issues.


Market Place; RJR Nabisco is unlikely to split without bond raters' approval.
HERE'S a quick multiple-choice quiz.
Name the person with the most influence in deciding whether RJR-Nabisco splits into two pieces that go their separate ways.
A. Henry Kravis; B. Charles Harper; C. Lisa Tesoriero.


A Stereotype of Jews in Hollywood Is Revived
A British magazine has revived a stereotype of Hollywood from the early days in which a "Jewish cabal" controls the entertainment industry.
Movie executives here who have seen the article in The Spectator are outraged.
"Disgusting," "despicable," "bigoted" and "odious" are some of the words used to describe the article, titled "Kings of the Deal," which goes on to say that Jews have created an "invidious and protective culture" that denies employment to non-Jews.
And it pointedly asks, "Now that Jews govern the New Establishment does any sort of reverse form of class or racial discrimination operate against outsiders trying to get access to the entertainment highways -- Wasps, blacks, Brits and others not so favored?" The article, sprinkled with stereotypical characterizations of Jews, answers itself: "Yes."


After the Election, Fix Albany
Gov.
Mario Cuomo and his Republican challenger, State Senator George Pataki, agree on one thing.
The current legislative process in Albany is a mess.
Voters should remember this and press every state official who is elected tomorrow to shake up the closed system that has the Governor, the Senate majority leader and the Assembly Speaker deciding most major issues in secret negotiating sessions.
This goofy practice bypasses open debate of the available policy choices, delays important issues until the last hours of the session and leaves the public, and even many state legislators, out in the cold.


Monte Shooting Is a Reminder: Times Sq. Con Is Never a Game
A man watching a three-card monte game on a crowded corner of Times Square was critically wounded Saturday night by a gunman who called the dealer a cheat in front of tourists and began firing wildly when the dealer and his team of shills and spotters closed in on him menacingly.
Alerted by the shrieks of scattering crowds, a rookie police officer chased and captured a suspect and no one else was injured.
But the episode cast new light on an old and resilient con game that officials say is lucrative and far more organized and dangerous than most New Yorkers and city visitors realize.


OM Group Inc.(OMGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A New-Music Feast With Flutes Ascendant
The Sonic Boom festival at the Miller Theater is a kind of co-op in sound.
New York's reputable new-music ensembles have never drawn particularly large audiences and now find themselves in debilitating intramural competitions for shrinking ones.
Sonic Boom, six concerts that began on Friday night and will run through Nov. 19, is a joint venture in contrasting musical aspirations and a shared listenership.
A restaurant analogy is not out of place, for as Friday night's tasting menu was designed to show, new music can take many turns.
The Da Capo Chamber Players, Continuum, the New York New Music Ensemble, the New Music Consort and Newband form the New York Consortium for New Music, and most of its members took turns on this program advertising the kind of music they will be presenting in individual concerts this month.


G.M. Is Getting Its Foot In the Door in Poland
The General Motors Corporation started its first venture in Poland this weekend with a fairly modest effort to assemble Opel Astras, but it said it hoped to expand its interests in this fast-growing car market.
Small though it was, the $20 million investment in a joint venture with Poland's second-largest car maker, Fabryka Samochodow Osobowych, or F.S.O., commanded a large send-off, with opening ceremonies of a new assembly plant attended by top G.M. executives and high-ranking members of the Polish Government.


Digital-Data Policies Undercut Innovation
To the Editor:
In his "Glory of Competition" (column, Oct. 31), William Safire missed the essential point that competition in industries driven by digital technology requires nonstop innovation.


Bodega Owner Shot Dead
A 54-year-old owner of a Brooklyn bodega was shot and killed yesterday during a robbery that also left one of his former employees with a gunshot wound to the head, the police said.
The shooting occurred just after 9 P.M. when the bodega owner, Salvatore Matos, and the former employee resisted several armed men who entered the store, the Espinal Bodega, at 279 Woodbine Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
The former employee, 35, who was not identified by the police, was taken to Woodhull Hospital, where he was in stable condition.


Saatchi Direct Absorbed by Kobs
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising North America has combined its New York direct marketing operations and "infomercial" production company under its Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide direct marketing agency.
The New York office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct has been absorbed by Kobs &amp; Draft; Saatchi Direct's San Francisco office will continue operating as a separate unit.
Hudson Street Partners, the "infomercial" company, will retain its name but no longer operate separately.


Corrections
A front-page article last Monday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's lead in a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll referred incorrectly to the last time a New York governor was elected without a majority.
It was the 1966 election, when Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller got 44.6 percent of the vote against five opponents.


Israel, With New Security, Will Reopen Shrine Where 29 Died
The trouble-laden Cave of the Patriarchs shrine reopened today, but hours earlier Dina Ben-Har was in the neighboring settlement of Qiryat Arba, where she took out a book of psalms and prayed.
She stood on Sunday by the grave there of the man responsible for shutting the cave nearly nine months ago, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, a Qiryat Arba settler who on Feb. 25 had opened fire on worshiping Palestinians with an automatic rifle, killing 29 and wounding about 125.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 5 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
12001 Astrand, B, 41M 4:06:18
12002 Cordova, D, 39M 4:06:18
12003 Nocker, P, 32F 4:06:19
12004 Fuentes, C, 41M 4:06:19
12005 Gasperini, L, 43F 4:06:19
12006 Lubin, B, 39M 4:06:20
12007 Bastias, J, 46M 4:06:20
12008 Clark, B, 47M 4:06:20
12009 Sikes, D, 36M 4:06:21
12010 Bellinson, J, 34M 4:06:21
12011 Freeman, P, 39M 4:06:21
12012 Toubert, H, 60M 4:06:21
12013 Bourcie, B, 45M 4:06:22
12014 Burri, H, 53M 4:06:22
12015 Stetch, J, 59M 4:06:22
12016 Blumenthal, K, 49M 4:06:23
12017 Gould, H, 43M 4:06:23
12018 Camarena Carrillo, B, 48M 4:06:23
12019 Murry, M, 43M 4:06:24
12020 Braggans, T, 51M 4:06:24
12021 Voelckner, T, 47F 4:06:24
12022 Tschudi, N, 55M 4:06:24
12023 Comet-Barthe, M, 36F 4:06:25
12024 Jacobse, P, 37M 4:06:26
12025 Dikkers, M, 50M 4:06:26
12026 Cespedes, L, 41M 4:06:27
12027 Candel, H, 34M 4:06:27
12028 Cecil, V, 35F 4:06:27
12029Moser, K, 25F 4:06:27
12030 Vollmer, D, 52M 4:06:27
12031 Gordon, C, 34F 4:06:28
12032 Dule, A, 34M 4:06:28
12033 White, J, 31F 4:06:28
12034 Porter, L, 28F 4:06:28
12035 Saltser, M, 57M 4:06:29
12036 Hiramatsu, K, 49F 4:06:29
12037 Delelis, P, 28M 4:06:29
12038 Huish, K, 40F 4:06:30
12039 Kieran, M, 50F 4:06:30
12040 Alt, N, 53M 4:06:31
12041 Schmitz, W, 46M 4:06:32
12042 Halldin, B, 46M 4:06:32
12043 McGraw, T, 40M 4:06:33
12044 DeAntoni, Z, 30M 4:06:33
12045 Meono-Sanchez, M, 32M 4:06:33
12046 McWilliams, T, 29F 4:06:33
12047 Woodard, R, 36M 4:06:33
12048 Vasapolli, F, 44M 4:06:33
12049 Szozda, R, 30M 4:06:33
12050 Mijangos, I, 30M 4:06:34
12051 Betancourt, G, 48M 4:06:34
12052 Schulthess, B, 56M 4:06:34
12053 Cox, W, 32M 4:06:34
12054 Soboul, P, 50M 4:06:36
12055Bingley, W, 55M 4:06:36
12056 Pelaez, M, 45M 4:06:36
12057 Wenger, A, 38F 4:06:37
12058 Slade, A, 31M 4:06:37
12059 Van Ravens, R, 54M 4:06:38
12060 Borali, M, 37M 4:06:38
12061 Horner, J, 37M 4:06:39
12062 Carter, F, 33F 4:06:39
12063 Maerten, H, 30M 4:06:39
12064 Knopp, K, 23M 4:06:40
12065 Pearson, J, 39M 4:06:40
12066 Alarcon, T, 57M 4:06:40
12067 Le Fournis, L, 26M 4:06:40
12068 Doss, G, 64M 4:06:41
12069 Goulden, P, 44F 4:06:41
12070 Jaeger, B, 60M 4:06:41
12071 Connaghan, K, 26F 4:06:41
12072 Burns, K, 46M 4:06:41
12073 Toshimassa, K, 44M 4:06:41
12074 Joho, K, 38M 4:06:42
12075 Tramontozzi, A, 51M 4:06:42
12076 Daudignon, J, 49M 4:06:42
12077 Tausig-Edwards, D, 33M 4:06:42
12078 D'Elia, D, 25F 4:06:42
12079 Healey, D, 26M 4:06:43
12080 Chiodo, D, 29M 4:06:43
12081 Douay, A, 45M 4:06:43
12082 Berdugo, G, 54M 4:06:43
12083 Gavin, S, 29M 4:06:44
12084 Ricaud, M, 66M 4:06:44
12085 Gonzalez, A, 52M 4:06:44
12086 Stanbury, T, 27M 4:06:44
12087 Stanley, J, 42M 4:06:44
12088 Cazier, G, 45M 4:06:44
12089 Ryan, P, 33F 4:06:44
12090 Long, O, 54F 4:06:45
12091 Purdy, B, 38M 4:06:45
12092Tuinzing-Dikkers, S, 46F 4:06:46
12093 Houben, M, 39F 4:06:46
12094 Gardiennet, M, 43M 4:06:47
12095 Schuran, D, 54M 4:06:47
12096 Iacurto, G, 40M 4:06:47
12097 Moelich, K, 40M 4:06:48
12098 Spelman, K, 43M 4:06:48
12099 Lorente, F, 32M 4:06:48
12100 Burns, J, 65M 4:06:48
12101 Scholz, R, 48M 4:06:48
12102 Herbel, V, 31M 4:06:48
12103 Cotta, J, 36F 4:06:48
12104 Chale, M, 32F 4:06:49
12105 Bleesz, W, 32M 4:06:49
12106 Pagano, D, 41M 4:06:50
12107 Nilsson, B, 27M 4:06:50
12108 Davenport, B, 46M 4:06:51
12109 Le Goaziou, B, 45M 4:06:51
12110 Telander, T, 45M 4:06:52
12111 Oviedo Cabrera, J, 46M 4:06:52
12112 Bos, J, 41M 4:06:52
12113 Bussen, K, 27F 4:06:52
12114 Islam, S, 25M 4:06:53
12115 Beale, J, 34M 4:06:53
12116 Verwey, T, 48M 4:06:53
12117 Morales, N, 49M 4:06:54
12118 Iltis, B, 25M 4:06:54
12119 Hewitt, G, 41M 4:06:54
12120 McKenna, L, 53M 4:06:54
12121 Herriou, Y, 34M 4:06:54
12122 Simon, T, 47F 4:06:54
12123 Goode, J, 54M 4:06:55
12124 Madigan, G, 33M 4:06:55
12125 Moffat, J, 27M 4:06:55
12126 Goodwin, K, 37M 4:06:55
12127 Morales, J, 30M 4:06:56
12128 Willer, H, 40M 4:06:56
12129 Cook, T, 41M 4:06:57
12130 Fasano, R, 36M 4:06:57
12131 Toudy, W, 53M 4:06:57
12132 Levasseur, E, 30M 4:06:57
12133 Korhonen, N, 60M 4:06:58
12134 Doctor, D, 25F 4:06:58
12135 Kervadec, G, 37M4:06:59
12136 Castiblanco, J, 41M 4:06:59
12137 Flint, A, 31F 4:06:59
12138 Gunduc, M, 40M 4:06:59
12139 Realmuto, J, 34F 4:06:59
12140 Komen, A, 31F 4:07:00
12141 Stege, K, 47M 4:07:00
12142Schliep, R, 43M 4:07:00
12143 Gagne, C, 47M 4:07:00
12144 Taylor, A, 28M 4:07:01
12145 Optekar, D, 42F 4:07:01
12146 Silpe, S, 40M4:07:01
12147 Gaine, J, 28M 4:07:01
12148 Pohlmann, S, 32M 4:07:01
12149 Campillo, M, 29F 4:07:02
12150 Bosi, C, 27F 4:07:02
12151 Strunz, J, 28M 4:07:02
12152 Esteve, A, 23F 4:07:02
12153 Morroni, A, 45M 4:07:02
12154 Van Minnen, F, 46M 4:07:03
12155 Hager, P, 39M 4:07:03
12156 McCaffrey, C, 42F 4:07:03
12157 Leonard, B, 39M 4:07:03
12158 Schwarz, R, 20F 4:07:03
12159 Chavez Espinoza, E, 34M 4:07:03
12160 Budny, P, 31F 4:07:04
12161 Mittman, S, 43M 4:07:06
12162 Ramsay, R, 45M 4:07:06
12163 Chun, B, 38F 4:07:06
12164 Reilly, R, 27F 4:07:07
12165 Ward, J, 43M 4:07:07
12166 Giles, J, 41M 4:07:08
12167 Javelle, F, 29M 4:07:08
12168 Tie, R, 45M 4:07:08
12169 Muller, M, 28M 4:07:08
12170 Baudin, C, 41F 4:07:09
12171 Romero Bardawil, E, 40M 4:07:09
12172 Schaetzle, B, 47M4:07:09
12173 Padro, H, 39M 4:07:10
12174 Bonnardel, P, 31M 4:07:10
12175 Chu Jr, H, 42M 4:07:10
12176 Remail, C, 32F 4:07:10
12177 Levine, S, 27M 4:07:10
12178 Brien, A, 48M 4:07:10
12179 Flandrin, F, 28M 4:07:11
12180 Van Den Berg, G, 43M 4:07:11
12181 Gjertsen, A, 34F 4:07:11
12182 Clemente, G, 32M 4:07:12
12183 Poropupas, T, 46M 4:07:12
12184 Flexer, W, 27M 4:07:13
12185 Lestang, J, 47M 4:07:13
12186 Hennessey, B, 42M 4:07:14
12187 Hernandez Leyva, V, 42M 4:07:14
12188 Davies, S, 30F 4:07:14
12189 De Nier, R, 32M 4:07:14
12190 Klein, M, 55M 4:07:14
12191 Neidert, G, 41M 4:07:15
12192 Calimer Jr, H, 51M 4:07:15
12193 Haberfeld, C, 28F 4:07:15
12194 Kaempfen, V, 48M 4:07:15
12195 Winnips, T, 30F 4:07:15
12196 Eliassen, T, 33M 4:07:15
12197 Young, C, 49M 4:07:15
12198 D'Angelo, S, 35M 4:07:16
12199 Carson, C, 24M 4:07:16
12200 Okuna, M, 42M 4:07:16
12201 Mellor, P, 36M 4:07:17
12202 Davis, C, 40M 4:07:17
12203 Henriot, M, 37F 4:07:17
12204 Ng, W, 29M 4:07:17
12205 Colome Miro, A, 39M 4:07:17
12206 Ludwig, P, 51M 4:07:17
12207 Schittecatte, P, 27M 4:07:18
12208 Salvagno, K, 36F 4:07:18
12209 Van De Voorde, C, 30M 4:07:18
12210 Lesser, E, 41F 4:07:18
12211 Cleij, B, 40M 4:07:18
12212 Houzet, J, 26M 4:07:18
12213 Lezy, G, 33M 4:07:18
12214 Den Drijver, R, 47M 4:07:18
12215 Hamminga, A, 40M 4:07:18
12216 Naumann, M, 26M 4:07:18
12217 Mura, L, 32M 4:07:18
12218 Cielak, A, 34M 4:07:18
12219 Kaempfer, W, 53M 4:07:19
12220 Brooker, B, 34M 4:07:19
12221 Mihalko, J, 36M 4:07:19
12222 Childs, G, 60M 4:07:19
12223 Panton, C, 53M 4:07:19
12224 Shott, C, 34F 4:07:19
12225 Ray*, B, 24M 4:07:19
12226 De Haas, R, 37M 4:07:20
12227 Putz, P, 50M 4:07:20
12228 Welsh, T, 29M 4:07:20
12229 Lagrange, A, 33M 4:07:20
12230 Rossow, R, 36F 4:07:20
12231 Arnaud, D, 33M 4:07:21
12232 Jordan, D, 39F 4:07:21
12233 Levitz, J, 24M 4:07:21
12234 Cohen, S, 34M 4:07:21
12235 Roguier, G, 30M 4:07:22
12236 Blanchi, J, 28M 4:07:22
12237 Stassinet, M, 46F 4:07:22
12238 Bonczek, M, 24M 4:07:22
12239 Gautron, I, 28F4:07:22
12240 Guasti, P, 32M 4:07:22
12241 Taira, A, 31M 4:07:22
12242 Sandberg, U, 35M 4:07:23
12243 Guanter, T, 34M 4:07:23
12244 Olthoff, M, 37M 4:07:23
12245 Martinez, M, 45M 4:07:23
12246 Colomines, M, 40M 4:07:24
12247 Willams, C, 44F 4:07:24
12248 Oxley, S, 38F 4:07:24
12249 Raudrant, D, 38M 4:07:24
12250 Cornelius, N, 32F 4:07:24
12251 Bruun, D, 38M 4:07:25
12252 Daniel, J, 56M4:07:25
12253 Cornelius, S, 36M 4:07:25
12254 Bailey, J, 24M 4:07:25
12255 Rojas, R, 41M 4:07:25
12256 Jennings, R, 38M 4:07:25
12257 Furst, J, 26M 4:07:25
12258 Jennings, C, 41M 4:07:26
12259 Typhaigne, B, 48M 4:07:26
12260 Mueller, H, 47M 4:07:26
12261 Foster, B, 28M 4:07:26
12262 Levine, N, 42M 4:07:26
12263 Danthon, P, 49M 4:07:26
12264 Condon Jr., H, 25M 4:07:27
12265 Blissert, V, 30F 4:07:27
12266 VanDyke, C, 25M 4:07:27
12267 Lawrence, B, 29M 4:07:27
12268 Dickinson, D, 32M 4:07:27
12269 White, E, 27F 4:07:27
12270 Vandaele, P, 28M 4:07:28
12271 Babashak, J, 22M 4:07:28
12272 Rodriguez, R, 30M 4:07:28
12273 Namur, T, 30M 4:07:28
12274 Clausen, J, 54M 4:07:28
12275 Slapa Jr, F, 30M 4:07:28
12276 Luethi, P, 53M 4:07:28
12277 Vidal, H, 31M 4:07:29
12278 Loughran, R, 37M 4:07:29
12279 Dube, D, 41M 4:07:29
12280 Paladino, C, 28M 4:07:30
12281 Strobaugh, R, 43M 4:07:30
12282 Holland, T, 36M 4:07:30
12283 Silgado, J, 42M 4:07:30
12284 Martinez, J, 34M 4:07:30
12285 Graca, R, 53M 4:07:30
12286 Jensen, G, 25M 4:07:31
12287 Carney, K, 29M 4:07:31
12288 Lian, C, 36M 4:07:31
12289 Fitzgerald, S, 28M 4:07:31
12290 Crocker, R, 28M 4:07:31
12291 Gooijer, R, 31M 4:07:31
12292 Rabl, B, 37F 4:07:32
12293 Haycook, L, 40F 4:07:32
12294 Mignot, D, 31M 4:07:32
12295 Fales, J, 29M 4:07:32
12296 Steffe, W, 35M 4:07:33
12297 Gunn, S, 39M 4:07:33
12298 Kanazawa, M, 29F 4:07:33
12299 Torre, P, 52M 4:07:33
12300 Ringenbach, A, 63M 4:07:33
12301 Boyer, B, 35M 4:07:34
12302 Moore, J, 44M4:07:34
12303 Thompson, E, 28M 4:07:34
12304 Bostich, D, 42M 4:07:34
12305 Jimmerskog, S, 36F 4:07:34
12306 Lamarre, M, 48M 4:07:34
12307 Andersen, D, 33M 4:07:35
12308 Jones, S, 37M 4:07:35
12309 Zahlten, F, 58M 4:07:35
12310 Blair, S, 31M 4:07:35
12311 Weinstein, B, 43M 4:07:36
12312 Rinella, J, 29M 4:07:36
12313 Gorelow, J, 34M 4:07:36
12314 Purvis, J, 27F 4:07:36
12315 Osby, T, 27M4:07:36
12316 Dejonghe, R, 45M 4:07:36
12317 Young, N, 39F 4:07:36
12318 Carbury, J, 42M 4:07:36
12319 Diamond, G, 37M 4:07:37
12320 Zaugg, M, 31M 4:07:37
12321 Lavelle, K, 46M 4:07:37
12322 Charrier, J, 32M 4:07:37
12323 Bonnafous, L, 46F 4:07:37
12324 Berger, V, 41F 4:07:37
12325 Pinkus, D, 61M 4:07:38
12326 Derville, F, 32M 4:07:38
12327 McEvoy, T, 44M 4:07:38
12328 Lathiere, P, 49M4:07:38
12329 Storm, K, 52M 4:07:39
12330 Love, T, 39M 4:07:39
12331 Weeks, B, 31M 4:07:39
12332 Lavorini, B, 28M 4:07:39
12333 Arias, R, 34M 4:07:39
12334 Nuesell, C, 26M 4:07:39
12335 Villagomez Ledesma, O, 56M 4:07:40
12336 Weselcouch, J, 41M 4:07:40
12337 Hessen, J, 32M 4:07:40
12338 Bleesz, E, 63M 4:07:40
12339 Maessen, A, 55M 4:07:41
12340 Levy, R, 29M 4:07:41
12341 Bardiau, C, 46M 4:07:41
12342 Simons, C, 32M 4:07:41
12343 Auyang, M, 39M 4:07:41
12344 Cooper, D, 36M 4:07:42
12345 Heinzmann, M, 30M 4:07:42
12346 Garcia Luna, P, 44M 4:07:42
12347 Trevino Arizpe, S, 32M 4:07:42
12348 Travis, J, 34M 4:07:42
12349 O'Connell, R, 36M 4:07:42
12350 Young, B, 27M 4:07:42
12351 Schacknow, P, 38M 4:07:42
12352 Dege, C, 31M 4:07:43
12353 Gilkey, S, 38M 4:07:43
12354 Moir, B, 33M 4:07:43
12355 Van Der Stel, A, 38M 4:07:43
12356 De Weerd, A, 38M 4:07:43
12357 Lewis, K, 38M 4:07:44
12358 McGuinness, C, 30M 4:07:44
12359 Rosso, L, 35M 4:07:44
12360 Alzuru, G, 47M 4:07:45
12361 Jorgensen, M, 30M 4:07:45
12362 Breit, M, 44M 4:07:46
12363 Kelley, B, 25M 4:07:46
12364 Hendon, S, 30M 4:07:46
12365 Molsbergen, E, 38M 4:07:46
12366 Amaral, D, 31F 4:07:46
12367 Levaillant, O, 25M 4:07:47
12368 Eickman, K, 29M 4:07:47
12369 Mancini, N, 45M 4:07:47
12370 Nice, M, 25M 4:07:47
12371 Harrison, J, 28M 4:07:47
12372 Elliott, D, 41M 4:07:47
12373 Gerst, W, 56M 4:07:47
12374 Kellener Jr, R, 33M 4:07:47
12375 Zale, D, 40M 4:07:47
12376 Eyraud, N, 41F 4:07:47
12377 Craig, G, 52M 4:07:47
12378 Donini, M, 44M 4:07:48
12379 Sullivan, M, 26F 4:07:48
12380 Vaska, A, 38M 4:07:49
12381 Martin, J, 40M 4:07:50
12382 Cufar, B, 26M 4:07:50
12383 Linett, M, 47M 4:07:50
12384 Van Dooren-Mesman, E, 38F 4:07:50
12385 Maiorano, J, 39M 4:07:50
12386 Van Dooren, M, 38M4:07:51
12387 Stefanoni, V, 35M 4:07:51
12388 Bagby, J, 22F 4:07:51
12389 Suppan, M, 36M 4:07:51
12390 Hebert, G, 33M 4:07:51
12391 McDiarmid, J, 28M 4:07:52
12392 Delmastro, T, 36M 4:07:52
12393 Suppan, C, 33F 4:07:52
12394 Yates, J, 41M 4:07:52
12395 Becker, J, 54M 4:07:53
12396 Kitahara, K, 67M 4:07:53
12397 Des Rosiers, S, 34F 4:07:54
12398 Seton, R, 42M 4:07:54
12399 Lesperance, L, 34M 4:07:55
12400 Loung, D, 48M 4:07:55
12401 Salow, J, 48M 4:07:56
12402 Lopes, F, 45M 4:07:56
12403 Dubray, G, 53M 4:07:57
12404 Earle, P, 24M 4:07:57
12405 Ritz Jr., J, 49M 4:07:57
12406 Stephens, A, 29M 4:07:57
12407 Platt, W, 31F 4:07:57
12408 Rodriguez Zamudio, M, 40M 4:07:58
12409 Sharp, I, 39M 4:07:58
12410 Lenkner, R, 30F 4:07:58
12411 Cassedy, M, 40M 4:07:59
12412 Truet, T, 42M 4:07:59
12413 Boland, A, 28F 4:07:59
12414 Hegge, S, 70M 4:08:00
12415 Payne, M, 23M 4:08:00
12416 Chapiro, D, 33M 4:08:00
12417 Mol, P, 36M 4:08:00
12418 Lee, K, 38M 4:08:00
12419 Hirota, J, 44M 4:08:01
12420 Oliveira Junior, G, 48M 4:08:01
12421 Morel, D, 37M 4:08:01
12422 Pettersson, G, 50M 4:08:02
12423 Tieppo, G, 29F 4:08:02
12424 Cardis, G, 38M 4:08:02
12425 Hickey, J, 27M 4:08:02
12426 Coughlin, W, 37M 4:08:02
12427 Lienard, P, 31M 4:08:02
12428 Bear, J, 43M 4:08:02
12429 Kleinberg, N, 48M 4:08:02
12430 Van Den Biggelaar, H, 44M 4:08:02
12431 Trunk, E, 47M 4:08:03
12432 Miller, R, 47M 4:08:03
12433 Bleas, B, 46M 4:08:03
12434 Vorauer, H, 38M 4:08:04
12435 Mosnes, T, 47M 4:08:04
12436 Delannoy, B, 30M 4:08:04
12437 Reisecker, H, 25M 4:08:04
12438 Patino, F, 32M 4:08:04
12439 Pump, E, 47M 4:08:04
12440 Tickner, N, 46M 4:08:05
12441 Bonnet, M, 36M 4:08:06
12442 Brown, P, 38F 4:08:06
12443 Nigri, C, 46M 4:08:06
12444 Mancone, J, 39M 4:08:06
12445 Luconi, M, 33M 4:08:06
12446 Gerritse, J, 43M 4:08:06
12447 Hughes, G, 31M 4:08:06
12448 Perezgomes Davila, G, 33M 4:08:06
12449 Clymer, M, 29F 4:08:06
12450 Buckmann, P, 54M 4:08:06
12451 Lowenthal, J, 35F 4:08:07
12452 Brandenburg, H, 32F 4:08:07
12453 Reimann, S, 48M 4:08:08
12454 Higbee, P, 39M 4:08:08
12455 Schilders, N, 33M4:08:08
12456 Mottus, J, 57F 4:08:08
12457 Lorek, S, 32M 4:08:09
12458 Schneider, A, 32M 4:08:09
12459 Latorre, T, 33M 4:08:09
12460 Arias Alvarez, D, 44M 4:08:09
12461 Caruana, M, 30M 4:08:09
12462 Leahy, E, 32M 4:08:09
12463 Haugen, J, 30M 4:08:09
12464 Spicer, F, 46M 4:08:09
12465 Alcocer Medinilla, A, 31M 4:08:09
12466 Thieser, A, 40M 4:08:10
12467 Ehlen, W, 47M 4:08:10
12468 Millet, A, 44M 4:08:10
12469 Grieco, S, 56M 4:08:10
12470 Couzzi, R, 42M 4:08:10
12471 Motomiya, H, 57M 4:08:10
12472 Perales, A, 55M 4:08:11
12473 Geertsma, W, 49F 4:08:11
12474 Veerwater, J, 53M 4:08:11
12475 Warner, S, 48M 4:08:12
12476 Wienner, T, 41M 4:08:12
12477 Andrews, K, 29F 4:08:13
12478 Borrelli, F, 43M 4:08:14
12479 Franckowiak, T, 25F 4:08:14
12480 Rodriguez, J, 33M 4:08:14
12481 Visser, M, 55M 4:08:15
12482 Jensen, P, 30M 4:08:15
12483 Walsh, M, 43F 4:08:16
12484 Dieulafait, D, 41F 4:08:16
12485 Galgani, J, 47M 4:08:16
12486 Schmidtbauer, H, 48M 4:08:17
12487 Esfandiari, M, 37M 4:08:18
12488 Seitz, W, 44M 4:08:18
12489 Souza Morales, R, 41M 4:08:18
12490 Kelly, H, 45M 4:08:20
12491 Mirich, P, 43M 4:08:20
12492 Graham, M, 49M 4:08:20
12493 Biggar, D, 47M 4:08:20
12494 Atkinson M.D., J, 43M 4:08:20
12495 Pratt, E, 34F 4:08:20
12496 Gueterman, J, 24M 4:08:21
12497 Franke, J, 22M 4:08:21
12498 Litvack, D, 35M 4:08:21
12499 Sengers, M, 26M 4:08:21
12500 Whelan, T, 32M 4:08:21
12501 Elliott, B, 29M 4:08:21
12502 Rodriguez, F, 37M 4:08:22
12503 Adipietro, F, 36M 4:08:22
12504 Kocsis, D, 47M 4:08:22
12505 Trinkle, P, 54M 4:08:22
12506 Pallotta, O, 39M 4:08:22
12507 Fodstad, M, 36M 4:08:23
12508 Roldan, D, 42M 4:08:23
12509 Dueck, P, 42M 4:08:24
12510 Robinson, D, 44M 4:08:24
12511 Dikeman, S, 31M 4:08:24
12512 Mason, T, 41M 4:08:25
12513 Feenick, J, 38M 4:08:25
12514 Emerson, B, 32M 4:08:26
12515 Kleyne Snuverink, P, 40M 4:08:27
12516 Johansen, B, 50M 4:08:27
12517 Pietsch, C, 33F 4:08:28
12518 Couvreur, N, 26F 4:08:28
12519 Stemmermann, A, 36M 4:08:28
12520 Nintemann, T, 28M 4:08:28
12521 Parr, P, 27M 4:08:28
12522 Westlake, R, 30M 4:08:28
12523 Postadan, R, 25M 4:08:28
12524 Bautsch, R, 38M 4:08:29
12525 Bini, S, 30M 4:08:29
12526 Spray, M, 33M 4:08:29
12527 Di Franco, V, 54M 4:08:30
12528 Bernardi, E, 20F 4:08:30
12529 Luiten, J, 47M 4:08:30
12530 Benedetti, M, 40M 4:08:30
12531 Waaijer, A, 47M 4:08:30
12532 Brophy, P, 54M 4:08:31
12533 Zeising MD, M, 41M 4:08:32
12534 Grannan, S, 31M 4:08:32
12535 Amendola, N, 44M 4:08:32
12536 Ferraiuolo, J, 42M 4:08:33
12537 Palacios Naranjo, F, 60M 4:08:33
12538 Heckfuss, A, 22F 4:08:33
12539 Stuveling, L, 44M 4:08:34
12540 Denny, M, 35M 4:08:34
12541 Silver, A, 29F 4:08:34
12542 Delgado, J, 47M 4:08:34
12543 Gontier, B, 38M 4:08:34
12544 Rozier, A, 38F 4:08:34
12545 Rangel Flores, R, 30M 4:08:34
12546 Guntenhoener, K, 56M 4:08:35
12547 Murphy, C, 29M 4:08:35
12548 Balderas Ruiz, G, 43M 4:08:35
12549 Schins, C, 24F 4:08:35
12550 Dunaif, A, 30M 4:08:35
12551 Bryar, P, 42M 4:08:35
12552 Rockcastle, S, 29F 4:08:35
12553 Wray, B, 47M 4:08:36
12554 Roeker, A, 35F 4:08:36
12555 Cornegge, P, 48M 4:08:36
12556 Escotet, J, 35M 4:08:36
12557 Spruit, C, 49M4:08:36
12558 Sendres, C, 62M 4:08:37
12559 O'Brien, D, 35M 4:08:37
12560 Ribeiro, C, 44M 4:08:37
12561 Saidman, Z, 45M 4:08:37
12562 Hokin, A, 25F 4:08:38
12563 Manocchio, V, 40F 4:08:38
12564 Hilarion, J, 26M 4:08:38
12565 Rhoads, W, 24M 4:08:39
12566 Lavrit, Y, 36M 4:08:39
12567 Becker, J, 47M 4:08:39
12568 Penazzi, A, 51M 4:08:39
12569 Barako, R, 49M 4:08:39
12570 Attard, D, 40M 4:08:40
12571 Del Grosso, M, 40F 4:08:40
12572 Haeussler, R, 39M 4:08:40
12573 Van Rijn, R, 48M 4:08:40
12574 Mahler, S, 28F 4:08:40
12575 Delgado Gonzalez, F, 32M 4:08:40
12576 Devonish, P, 33M 4:08:40
12577 Zerpa, Y, 43F 4:08:41
12578 Kantor, S, 36M 4:08:41
12579 Pope, M, 28M 4:08:41
12580 Slijkhuis, F, 39M 4:08:41
12581 Boehmer, R, 44M 4:08:42
12582 De Sa, A, 53M 4:08:42
12583 Webb, S, 31F 4:08:43
12584 Werner, G, 47M 4:08:43
12585 Henze, H, 37M 4:08:44
12586 Defrasne, H, 37M 4:08:44
12587 Pressly, B, 28F 4:08:44
12588 Mueller, S, 27F 4:08:44
12589 Bagnarello, M, 38M 4:08:44
12590 Rigali, A, 33F 4:08:45
12591 Roth, L, 40M 4:08:45
12592 McCoy, S, 35F 4:08:45
12593 Sipes, L, 31F 4:08:45
12594 Mendez, C, 53M 4:08:46
12595 Cabral, R, 42M 4:08:46
12596 Cimaschi, A, 38F 4:08:47
12597 Sidwell, J, 47F 4:08:47
12598 Cohen, D, 30F 4:08:48
12599 Serrano, C, 37F 4:08:48
12600 McGee, C, 27M 4:08:48
12601 Newton, D, 24M 4:08:49
12602 Metje, G, 33M 4:08:49
12603 Serra, N, 42M 4:08:49
12604 Casey, P, 46M 4:08:49
12605 Herbst, C, 34F 4:08:49
12606 Schleicher, H, 34M 4:08:49
12607 Levitte, O, 31M 4:08:50
12608 Froboese, H, 48M 4:08:50
12609 Proietti, L, 30M 4:08:51
12610 Beckman, G, 37M 4:08:51
12611 Giovanelli, E, 39M 4:08:51
12612 Webster, C, 35M 4:08:51
12613 Porcedda, O, 30M 4:08:51
12614 Kavanaugh, P, 26M 4:08:51
12615 Gressler, C, 45F 4:08:51
12616Scheurman, S, 45M 4:08:51
12617 Collins, K, 26M 4:08:52
12618 Watkins, L, 40F 4:08:52
12619 Yanase, S, 26F 4:08:52
12620 Kavanaugh, M, 27M 4:08:53
12621 Golden, L, 31F 4:08:53
12622 Hirschey, K, 34M 4:08:53
12623 Gerardo De Los Santos, R, 39F 4:08:53
12624 Sullivan, D, 36M 4:08:53
12625 Michel, D, 19M 4:08:53
12626 Joannides, C, 40M 4:08:53
12627 Ross, W, 28M 4:08:53
12628 Redman, B, 38F 4:08:53
12629 Develly, M, 31M 4:08:54
12630 Moreno, J, 33M 4:08:54
12631 Caceres, D, 28M 4:08:54
12632 Mecklem, N, 50M 4:08:54
12633 Lomelin Ogarrio, J, 37M 4:08:55
12634 Steatham, R, 42M 4:08:55
12635 Cannons, A, 36M 4:08:55
12636 Beckstead, C, 34F 4:08:55
12637 Joby, S, 43M 4:08:56
12638 Martinez, W, 49M 4:08:56
12639 King, B, 54M 4:08:57
12640 Follesoe, O, 47M 4:08:57
12641 Manner, S, 34F 4:08:57
12642 Handy, S, 28F 4:08:58
12643 Bailey, S, 25M 4:08:58
12644 Salzenstein, G, 52M 4:08:58
12645 Moreau, P, 43M 4:08:58
12646 Sorgatz, E, 43M 4:08:59
12647 Lopes, F, 36F 4:08:59
12648 Pickhard, H, 47M 4:08:59
12649 Kurtis, S, 44F 4:08:59
12650 Sayasith, W, 32M 4:08:59
12651 Sierra, C, 37M 4:08:59
12652 Schardt, C, 29F 4:08:59
12653 Kumm, J, 34M 4:08:59
12654 Gellman, K, 28M 4:08:59
12655 Georgi, B, 29M 4:08:59
12656 White, V, 26F 4:08:59
12657 Bickford, N, 39F 4:08:59
12658 Gutteridge, G, 33M 4:08:59
12659 Thouin, S, 29F 4:08:59
12660 Guzman, F, 52M 4:08:59
12661 Marpe, W, 43M 4:08:59
12662 Zweiman, D, 49M 4:09:00
12663 Sanford, J, 48M 4:09:00
12664 Mishkin, J, 46M 4:09:00
12665 Lefebvre, M, 25M 4:09:00
12666 Obonaga, S, 44F 4:09:01
12667 Lanzuise, V, 69M 4:09:01
12668 Bleichman, S, 46F 4:09:02
12669 Rabenstine, J, 35M 4:09:03
12670 O'Neill, T, 33M 4:09:03
12671 Doucet, H, 42F 4:09:03
12672 Spedicato, M, 59M 4:09:04
12673 Kempler, P, 44M 4:09:04
12674 Rowe, C, 20F 4:09:04
12675 Portzgen, P, 37M 4:09:04
12676 Ryser, L, 55M 4:09:05
12677 Atkins, E, 28F 4:09:05
12678 Knoop, P, 44M 4:09:05
12679 Illig, K, 36F 4:09:05
12680 Krick, B, 51M 4:09:05
12681 Hahn, B, 42M 4:09:05
12682 Quinn, T, 37M 4:09:05
12683 Kloehn, C, 47F 4:09:06
12684 Hall, B, 33M 4:09:06
12685 Page, S, 40M 4:09:06
12686 Rodriguez, R, 38M 4:09:06
12687 Olsen, E, 30M 4:09:07
12688 Fernandez, A, 41M 4:09:07
12689 Herrejon, A, 36M 4:09:07
12690 Van Beek, A, 48M 4:09:08
12691 Keller, P, 29M 4:09:08
12692 Veijola, H, 37M 4:09:08
12693 Loeters, H, 42M 4:09:09
12694 Mullick, D, 42M 4:09:09
12695 Doladille, E, 37M 4:09:09
12696 Plebani, P, 54M 4:09:09
12697 Rodriguez, R, 34M 4:09:10
12698 Nishikido, K, 56M 4:09:10
12699 Garcia Garcia, A, 43F 4:09:10
12700Gormley, B, 38M 4:09:10
12701 Larsen, H, 43M 4:09:10
12702 Moreno Martinez, R, 39M 4:09:10
12703 Irigoyen, P, 38M 4:09:11
12704 Dumesnil, A, 42M 4:09:11
12705 Nasta, F, 30M 4:09:11
12706 Goldberg, K, 30M 4:09:11
12707 Toohey, P, 25M 4:09:11
12708 Huck, P, 32M 4:09:12
12709 Bongiorno, F, 51M 4:09:12
12710 Verbeek, T, 40M 4:09:12
12711 Treguier, G, 49M 4:09:13
12712 Arpadi, S, 41M 4:09:13
12713 Begley, R, 32M 4:09:13
12714 Philippe, H, 46M 4:09:14
12715 Drewett, D, 59M 4:09:14
12716 Laperna, P, 43M 4:09:15
12717 Smits, H, 44M 4:09:15
12718 Hanna, R, 58M 4:09:15
12719 Voigt, D, 42M4:09:15
12720 Kachmar, K, 27M 4:09:16
12721 Bily, M, 47M 4:09:16
12722 Russell, R, 32M 4:09:16
12723 Smeke, S, 36M 4:09:16
12724 Rowan, J, 34F 4:09:17
12725 Pierce, A, 35F 4:09:17
12726 Contri, C, 53M 4:09:18
12727 Lindfors, A, 27F 4:09:19
12728 Laine, M, 49M 4:09:19
12729 Volker, N, 44M 4:09:19
12730 Herrera, D, 37F 4:09:19
12731 Ornstein, M, 60M 4:09:20
12732 Amador, R, 23F 4:09:20
12733 Turek, T, 54M 4:09:20
12734 Mason Sr, D, 54M 4:09:20
12735 Van De Velde, P, 40M 4:09:20
12736 Selig, K, 43M 4:09:20
12737Shepley, D, 46F 4:09:20
12738 Montilla, A, 30M 4:09:21
12739 Sentlinger, J, 29M 4:09:21
12740 Goetsch, F, 29M 4:09:21
12741 Bullock, S, 28M 4:09:21
12742 Seidel, J, 39M 4:09:22
12743 Kajiyama, K, 47M 4:09:22
12744 Camery, B, 37M 4:09:22
12745 Sisto, J, 43F 4:09:22
12746 Munscher, R, 52M 4:09:22
12747 Watson, D, 33M 4:09:22
12748 Thompson, C, 33F 4:09:22
12749 Lofing, M, 38M 4:09:23
12750 Keating, J, 36M 4:09:23
12751 Faria, M, 39F 4:09:23
12752 Rath, B, 36F 4:09:24
12753 Martinez Torres, R, 73M 4:09:24
12754 Atkinson, R, 36M 4:09:25
12755 Teigland, D, 28M 4:09:25
12756 Schaum, A, 36F 4:09:25
12757 Eide, L, 26F 4:09:26
12758 Kleinhans, F, 28M 4:09:26
12759 Cawen, K, 37M 4:09:26
12760 DeFrancisci, M, 38M 4:09:26
12761 Kelly, M, 37M 4:09:26
12762 Artuso, A, 42M 4:09:26
12763 Grabinski, L, 44M 4:09:27
12764 Henke, W, 45M 4:09:27
12765 Pasquali, P, 66M 4:09:27
12766 Fitchett, G, 31M 4:09:27
12767 Copland, M, 45F 4:09:27
12768 Schneiders, J, 51M 4:09:27
12769 Godde, A, 34M 4:09:28
12770 Mackinnon, C, 39M 4:09:28
12771 Allard, D, 47M 4:09:28
12772 Veyrie, P, 27M 4:09:28
12773 Quinn, J, 47M 4:09:28
12774 Bousquet, P, 30M 4:09:29
12775 Jouan, D, 47M 4:09:29
12776 Hirschberg, D, 36M 4:09:29
12777 Pocci, P, 59M 4:09:29
12778 Wilson, R, 50M 4:09:29
12779 Davison, C, 25F 4:09:30
12780 O'Malley, L, 44F 4:09:30
12781 Ralph, C, 43F 4:09:30
12782 Reich, L, 52M 4:09:30
12783 Hawkshaw, B, 26M 4:09:30
12784 Hardus, P, 46M 4:09:30
12785 Girault, I, 25F 4:09:31
12786 Moreno Guajardo, M, 45M 4:09:31
12787 Pittet, E, 48M 4:09:31
12788 Bez, M, 32M 4:09:31
12789 Pitre, G, 48M 4:09:32
12790 Fortunato, L, 46M 4:09:33
12791 Dee, J, 49M 4:09:34
12792 Farkash, I, 19F 4:09:35
12793 Masachs Guberna, J, 42M 4:09:35
12794 Banwell, C, 31F 4:09:35
12795 Radziemski, M, 33M 4:09:35
12796 Wroblewski, J, 46M 4:09:35
12797 Coleman, D, 25F 4:09:35
12798 Richard, J, 38M 4:09:36
12799 Olson, R, 61M 4:09:36
12800 Jakeway, D, 42F 4:09:36
12801 Kroop, H, 60M 4:09:37
12802 Yienger, R, 36M 4:09:37
12803 Dillman, C, 29M 4:09:37
12804 Bax, D, 29M 4:09:38
12805 Sweeney, S, 29M 4:09:38
12806 Collari, M, 27F 4:09:38
12807 Carbuto, M, 41M 4:09:39
12808 Tralli, D, 38M 4:09:39
12809 Wiedmann, E, 35M 4:09:39
12810 Lion, R, 41M4:09:39
12811 Friel, J, 43M 4:09:39
12812 Bailhache, C, 23F 4:09:39
12813 Bisceglia, A, 35M 4:09:39
12814 Cronan, S, 37M 4:09:40
12815 Sirica, D, 56M 4:09:40
12816 Pirozzi, R, 50M 4:09:41
12817 Wessel, S, 40M 4:09:41
12818 Loughran, R, 33M 4:09:41
12819 Schulz, N, 30M 4:09:42
12820 Marsa, A, 46F 4:09:43
12821 Anderson, J, 33M 4:09:43
12822 Reiter, K, 40M 4:09:43
12823 O'Shaughnessy, S, 41M 4:09:44
12824 Berg, J, 40M 4:09:44
12825 Moriarty, M, 38M 4:09:44
12826 Reiter, M, 36F 4:09:44
12827 Alario, F, 28M 4:09:45
12828 Chiappini, A, 28M 4:09:46
12829 Charette, E, 44M 4:09:46
12830 Davis, B, 35M 4:09:46
12831 Richardson, M, 53F 4:09:47
12832Dien, D, 43M 4:09:47
12833 Henry, R, 39M 4:09:47
12834 Terry, L, 53M 4:09:48
12835 Roberts, R, 47M 4:09:48
12836 Simonsen, L, 27F 4:09:48
12837 Ferguson, M, 27F 4:09:49
12838 Warmerdam, L, 39M 4:09:49
12839 Aptheker, S, 46M 4:09:50
12840 Ortega, F, 36M 4:09:50
12841 Dereymaeker, B, 38M 4:09:50
12842 Thompson, P, 25F 4:09:50
12843 Thibault, D, 39M 4:09:51
12844 Croot, D, 41M 4:09:51
12845 Dee, R, 30M 4:09:51
12846 Duthoo, C, 48M 4:09:51
12847 Jones, R, 40M 4:09:51
12848 Oimizzi, S, 27F 4:09:51
12849 Coleman, M, 39M4:09:52
12850 Samudosky, A, 50M 4:09:52
12851 Kokes, J, 50M 4:09:52
12852 D'Arecca, J, 24M 4:09:52
12853 Roth, S, 25M 4:09:52
12854 Stekelenburg, A, 30M 4:09:53
12855 Cayanas, J, 34M 4:09:53
12856 Hearn, J, 36M 4:09:53
12857 Wanko, W, 31M 4:09:53
12858 Portugall, O, 33M 4:09:53
12859 Schulz, H, 37M 4:09:53
12860 Joziak, M, 33F 4:09:53
12861 Flood, T, 42M 4:09:54
12862 Barbara, A, 35M 4:09:54
12863 Hilgers, J, 28M 4:09:54
12864 Hilemn, D, 32M 4:09:54
12865 Andre, A, 49M 4:09:54
12866 Morris Sr, D, 45M 4:09:54
12867 Skarveland, B, 45M 4:09:54
12868 Daley, S, 29F 4:09:55
12869Bujalski, S, 43M 4:09:55
12870 Laan, R, 43M 4:09:55
12871 Tauber, B, 28M 4:09:56
12872 Monsonis, F, 44M 4:09:56
12873 Fuzillier, G, 49M 4:09:56
12874 Harris, P, 37M 4:09:56
12875 Hearn, M, 30F 4:09:56
12876 Hayden, W, 55M 4:09:56
12877 Levy, A, 32M 4:09:57
12878 Van Drooge, H, 49M 4:09:57
12879 Kitzler, K, 37M 4:09:57
12880 Housen, J, 37M 4:09:57
12881 Knetemann, G, 43M 4:09:57
12882 Engelsma, J, 37M 4:09:58
12883 Profaci, J, 30M 4:09:58
12884 Saunders, D, 43M 4:09:58
12885 Knapp, L, 30F 4:09:58
12886 McAfee, S, 29M 4:09:58
12887 Voehl, D, 29F 4:09:58
12888 Klopp, J, 40M 4:09:58
12889 Huntsinger, L, 30F 4:09:58
12890 Sullivan, S, 26M 4:09:59
12891 Lewis, A, 44M 4:09:59
12892 Hughes, D, 25M 4:09:59
12893 Veegh, C, 31M 4:09:59
12894 Landwehr, H, 37M 4:09:59
12895 Piedrasanta, L, 48M 4:09:59
12896 Pierre, P, 29M 4:09:59
12897 Quinn, E, 57F 4:09:59
12898 Proust, P, 29M 4:09:59
12899 Sulc, J, 39M 4:10:00
12900 DePalma, K, 26F 4:10:00
12901 Patrick, K, 29M 4:10:00
12902 Gilviskos, C, 23F 4:10:00
12903 De Vries, M, 27M 4:10:01
12904 Sailer, T, 35M 4:10:01
12905 Evans, S, 30F 4:10:01
12906 Di Carlo, G, 51M 4:10:01
12907 Billie, L, 42F 4:10:01
12908 Dodde, J, 52M 4:10:02
12909 Byl, H, 42M 4:10:02
12910 Taeuber, M, 52M 4:10:02
12911 Billie, R, 43M 4:10:03
12912 Minard, J, 24M 4:10:03
12913 Monaghan, P, 28M 4:10:03
12914 Ruppert, J, 43M 4:10:03
12915 Diederich, J, 42F 4:10:03
12916 Boffelli, M, 43M 4:10:04
12917 Dodrill II, J, 28M 4:10:04
12918 Schluter, H, 27M 4:10:04
12919 Grello, M, 29F 4:10:04
12920 Banks, A, 26M 4:10:04
12921 Milne, I, 43M 4:10:04
12922 Wai-Shek, T, 46M 4:10:05
12923 Beckmeyer, J, 28M 4:10:05
12924 Heindl, U, 30F 4:10:06
12925 Martin, R, 63M 4:10:06
12926 Seber, H, 33M 4:10:06
12927 Fennelly, D, 33M 4:10:06
12928 Nadasdi, M, 32M 4:10:07
12929 McInerney, M, 49M 4:10:07
12930 Winter, L, 28F 4:10:07
12931 Bjorklund, J, 41M 4:10:08
12932 Larsen, L, 40F 4:10:08
12933 Horn, J, 45M 4:10:08
12934 Brown, J, 53F 4:10:09
12935 Denslow, M, 47M 4:10:09
12936 Egge, O, 28M 4:10:09
12937 Grootaers, C, 32F 4:10:09
12938 Jankovits, T, 37M 4:10:10
12939 Ruiz, A, 42M 4:10:10
12940 Dupuis, F, 50M 4:10:10
12941 Gordon, R, 36M 4:10:10
12942 Logue, K, 38M 4:10:11
12943 Nosari, G, 49M 4:10:12
12944 Farquharson, L, 35M 4:10:12
12945 Baer, T, 29M 4:10:12
12946 Sherrington, K, 33M 4:10:12
12947 Condon, N, 37M 4:10:13
12948 Poon, V, 27F 4:10:13
12949 Brawley, M, 34M 4:10:13
12950 Inagaki, S, 34M 4:10:14
12951 Paliwoda, R, 37M 4:10:14
12952 McCarthy, K, 31M 4:10:15
12953 Rodriguez Pulido, J, 42M 4:10:15
12954 Maurer-Faust, C, 41F 4:10:15
12955 Pedersen, A, 32M 4:10:16
12956 Dingus, W, 27F 4:10:16
12957 Slominsky, A, 47M 4:10:16
12958 Schmaeling, H, 37M 4:10:16
12959 Chabay, J, 31M 4:10:16
12960 Peruzy, A, 29M 4:10:16
12961 Collins, M, 37F 4:10:17
12962 Wijnker, M, 26M 4:10:17
12963 Yagi, S, 39M 4:10:17
12964 Laskey, D, 34F 4:10:17
12965 Rader, K, 26M 4:10:17
12966 Kahana, S, 36M 4:10:17
12967 Wallender, T, 41M 4:10:18
12968 Kley, K, 27F 4:10:18
12969 Kent, R, 33M 4:10:18
12970 Wellington, A, 41M 4:10:18
12971Vannucci, R, 25M 4:10:18
12972 Chavez Balderas, R, 56M 4:10:18
12973 Ramirez Irizarry, F, 30M 4:10:19
12974 Fitger, P, 30M 4:10:20
12975 Ulbrich, G, 49F 4:10:20
12976 Beatty, S, 27M 4:10:20
12977 Stickney, D, 33F 4:10:20
12978 Londino, W, 42M 4:10:20
12979 Fuscaldo, D, 45F 4:10:20
12980 Breuer, F, 32M 4:10:21
12981 Michaltsis, Z, 44M 4:10:21
12982 Cohn, J, 37M 4:10:21
12983 Padovich, K, 53M 4:10:21
12984 Newkirk, D, 55M 4:10:22
12985 Spano, M, 38F 4:10:22
12986 Zellner, P, 40M 4:10:22
12987 Abel, J, 53M 4:10:22
12988 Quinterno, R, 48M 4:10:22
12989 Kapellu, H, 48M 4:10:22
12990 Rojas, I, 37M 4:10:23
12991 Thomasson, M, 30M 4:10:23
12992 Sanger, S, 43M 4:10:23
12993 Cabrera, A, 41M 4:10:23
12994 Monahan, B, 38M 4:10:23
12995 Kitograd, J, 29M 4:10:23
12996 Lustri, G, 40M 4:10:24
12997 Melse, P, 34M 4:10:24
12998 Coen, W, 31M 4:10:24
12999 Basagic III, H, 49M 4:10:24
13000 Krebbers, R, 46M 4:10:24
13001 Koester, S, 45M 4:10:25
13002 Thomas, C, 36M 4:10:25
13003 Manganello, J, 43M 4:10:25
13004 Uttaro, M, 39M 4:10:26
13005 Doerfel, M, 50M 4:10:26
13006 Bergholdt, J, 48M 4:10:27
13007 Masuda, M, 29M 4:10:27
13008 Forte, F, 35M 4:10:27
13009 Rousse, M, 55F 4:10:28
13010 Mousaw, M, 34M 4:10:28
13011 Sanczyk, T, 30M 4:10:29
13012 Simmons, D, 31M 4:10:29
13013 Alvarez, A, 50F 4:10:30
13014 Egues, M, 30M 4:10:30
13015 Chmara, E, 47M 4:10:31
13016 Ellson, J, 56M 4:10:31
13017 Jaedicke, J, 49M 4:10:32
13018 Menke, H, 56M 4:10:32
13019 Tinelli, R, 45M 4:10:32
13020 Blum, E, 26F 4:10:33
13021 Luster, D, 39M 4:10:33
13022 Ainora, C, 41F 4:10:33
13023 Fagin, J, 46M 4:10:33
13024 Goodey, D, 28M 4:10:34
13025 Dorda, C, 47M 4:10:34
13026 Chappuis, F, 51M 4:10:34
13027 Frixe, P, 43F 4:10:34
13028 Hassepass, W, 37M 4:10:35
13029 Ebner, G, 45M 4:10:36
13030 Pucalka, A, 41M 4:10:36
13031 Friedgood, J, 38M 4:10:36
13032 Giovanini, J, 51M 4:10:36
13033 Castellier, J, 45M 4:10:36
13034 Valat, C, 42M 4:10:36
13035 Reilly, E, 26M 4:10:37
13036 Nap, L, 47M 4:10:37
13037 Mossing, D, 29M 4:10:38
13038 Janish, L, 36F 4:10:38
13039 Molina Alanis, E, 55M 4:10:38
13040 Nootenboom, L, 53M 4:10:39
13041 Van Der Brugge, H, 47M 4:10:40
13042 LaFrance, R, 47M 4:10:40
13043 Dealey, P, 43F 4:10:40
13044 Lorimier, G, 53M 4:10:40
13045 Van Croonenborgh, T, 21M 4:10:41
13046 Stoecklin, A, 43M 4:10:41
13047 Ventura, C, 43M 4:10:41
13048 Van Croonenborgh, R, 50M 4:10:41
13049 Umstead, S, 33M 4:10:42
13050 Van Veen, H, 44F 4:10:42
13051 Schuman, K, 36M 4:10:42
13052 Baer, T, 29F 4:10:42
13053 Westenburg, D, 35M 4:10:42
13054 Guilet, M, 48M4:10:42
13055 Johnson, P, 38M 4:10:42
13056 Pedersen, J, 45M 4:10:42
13057 Thomas, N, 39F 4:10:43
13058 Barry, C, 27M 4:10:43
13059 Kirkpatrick, J, 52M 4:10:43
13060 Dolzall, G, 41M 4:10:43
13061 Scates, G, 40M 4:10:43
13062 Roussel, Y, 49M 4:10:43
13063 Deretchin, C, 34F 4:10:43
13064 Turberville, D, 51M 4:10:44
13065 De Bruin, M, 33M 4:10:44
13066 Soerensen, K, 44M 4:10:44
13067 Caraher, K, 41M 4:10:45
13068 Wien, D, 52M 4:10:45
13069 Euskirchen, U, 43M 4:10:45
13070 Duesing, T, 29M 4:10:45
13071 Scaglianti, R, 52M 4:10:45
13072 Russell, J, 55M 4:10:45
13073 Kuiper, J, 33M 4:10:46
13074 Rolloos, E, 24M 4:10:46
13075 Pressman, G, 43M 4:10:46
13076 Hudjetz, A, 23M 4:10:46
13077 Halgrin, D, 45M 4:10:46
13078 Vives, M, 46F 4:10:46
13079 Weinmann, C, 30F 4:10:46
13080 Helbsing, G, 61M 4:10:47
13081 Lodin, H, 31M 4:10:47
13082 McGraw-Carhart, L, 42F 4:10:47
13083 Sarr, C, 26F 4:10:48
13084 Foltz, W, 58M 4:10:48
13085 Muci, A, 61M 4:10:48
13086 Schweickhardt, R, 50M4:10:48
13087 Alastair, N, 35M 4:10:49
13088 Armfelt, J, 40M 4:10:49
13089 Leveque, P, 27M 4:10:49
13090 Mingolello, A, 47M 4:10:49
13091 Bonassi, P, 40M 4:10:49
13092 Morely, M, 38M 4:10:49
13093 Cabrol, P, 27M 4:10:49
13094 Nagel, M, 31M 4:10:49
13095 Blake, R, 30M 4:10:49
13096 Ohmstede, L, 51F 4:10:50
13097 Ross, H, 28M 4:10:51
13098 Talerman, H, 39M 4:10:51
13099 Ward, A, 28F 4:10:51
13100 Maurer, E, 36F 4:10:51
13101 Kaplan, S, 32M 4:10:52
13102 Schwarz, O, 34M 4:10:52
13103 Lecourt, M, 32F 4:10:52
13104 Licata, D, 42M 4:10:53
13105 Nicoll, K, 36F 4:10:53
13106 Pappe, M, 44M 4:10:53
13107 Nales, R, 61F 4:10:54
13108 Hogden, J, 35M 4:10:54
13109 Sawitzki, A, 36M 4:10:54
13110 Szczerbinski, E, 33M 4:10:55
13111 Beal, S, 39M 4:10:55
13112 Cannon, J, 39M 4:10:56
13113 Dirsa, M, 36M 4:10:56
13114 Joergensen, B, 31M 4:10:57
13115 Woods, T, 32M 4:10:57
13116 Bent, R, 41M 4:10:57
13117 Howard, D, 36M 4:10:57
13118 Penalba, J, 42F 4:10:58
13119 Fine, K, 48M4:10:58
13120 Ross, J, 30M 4:10:58
13121 Geissler, W, 54M 4:10:58
13122 Claxton, J, 55M 4:10:59
13123 Adler, M, 32M 4:10:59
13124 Benichou, M, 39F 4:10:59
13125 Rosenstock, E, 42M 4:10:59
13126 Grenner, L, 52M 4:10:59
13127 Zelig, M, 35F 4:10:59
13128 Magaw, W, 33M 4:11:00
13129 Mosca, S, 37M 4:11:00
13130 Schottz, C, 45M 4:11:01
13131 Hornig, P, 27M 4:11:01
13132 Karstensen, K, 38M 4:11:01
13133 King, J, 26M 4:11:02
13134 Kondo, H, 20F 4:11:02
13135 Guttman, B, 36M 4:11:02
13136 Drury, A, 41M 4:11:03
13137 Sparks, P, 32M 4:11:03
13138 Kaufman, J, 43F 4:11:03
13139 Overfelt, D, 30F 4:11:03
13140 Drake, H, 59M 4:11:03
13141 Rohrauer, R, 58M 4:11:03
13142 Sava, S, 40M 4:11:03
13143 Thomas Jr, A, 33M 4:11:03
13144 Gillen, R, 40M 4:11:03
13145 Gordillo, J, 53M 4:11:03
13146 Daly, M, 28M 4:11:03
13147 Passemier, P, 46M 4:11:04
13148 Vangen, F, 42F 4:11:04
13149 Tubach, J, 57M 4:11:04
13150 Torres, A, 27M 4:11:04
13151 Sproul, W, 31M 4:11:05
13152 Rohde, J, 53F 4:11:05
13153 Ahern, T, 40M 4:11:05
13154 Daly, T, 29M 4:11:05
13155 Vura, G, 33M 4:11:07
13156 Maupas, N, 34M 4:11:08
13157Matyas, K, 30M 4:11:08
13158 Duchemin, P, 35M 4:11:08
13159 Van Setten, G, 50M 4:11:09
13160 Mengelkamp, H, 50M 4:11:09
13161 Stryker Jr, F, 41M 4:11:10
13162 Habib, J, 47M 4:11:10
13163 Matturro, A, 31F 4:11:10
13164 Amigo Leon, M, 40M 4:11:10
13165 Kolwelter, G, 43M 4:11:11
13166 Reehn, S, 40M 4:11:11
13167 Roche, K, 29F 4:11:11
13168 Blum, J, 41F 4:11:12
13169 Ruiz Garza, J, 41M 4:11:13
13170 Quitasol, T, 30F 4:11:13
13171 Quitasol, L, 34F 4:11:13
13172 Lopez-Prado, F, 55M 4:11:13
13173 Mofsowitz, M, 29M 4:11:14
13174 Bonfanti, E, 43M 4:11:14
13175 James, E, 29M 4:11:15
13176 Frerichs, R, 34M 4:11:15
13177 Newburgh, J, 52F 4:11:15
13178 Barajas Cruz, C, 54M 4:11:16
13179 Lemon, A, 42M 4:11:16
13180 Delaunois, A, 48M 4:11:17
13181 Collantes, A, 35M 4:11:17
13182 Chatwin, C, 59M 4:11:17
13183 Osran, B, 44M 4:11:17
13184 Brennan, L, 29F 4:11:17
13185 Rosenthal, M, 31M 4:11:18
13186 Sasaki, M, 34M 4:11:18
13187 O'Donnell, D, 27M 4:11:19
13188 Theil, K, 66M 4:11:20
13189 Smith, G, 40M 4:11:20
13190 Flores, R, 39M 4:11:20
13191 Devassine, C, 53M 4:11:21
13192 Suzuki, S, 52M 4:11:21
13193 Hiskes, F, 39M 4:11:21
13194 Hartnett, K, 31M 4:11:21
13195 Goronjic, S, 30F 4:11:21
13196 Bjerg, B, 39F 4:11:21
13197 Horn, A, 45M 4:11:21
13198 Lapierre, T, 41M 4:11:21
13199 Rispal, O, 36M 4:11:21
13200 Splinter, J, 42M 4:11:22
13201 Splinter, B, 41F 4:11:22
13202 Lerfald, M, 37M 4:11:22
13203 Hall, M, 25F 4:11:22
13204 Sweezey, P, 38F 4:11:22
13205 Flancraich, R, 36M 4:11:23
13206 Lyon, F, 43F 4:11:23
13207 Yamamoto, A, 40M 4:11:23
13208 Fehir, J, 48M4:11:23
13209 Schneider, M, 29F 4:11:23
13210 Eitel-Braitsch, Y, 45F 4:11:23
13211 Bejarano Vela, J, 43M 4:11:23
13212 Hackell, J, 43M 4:11:23
13213 Prichard, J, 23M 4:11:24
13214 Larsen, G, 50F 4:11:24
13215 Eustaquio, N, 32M 4:11:24
13216 Conte, A, 52F 4:11:24
13217 Kern, D, 26F 4:11:24
13218 Albers-Van Pareren, C, 42F 4:11:24
13219 Smyth, G, 46M 4:11:25
13220 Koehl, S, 27F 4:11:25
13221 Gau, F, 40M 4:11:25
13222 Carroll, K, 32M 4:11:25
13223 Zwer, M, 41M 4:11:25
13224 Piplani, P, 47M 4:11:26
13225 Zarcone, L, 35M 4:11:26
13226 Rozier, W, 38M 4:11:27
13227 Silva, R, 36M 4:11:27
13228 Schluep, C, 27M 4:11:27
13229 Schluep, J, 24M 4:11:28
13230 Mostacci, P, 35M 4:11:28
13231 Caldarone, P, 42M 4:11:28
13232 Due, K, 40F 4:11:28
13233 Krausch, K, 55M 4:11:28
13234 Anderson, R, 40M 4:11:28
13235 Sabot, R, 44M 4:11:29
13236 Mullins, W, 50M 4:11:29
13237 Antell, S, 28M 4:11:29
13238 Heywood, S, 44M 4:11:29
13239 Zurita, V, 42F 4:11:30
13240 Ventura, F, 28F 4:11:30
13241 Liberi, B, 54M 4:11:30
13242 Hopper, P, 26M 4:11:30
13243 Klein, H, 45M 4:11:30
13244 Ring, M, 31M 4:11:30
13245 Tillett, C, 38M 4:11:31
13246 Jones III, H, 59M 4:11:31
13247 Tompkins, L, 30F 4:11:31
13248 De Zeeuw, J, 36M 4:11:31
13249 Gaspard, M, 57M 4:11:31
13250 Patton, N, 39F 4:11:32
13251 Kimble, J, 50M 4:11:32
13252 Westlund, J, 53M 4:11:32
13253 Theiss, K, 38F 4:11:33
13254 Gilgen, M, 31F 4:11:34
13255 Santora, G, 41M 4:11:34
13256 Aufricht, C, 36M 4:11:34
13257 Oliveira, O, 37M 4:11:35
13258 Kalhoj, L, 42M 4:11:35
13259 Catillo*, V, 29M 4:11:36
13260 Livingston, J, 33F 4:11:36
13261 Leach, M, 44F 4:11:36
13262 Cunningham, K, 23M 4:11:36
13263 Mohr, H, 43M 4:11:36
13264 Diago Madrid, M, 40M 4:11:36
13265 Raffone, C, 48F 4:11:36
13266 Jurgens, J, 46M 4:11:36
13267 Prandini, A, 30M 4:11:37
13268 Sanchez, L, 38F 4:11:37
13269 Proietti, M, 26M 4:11:37
13270 Davies, A, 49M 4:11:38
13271 Martin, D, 48M 4:11:38
13272 Henghuber, H, 34M 4:11:38
13273 Gazan, G, 47M 4:11:39
13274 Marcovitz, H, 41M 4:11:39
13275 Jones, D, 31M 4:11:40
13276 Stroesser, J, 33M 4:11:40
13277 Bubeck, T, 25M 4:11:40
13278 Latzel, E, 28F 4:11:40
13279 Breault, B, 28M 4:11:41
13280 Eckhardt, T, 38M 4:11:41
13281 Gilberto, R, 39M 4:11:41
13282 Alcalde Guerrero, M, 45F 4:11:42
13283 Dillon, M, 46M 4:11:43
13284 Lopez, J, 35M 4:11:43
13285 Zagurak, B, 33F 4:11:43
13286 Bruyn-Wakkee, D, 30F 4:11:43
13287 Bezemer, J, 37F 4:11:44
13288 Courounis, C, 29M 4:11:44
13289 Mora Cordero, O, 43M 4:11:44
13290 Paterson, A, 36M 4:11:44
13291 Paterson, R, 62M 4:11:45
13292Levine, J, 34F 4:11:45
13293 Prucner, G, 60M 4:11:45
13294 De Jong, M, 38F 4:11:46
13295 McCormick, M, 45M 4:11:46
13296 Maya, A, 57M 4:11:46
13297 Sohn, M, 47M 4:11:46
13298 Van Woudenberg, H, 27M 4:11:46
13299 Pryor, R, 27M 4:11:47
13300 Leturcq, E, 36M 4:11:47
13301 Sandreuter, H, 24F 4:11:47
13302 Harms, K, 27M 4:11:47
13303 Giammaico, R, 44M 4:11:47
13304 Borner, H, 53M 4:11:48
13305 Lennartsson, S, 42M 4:11:48
13306 Artmann, W, 51M 4:11:48
13307 Biboso, P, 48M 4:11:48
13308 Van Der Velden, R, 35M 4:11:49
13309 Ramm, W, 49M 4:11:49
13310 Guenther, S, 26M 4:11:49
13311 Donnelly, N, 30F 4:11:49
13312 Hines, S, 27M 4:11:49
13313 Geurts, P, 46F 4:11:50
13314 Delk, R, 41M 4:11:50
13315 Masullo, P, 38M 4:11:51
13316 Clark, R, 21M 4:11:51
13317 Carleton, S, 36M 4:11:51
13318 Wansink, G, 30F 4:11:51
13319 Newman, E, 33M 4:11:52
13320 Accurso, J, 45M 4:11:52
13321 Tart, B, 24M 4:11:52
13322 Bracey, J, 22M 4:11:52
13323 Caldecourt, M, 25M 4:11:53
13324 Steele, E, 35M 4:11:53
13325 Stassinet, E, 41M 4:11:53
13326 Rosen, J, 34M 4:11:53
13327 Rawlings, H, 33F 4:11:53
13328 Port, D, 24M 4:11:53
13329 Frisenberg, W, 19M 4:11:53
13330 McKay, C, 43M 4:11:54
13331 McCarthy, C, 49M 4:11:54
13332 Kop, F, 39M 4:11:55
13333 Rizzitelli, M, 48M 4:11:55
13334 Kengen, M, 31M 4:11:55
13335 Chrisman, W, 35F 4:11:55
13336 Vagnuzzi, C, 33M 4:11:56
13337 Charles, E, 27M 4:11:56
13338 Alpert, C, 45M 4:11:56
13339 Seward, P, 32M 4:11:56
13340 Morocco, C, 28M 4:11:57
13341 Gellman, C, 45F 4:11:57
13342 Whelan, C, 52M 4:11:57
13343 McDonald, W, 66M 4:11:57
13344 De Mol, M, 36F 4:11:57
13345 Puijk, P, 33M 4:11:57
13346 Trummer, B, 31F 4:11:57
13347 White, L, 41M 4:11:57
13348 Kelley, L, 25F 4:11:57
13349 Johns, G, 37M 4:11:58
13350 Chapman, J, 50M 4:11:58
13351 Silverberg, J, 38M 4:11:58
13352 Bentsen, E, 31F 4:11:58
13353 Vazquez Pulido, J, 23M 4:11:58
13354 Willmott, D, 34M 4:11:59
13355 Powers, C, 30F 4:11:59
13356 Lato, A, 37M 4:11:59
13357 Hartley, R, 30F 4:11:59
13358 Meyer, M, 36M 4:11:59
13359 Beyeler, E, 44M 4:11:59
13360 Tridemy, C, 45M 4:11:59
13361 Hutniak, C, 30F 4:11:59
13362 Koecher, M, 33M 4:12:00
13363 Miller, H, 37M 4:12:00
13364 Kusmierek, W, 49M 4:12:00
13365 Brown, L, 30F 4:12:01
13366 Plummer, K, 43F 4:12:01
13367 Bucay Bissu, S, 31F 4:12:01
13368 Kress, B, 34M 4:12:01
13369 Kelly, P, 42M 4:12:01
13370 Siegel, A, 26F 4:12:02
13371 Lebron, E, 34M 4:12:02
13372 Thornton, R, 40M 4:12:03
13373 Jaudeau, B, 49M 4:12:05
13374 Ishbuldin, I, 42M 4:12:05
13375 Goldstein, R, 32M 4:12:05
13376 Silbert, A, 49M 4:12:05
13377 Grand, J, 19M 4:12:05
13378 Henke, T, 19M 4:12:05
13379 Brown, L, 34F 4:12:05
13380 Yamamoto, Y, 29M 4:12:05
13381 Brown, K, 37M 4:12:06
13382 Kempfer, K, 49M 4:12:06
13383 Kelly, M, 30F 4:12:06
13384 Roger, C, 40F 4:12:06
13385 Luno, M, 44M 4:12:06
13386 Roger, S, 45M 4:12:07
13387 Salvatico, H, 40M 4:12:07
13388 Pierce, W, 44M 4:12:07
13389 Vaughan, C, 37M 4:12:07
13390 McCabe, J, 29M 4:12:07
13391 Shimojo, Y, 47F 4:12:08
13392 Richardson, C, 41M 4:12:08
13393 Mouchet, E, 34M 4:12:08
13394 Peterson, D, 54M 4:12:08
13395 Bard, A, 49M 4:12:08
13396 Sarno, E, 39F 4:12:09
13397 Filippone, C, 27F 4:12:09
13398 Johansson, C, 46M 4:12:09
13399 Danehy, M, 30F 4:12:09
13400 Doksater, S, 47F 4:12:10
13401 Dicks, A, 31F 4:12:10
13402 Cerepak, M, 37M 4:12:10
13403 Yasuhara, F, 33M 4:12:10
13404 Yienger, K, 31M 4:12:11
13405 Ono, M, 27M 4:12:12
13406 Thompson, M, 38M 4:12:12
13407 Witt, D, 24F 4:12:12
13408 Emmrich, H, 41M 4:12:12
13409 Bornstein, J, 24F 4:12:13
13410 Barrett, K, 33F 4:12:13
13411 Goltsche, T, 41M 4:12:13
13412 Hinson, M, 30F 4:12:13
13413 Panelli, D, 32F 4:12:13
13414 Sikorski, C, 41M 4:12:13
13415 Boyd, J, 26M 4:12:13
13416 Hack, D, 47M 4:12:14
13417 Rodriguez Salinas, E, 49M 4:12:14
13418 Wickler, G, 29F 4:12:14
13419 Bank, J, 26M 4:12:14
13420 Heerebout, B, 50M 4:12:15
13421 Boonen, J, 51M 4:12:15
13422 Ruiz, R, 35M 4:12:15
13423 Kuntzmann, E, 55M 4:12:15
13424 Westeinde, J, 24M 4:12:16
13425 Andrassy, J, 34M 4:12:16
13426 Suitovsky-Berkin, L, 30F 4:12:16
13427 Yih, B, 33M 4:12:16
13428 Knudsen, L, 27M 4:12:16
13429 Markovich, L, 47F 4:12:17
13430 Condron, J, 40M 4:12:17
13431 Makin, F, 61M 4:12:17
13432 Shane, G, 55M 4:12:17
13433 Brekeller, M, 57M 4:12:18
13434 Paul, W, 42M 4:12:18
13435 Salemmo, R, 48M 4:12:18
13436 MacDonald, J, 50M 4:12:18
13437 Huseby, J, 19M 4:12:18
13438 King, N, 34M 4:12:18
13439 Kloevekorn, I, 35M 4:12:18
13440 Cowell, C, 32F 4:12:18
13441 Walsh, R, 46M 4:12:19
13442 Gibbons, P, 51M 4:12:19
13443 Forrest, K, 34F 4:12:19
13444 Vega, R, 42M 4:12:19
13445 Higgs, H, 32F 4:12:19
13446 Schonfeld, E, 22M 4:12:20
13447 Bone, S, 37M 4:12:20
13448 Klingmann, H, 54M 4:12:20
13449 Haliburton, A, 29F 4:12:20
13450 Martinez, M, 35M 4:12:20
13451 Cavalcanti, M, 29M 4:12:20
13452 Holmes, J, 48M 4:12:21
13453 De Veth, M, 38M 4:12:21
13454 Meyer, O, 56M 4:12:21
13455 Nikolaou, L, 29F 4:12:21
13456 Bayer, E, 33M 4:12:21
13457 Corsello, M, 37M 4:12:21
13458 Gustafsson, O, 67M 4:12:21
13459 Schwarz, N, 43M 4:12:22
13460 Takakubo, Y, 28F 4:12:22
13461 Figlio, T, 45M 4:12:22
13462 Lichtenstein, J, 30M 4:12:22
13463Butler, M, 36M 4:12:22
13464 Marks, C, 18M 4:12:22
13465 Matthews, W, 39M 4:12:23
13466 McGinn, S, 24M 4:12:23
13467 Woolf, A, 30M4:12:23
13468 Stanley*, W, 33M 4:12:23
13469 Vigliano, P, 51M 4:12:23
13470 Young, H, 43M 4:12:24
13471 Casset, M, 49M 4:12:24
13472 Autherith, A, 37M 4:12:24
13473 Reinders, B, 54M 4:12:25
13474 Wik, I, 51M 4:12:25
13475 Hernandez, R, 30M 4:12:25
13476 Ryks, R, 38M 4:12:25
13477 Pancaldo, A, 36M 4:12:25
13478 Picchio, W, 34M 4:12:25
13479 Hennequin, B, 40M 4:12:27
13480 Vogel, C, 27F 4:12:27
13481 Hull, H, 24F 4:12:27
13482 Pinto, F, 23M 4:12:28
13483 Jamin, G, 52M 4:12:29
13484 Forman, S, 41M 4:12:30
13485 Martinez Martinez, M, 43M 4:12:30
13486 Korchmar, M, 37F 4:12:30
13487 Haupt, H, 51M 4:12:31
13488 Barris, R, 39M 4:12:31
13489 Rieman, M, 51M 4:12:32
13490 Jones, I, 26M 4:12:32
13491 Hoffman, B, 53M 4:12:32
13492 Pigg, B, 38M 4:12:33
13493 O'Brien, K, 30F 4:12:33
13494 Peisner, W, 30M 4:12:33
13495 Sweeney, C, 44F 4:12:33
13496 Kauertz, T, 28M 4:12:34
13497 Makoske, A, 49F 4:12:34
13498 Strassburger, P, 44M 4:12:34
13499 Goodwin, P, 37M 4:12:34
13500 Sharpe, N, 45F 4:12:34
13501 Bergau, F, 37M 4:12:35
13502 Carini, M, 26F 4:12:35
13503 Blanquet, D, 42M 4:12:35
13504 Monnard, M, 46F 4:12:35
13505 Brown, K, 45F 4:12:36
13506 Coburn, S, 39M 4:12:36
13507 Kaplan, J, 45M 4:12:37
13508 Gerard-Jacquot, F, 60F 4:12:37
13509 Houweling, L, 43M 4:12:38
13510 Fallon, K, 28M 4:12:38
13511 Terschueren, H, 47M 4:12:38
13512 Radner, M, 54M 4:12:38
13513 Hesford, J, 35F 4:12:38
13514 San Emeterio, F, 42M 4:12:39
13515 Berlanga Gaona, L, 31M 4:12:39
13516 Kraemer, E, 34F 4:12:39
13517 Spelman, M, 59F 4:12:39
13518 Delevoye, D, 39M 4:12:39
13519 Guthart, J, 32M 4:12:39
13520 Lesslie, L, 37M 4:12:39
13521 Tvinnereim, A, 30F 4:12:39
13522 Cacucci, J, 48M 4:12:39
13523 Kerkhove, J, 40M 4:12:40
13524 Curet, G, 35M 4:12:40
13525 Peroza, G, 57M 4:12:40
13526 Delcourt, F, 35M 4:12:40
13527 Duponchel, B, 27M 4:12:40
13528 Vionnet, P, 42M 4:12:41
13529 Dupont, P, 38M 4:12:41
13530 Meyer, J, 46M 4:12:41
13531 Brame, B, 42M 4:12:41
13532 Saalfeld, G, 56M 4:12:42
13533 Creegan, K, 31M 4:12:42
13534 Etherington, A, 37F 4:12:42
13535 Pribyl, J, 38M 4:12:43
13536 Howard, M, 30M 4:12:43
13537 Hechelski, C, 40M 4:12:43
13538 Flynn, J, 44M 4:12:43
13539 Maloney, C, 54M 4:12:43
13540 Mahon, E, 29F 4:12:44
13541 Zannella, S, 40M 4:12:44
13542 Nupnau, T, 40M 4:12:44
13543 Arrieta Fernandez, R, 39M 4:12:44
13544 Gavin, M, 42F 4:12:44
13545 Sweeney, J, 29M 4:12:44
13546 Kalita, A, 30M 4:12:45
13547 Conroy, A, 34M 4:12:45
13548 Miyazaki, S, 36M 4:12:45
13549 O'Brien, G, 43F 4:12:45
13550 Bouzane, G, 30M 4:12:45
13551 Silliman, M, 43M 4:12:45
13552 Barfield, T, 38M 4:12:45
13553 Gosens, J, 54M 4:12:46
13554 Stamp, P, 39M 4:12:46
13555 Keijser, B, 40M 4:12:46
13556 Urzi, M, 27F 4:12:46
13557 Rodriguez, N, 53M 4:12:47
13558 Pioch, R, 37F 4:12:47
13559 Walden, A, 30F 4:12:48
13560 Newman, R, 31M 4:12:48
13561 Berger, W, 53M 4:12:49
13562 Salib, G, 33M 4:12:50
13563 Christen, B, 35F 4:12:50
13564 Petersen, B, 47M 4:12:50
13565 Sauniere, J, 50M 4:12:50
13566 Torres, G, 59M 4:12:50
13567 Duenas De Lira, P, 46M 4:12:51
13568 Napolitano, M, 48M 4:12:51
13569 Catano, C, 54M 4:12:51
13570 Saville, M, 32M 4:12:51
13571 Roosevelt, L, 34F 4:12:51
13572 Herzog, M, 36M 4:12:51
13573 Reynolds, K, 45M 4:12:51
13574 Dunlap, S, 30F 4:12:51
13575 Hensel, W, 40M 4:12:52
13576 Freedman, M, 46F 4:12:52
13577 Cheema, T, 27M 4:12:52
13578 Mothner, J, 31M 4:12:52
13579 Garvey, M, 40F 4:12:52
13580 Kay, J, 39M 4:12:53
13581 Kane, M, 37F 4:12:53
13582 Luijken, K, 37F 4:12:53
13583 Scrivanich, C, 32M 4:12:53
13584 Smith, P, 52M 4:12:53
13585 Field, M, 34F 4:12:54
13586 Risamenapatty, D, 42M 4:12:54
13587 Schueller, R, 28F 4:12:54
13588 Schwarz, H, 39M 4:12:54
13589 Cito, M, 35M 4:12:55
13590 Srinivasan, S, 24F 4:12:55
13591 McCusker, T, 24M 4:12:55
13592 Stopper, E, 42F 4:12:55
13593 Matsui, A, 25M 4:12:55
13594 Cooper, R, 55M 4:12:55
13595 Dozy, F, 44M 4:12:56
13596 Itzler, J, 26M 4:12:56
13597 Tuarze, J, 37M 4:12:56
13598 Kalnins, L, 32F 4:12:57
13599 Dekker, W, 44M 4:12:57
13600 Muckenhumer, H, 27M 4:12:57
13601 MacLeod, C, 40F 4:12:57
13602 Gariglio, M, 47F 4:12:58
13603 Wall, J, 48M 4:12:58
13604 Robson, M, 57M 4:12:58
13605 Llovera Sobrino, O, 21M 4:12:58
13606 Ratyosyan, A, 37M 4:12:59
13607 Antoine, D, 48M 4:12:59
13608 Yoshikawa, M, 55M 4:12:59
13609 Flynn, W, 43M 4:12:59
13610 Gonzalez, S, 35M 4:13:00
13611 Mirman, D, 29F 4:13:00
13612 Bost, F, 54M 4:13:00
13613 Viacaba, C, 50M 4:13:00
13614 Bost, M, 54F 4:13:00
13615 Rivera, F, 44M 4:13:01
13616 Chapman, W, 39M 4:13:01
13617 Della Chiara, G, 58M 4:13:01
13618 Crane, J, 28M 4:13:02
13619 Radziewicz, S, 40M 4:13:02
13620 Draesel, I, 24F 4:13:03
13621 Stankievitch, M, 36M 4:13:03
13622 Bateman, S, 38M 4:13:03
13623 Fowler, K, 38F 4:13:04
13624 Meagher, J, 40M 4:13:04
13625 Irwin, R, 23F 4:13:04
13626 Romo, R, 40M 4:13:04
13627 Marin, T, 31M 4:13:05
13628 Wieland, M, 46M 4:13:06
13629Lackner, J, 57M 4:13:06
13630 Preston, P, 39M 4:13:07
13631 Lamboy, A, 35M 4:13:07
13632 Wiersum, B, 41M 4:13:07
13633 Garde, T, 38M 4:13:07
13634 Anthony, K, 33M 4:13:07
13635 Olson, D, 44F 4:13:07
13636 Herrera, D, 35M 4:13:07
13637 Lingon, C, 40M 4:13:08
13638 Marabese, B, 57M 4:13:08
13639 Silverberg, B, 47M 4:13:08
13640 Saenz De Viteri, V, 46M 4:13:08
13641 Miers, G, 60M 4:13:08
13642 Bassano, M, 44M 4:13:09
13643 Newman, W, 44F 4:13:09
13644 Newman, M, 46M 4:13:10
13645 Waskevich Jr, C, 46M 4:13:10
13646 Bonnevier, C, 30M 4:13:10
13647 Rundquist, J, 39F 4:13:10
13648 Wigand, V, 33F 4:13:10
13649 Songeon, M, 58M 4:13:11
13650 Bickham, J, 37M 4:13:11
13651 Hermann, D, 39F 4:13:11
13652 Verni, K, 25F 4:13:12
13653 Oshry, A, 57M 4:13:12
13654 Luke, G, 32M 4:13:12
13655 Singh, N, 38M 4:13:13
13656 Anderson, H, 58M 4:13:13
13657 Dory, B, 39F 4:13:14
13658 Kohli, A, 52M 4:13:14
13659 Cohen, S, 31M 4:13:14
13660 Spina, S, 36F 4:13:14
13661 Heifetz, A, 34M 4:13:15
13662 Fernandez, J, 18M 4:13:15
13663 Dekker, H, 46M 4:13:15
13664 Segura Villacorta, S, 33F 4:13:15
13665 Wiik, R, 36M 4:13:16
13666 Bardsley, C, 25M 4:13:16
13667 Mahrer, D, 33M 4:13:16
13668 Jimenez, C, 26F 4:13:16
13669 Deluga, I, 27F 4:13:16
13670 Fait, P, 31M 4:13:16
13671 Marriott, P, 39M 4:13:16
13672 Haug, T, 45F 4:13:16
13673 Soderstrom, I, 36F 4:13:17
13674 Bradley, E, 29F4:13:17
13675 Munoz, E, 51M 4:13:17
13676 Convery, B, 25M 4:13:18
13677 Brough-Convery, L, 23F 4:13:18
13678 Sheldon, A, 39M 4:13:18
13679 Jensen, K, 46M 4:13:19
13680 Kugeuer, R, 41M 4:13:19
13681 Viforel, M, 67M 4:13:19
13682 Garduno, V, 50M 4:13:19
13683Ocontrillo, V, 37M 4:13:19
13684 Rabin, A, 28M 4:13:19
13685 Ferwerda, A, 49M 4:13:20
13686 Pilmar, H, 38M 4:13:20
13687 Hayduk, K, 31F 4:13:21
13688 Karbiche, C, 41M 4:13:21
13689 Lucas, B, 46M 4:13:22
13690 Heiduck, R, 24M 4:13:22
13691 Oberweis, G, 30F 4:13:23
13692 Cherkasky, A, 41M 4:13:23
13693 Saporito, J, 40F 4:13:23
13694 Johansen, E, 47F 4:13:24
13695 Hutchins, J, 40F 4:13:24
13696 Sontheim, A, 46F 4:13:24
13697 O'Neil, D, 33M 4:13:24
13698Capdevielle, M, 35F 4:13:24
13699 Besancet, I, 30F 4:13:24
13700 Cancel, C, 31M 4:13:25
13701 Elberg, E, 45M 4:13:25
13702 Halliday, J, 51M 4:13:25
13703 Hurley Jr, T, 40M 4:13:25
13704 Fitzgerald, K, 40M 4:13:26
13705 Barry, T, 27M 4:13:26
13706 Bertschi, P, 40M 4:13:26
13707 Correa, J, 31M 4:13:27
13708 Ciero, R, 35M 4:13:27
13709 May, A, 54M 4:13:28
13710 Jackson, M, 43M 4:13:28
13711 Delgado, F, 31M 4:13:28
13712 Prades, A, 31M 4:13:28
13713 Matamoros, G, 45M 4:13:28
13714 Breen, P, 37M 4:13:28
13715 Wilke, N, 47M 4:13:28
13716 Evrard, J, 45M 4:13:28
13717 Cowap, C, 29M 4:13:28
13718 Rocha Caballero, J, 49M 4:13:28
13719 Arcadio Lebron, S, 51M 4:13:29
13720 Huntley, P, 50M 4:13:29
13721 Schlapak, E, 29M 4:13:29
13722 Vallari Gomez, C, 28F 4:13:30
13723 Nosek, J, 44M 4:13:30
13724 Poth, V, 39F 4:13:31
13725 Deleone, L, 25F 4:13:32
13726 Chan, W, 43M 4:13:32
13727 Wilken, C, 25F 4:13:32
13728 Odainai Neto, J, 42M 4:13:33
13729 McCormack, M, 28M 4:13:33
13730 McCormack, C, 25M 4:13:33
13731 Lynch, G, 44M 4:13:34
13732 Gretter, B, 28M 4:13:34
13733 Saint-Fort, L, 45M 4:13:34
13734 Ishihara, H, 62M 4:13:35
13735 Wallace, S, 27F 4:13:35
13736 Fischer, S, 38M 4:13:35
13737 Huerta Ortiz, G, 43M 4:13:35
13738 Kirshenbaum, S, 41M 4:13:36
13739 Woodward, F, 35F 4:13:36
13740 Vasisko, M, 28M4:13:36
13741 Wagner, C, 25M 4:13:38
13742 Saunders, L, 34F 4:13:38
13743 Costello, M, 36M 4:13:38
13744 Kindl, M, 48M 4:13:38
13745 Miller, T, 32F 4:13:38
13746 Carucci, K, 38F 4:13:39
13747Chalamet, M, 40M 4:13:40
13748 Carlsson, C, 22M 4:13:41
13749 McWall, A, 57M 4:13:41
13750 Wells, J, 30M 4:13:41
13751 Mai Dr, W, 49M 4:13:41
13752 Graham, R, 31M 4:13:42
13753 Bohnen, A, 48M 4:13:42
13754 Kullberg, M, 28M 4:13:42
13755 Masi, P, 40M 4:13:43
13756 Laurel, R, 28M 4:13:43
13757 Hazelhoff, E, 31M 4:13:43
13758 Correa, A, 37M 4:13:44
13759 Swimmer, T, 26M 4:13:44
13760 Roush, K, 40F 4:13:44
13761 Bakker, M, 45M 4:13:44
13762 Tsang, C, 36M 4:13:45
13763 Peverini, E, 64M 4:13:45
13764 Muiheid, P, 41F 4:13:46
13765 Husmann, H, 52M 4:13:46
13766 Denney, C, 26M 4:13:46
13767 Lemmer, M, 50M 4:13:47
13768 Gelburd, P, 37M 4:13:47
13769 Birka, B, 45M 4:13:47
13770 Holmes, E, 41M 4:13:48
13771 Erlandsson, K, 42M 4:13:49
13772 O'Neill, G, 32M 4:13:49
13773 Martinsson, J, 43M 4:13:50
13774 De Legorburu, E, 43M 4:13:50
13775 Gisbers, J, 54M 4:13:50
13776 Lesage, O, 58M 4:13:50
13777 Oeye, L, 27F 4:13:51
13778 Zona, M, 34M 4:13:51
13779 Lemon, R, 51M 4:13:51
13780 Hoffmann, R, 50M 4:13:51
13781 Crispi, M, 45M 4:13:51
13782 Costello, J, 50M 4:13:51
13783 Bruun, C, 48M 4:13:52
13784 Galil, Z, 47M 4:13:52
13785 Tamborini, I, 44F 4:13:52
13786 Mood, W, 35M 4:13:52
13787 Davidson, J, 48M 4:13:53
13788 Karlsson, R, 43M 4:13:53
13789 Rook, B, 44M 4:13:54
13790 Rosa, P, 52M 4:13:54
13791 Hansen, M, 25M 4:13:55
13792 Hannen, T, 39M 4:13:55
13793 Sanchez, Y, 40F 4:13:55
13794 Bertazzoni, W, 56M 4:13:55
13795 Crawford, R, 44M 4:13:57
13796 Humphries, W, 31M 4:13:57
13797 Little, J, 48M 4:13:57
13798 Bartnik, T, 30M 4:13:57
13799 Boms, R, 42F4:13:58
13800 Vecchio, B, 40F 4:13:58
13801 Wien, F, 27M 4:13:58
13802 Cardwell, R, 41M 4:13:59
13803 Roth, A, 37M 4:13:59
13804 Rating, N, 51M 4:13:59
13805 Gillmeister, W, 50M 4:14:00
13806Franco, R, 27M 4:14:00
13807 Ollivier, P, 45M 4:14:00
13808 Stowe, J, 24M 4:14:00
13809 Ait-Ahmed, S, 32M 4:14:00
13810 Freudenberg, B, 39M 4:14:02
13811 Dennison, J, 51M 4:14:02
13812 Luthin, C, 24F 4:14:03
13813 Meiners, K, 38F 4:14:04
13814 Zoni, B, 49F 4:14:04
13815 Conger, J, 37M 4:14:04
13816 Clews, R, 28M 4:14:04
13817 Sandell, L, 35M 4:14:05
13818 Ulick, J, 27M 4:14:05
13819 Hammer, M, 29F 4:14:05
13820 Cunningham, R, 49M 4:14:05
13821 Scott, N, 29M 4:14:05
13822 Ciccarelli, F, 32F 4:14:06
13823 Romero, M, 37M 4:14:06
13824 Beane, R, 55M 4:14:06
13825 Sonstein, S, 40F 4:14:06
13826 Sharara, F, 47M 4:14:06
13827 Kriekaart, J, 43M 4:14:07
13828 Grandin, P, 51M 4:14:07
13829 De La Rochebrochard, O, 33M 4:14:07
13830 Lipkowitz, M, 52M 4:14:07
13831 Howe, B, 51M 4:14:08
13832 Gorrindo, M, 39M 4:14:08
13833 Wilkowski, T, 34M 4:14:09
13834 Clelen, S, 39F 4:14:09
13835 Getz, G, 39M 4:14:09
13836 Stanise, T, 29F 4:14:09
13837 Seymour, M, 47F 4:14:10
13838 Blok, E, 25M 4:14:10
13839 Lotterer, M, 50M 4:14:10
13840 Marino, R, 29M 4:14:10
13841 D'Incelli, P, 42M 4:14:10
13842 Ruesch, N, 42M 4:14:11
13843 McCullie, J, 48M 4:14:11
13844 Bettini, C, 45M 4:14:11
13845 Pelz, G, 53M 4:14:11
13846 Johnston, M, 56M 4:14:11
13847 Griesemer, K, 37M 4:14:11
13848 Jakositz, T, 37M 4:14:11
13849Loibl, O, 40M 4:14:12
13850 Yli Ojandera, I, 42M 4:14:12
13851 Hansen, D, 50M 4:14:12
13852 Ellis, T, 38F 4:14:12
13853 McGorty, T, 39M 4:14:12
13854 Fouse, S, 44F 4:14:13
13855 Nunez, A, 43M 4:14:13
13856 Antonsson, S, 34M 4:14:13
13857 Fure, J, 53M 4:14:13
13858 Churlet, M, 41F 4:14:14
13859 De Jager, R, 29M 4:14:14
13860 Greco, M, 34M 4:14:14
13861 Jedel, M, 50M 4:14:14
13862 Browne, G, 32M 4:14:14
13863 Wittpenn, A, 38F 4:14:15
13864 Handy, G, 29M 4:14:15
13865 Menard, D, 51M 4:14:15
13866 Webster, J, 34M 4:14:15
13867 Pudjak, L, 41M 4:14:16
13868 Peralta, L, 51M 4:14:16
13869 Castelruiz, J, 47M 4:14:16
13870 Van Dorp, M, 30M 4:14:16
13871 Santos, A, 47M 4:14:16
13872 Belaustegui, N, 43M 4:14:16
13873 Oger, T, 34M 4:14:17
13874 Kliber, D, 26M 4:14:17
13875 Kliber, B, 31M 4:14:17
13876 Frankhouse, J, 31M 4:14:18
13877 O'Brien, P, 33F 4:14:18
13878 Calderon, A, 30M 4:14:18
13879 Simart, S, 25F4:14:19
13880 Ness, M, 46M 4:14:19
13881 Meizler, L, 32F 4:14:19
13882 Timmerman, G, 46M 4:14:19
13883 Wittlin, E, 50F 4:14:19
13884 Ferreira, W, 49M 4:14:19
13885 Schmidt, J, 53M 4:14:20
13886 Moeller, M, 56F 4:14:20
13887 Pinchbeck, G, 26M 4:14:20
13888 Magnus, K, 47M 4:14:20
13889 Castana, S, 46M 4:14:20
13890 Duffours, P, 45M 4:14:20
13891 Schindler, M, 45F 4:14:20
13892 Huitron Benitez, J, 41M 4:14:20
13893 Gifford, P, 36F 4:14:21
13894 Schmidt, H, 50F 4:14:21
13895 Siedat, H, 43M 4:14:21
13896 Abler, R, 32M 4:14:21
13897 Vogt, S, 48F 4:14:21
13898 Korn, J, 39M 4:14:21
13899 Reeves, R, 34M 4:14:22
13900 Burns, J, 37M 4:14:22
13901 McDermott, E, 37M 4:14:22
13902 Seidel, H, 32M 4:14:22
13903 Rundle, W, 32M 4:14:22
13904 Yamamoto, A, 44M 4:14:23
13905 Chacon, O, 48M 4:14:23
13906 Stanton, A, 50M 4:14:23
13907 Tucker, P, 34F 4:14:23
13908 Raquillet, R, 47M 4:14:23
13909 Chapman, P, 46M 4:14:23
13910 Lara, J, 30M 4:14:24
13911 Regniez, F, 21M 4:14:24
13912 Murphy, D, 45M 4:14:24
13913 McCallion, J, 33M 4:14:24
13914 Nogues Alech, J, 47M 4:14:24
13915 Patton, B, 37M 4:14:25
13916 Uehling, R, 46M 4:14:25
13917 Reilly, C, 35M 4:14:25
13918 Scott, J, 33M 4:14:26
13919 Wojcio, M, 46M 4:14:26
13920 Utsuno, T, 49M 4:14:27
13921 Sage, A, 48M 4:14:27
13922 Mattioli, J, 34M 4:14:27
13923 Engle, P, 24M 4:14:27
13924 Janssens, J, 32M 4:14:27
13925Ikegaki, T, 34F 4:14:27
13926 Thompson, S, 42M 4:14:28
13927 Cazeneuve, J, 36M 4:14:28
13928 Kalish, M, 42M 4:14:28
13929 Bogdanski, A, 29M 4:14:28
13930 Strazzi, G, 64M 4:14:28
13931 Moleiro, J, 53M 4:14:29
13932 Levy, R, 26M 4:14:29
13933 David, E, 26M 4:14:30
13934 Fritz, R, 35M 4:14:30
13935 Cruz, D, 23M 4:14:31
13936 Vidal, O, 50M 4:14:31
13937 Winter, W, 34M 4:14:31
13938 Beatty, M, 39F 4:14:31
13939 Zeide, S, 47M 4:14:32
13940 De Jong, W, 49M4:14:32
13941 Wray, T, 43M 4:14:32
13942 Huerlimann, E, 43F 4:14:32
13943 Stampfus, R, 34M 4:14:32
13944 Davy, J, 44M 4:14:32
13945 Lieuwen, J, 43M 4:14:32
13946 Saenz Quiroga, J, 45M 4:14:32
13947 Dreyer, N, 52M 4:14:33
13948 Janssen, M, 46F 4:14:33
13949 Harryson, E, 49M 4:14:33
13950 Rodriguez, A, 44M 4:14:34
13951 Fornwalt, S, 43F 4:14:34
13952 Robertson, L, 36M 4:14:34
13953 Chambers, A, 24F 4:14:34
13954 Gentilucci, T, 28M 4:14:34
13955 Barilla, C, 35M 4:14:34
13956 Fowler, B, 39M 4:14:35
13957 Lico, A, 49M 4:14:35
13958 Hak, J, 39M 4:14:35
13959 Hojohn, B, 54M 4:14:35
13960 Blazoff, K, 34F 4:14:35
13961 Follesoe, K, 50M 4:14:35
13962 Blazoff, S, 35M 4:14:35
13963 Hernandez, H, 38M 4:14:36
13964 Kluft, J, 33M 4:14:36
13965 Kramer, D, 36M 4:14:36
13966 Chmura, M, 41M 4:14:36
13967 Reede, E, 34M 4:14:36
13968 Taylor, P, 48M 4:14:38
13969 Savage, M, 48M 4:14:38
13970 Goll, F, 26M 4:14:38
13971 Malone, P, 33M 4:14:38
13972 Bomke, H, 39M 4:14:39
13973 Santolini, T, 39M 4:14:39
13974 Livingstone, J, 28M 4:14:39
13975 Morley, I, 43M 4:14:40
13976 Slaggie, L, 59M 4:14:40
13977 Guiziou, Y, 43M 4:14:40
13978 Kirchmaier, G, 33M 4:14:40
13979 Kellman, M, 32M 4:14:41
13980 Leliveld, P, 37M 4:14:41
13981 Hofman, R, 48M 4:14:41
13982 Fortin, C, 55M 4:14:41
13983 Van Tienen, T, 46M 4:14:42
13984 Folgado, R, 57M 4:14:42
13985 Abraham, P, 37M 4:14:42
13986 O'Brien, W, 58M 4:14:43
13987 Cappell, R, 47M 4:14:43
13988 Fort, J, 36M 4:14:43
13989 Green, R, 42M 4:14:44
13990 Moriber, R, 29M 4:14:44
13991 Dorresteyn, T, 39M 4:14:44
13992 Hall, T, 46M 4:14:44
13993 Martinez Compean, J, 49M 4:14:44
13994 Gonzalez Palomir, L, 40M 4:14:45
13995 O'Hara, P, 32M 4:14:45
13996 Junker, H, 38M 4:14:45
13997 Tessler, J, 24M 4:14:46
13998 Bresky, C, 40F 4:14:47
13999 Gomez, S, 39M 4:14:47
14000 Vogdes, S, 43F 4:14:48
14001 Tierney, D, 38M 4:14:48
14002 Wandtke, M, 34F 4:14:48
14003 Gannac, N, 46F 4:14:48
14004 Carrel, M, 24M 4:14:48
14005 Flanagan, P, 24M 4:14:49
14006 Gannac, R, 50M 4:14:49
14007 Shub, M, 50M 4:14:49
14008 Van Doosselaere, T, 40M 4:14:50
14009 Rosendal, A, 36F 4:14:50
14010 Weinreb, J, 42M 4:14:50
14011 Reed, E, 39F 4:14:51
14012 Bauman, R, 44M 4:14:51
14013 Goodkin, L, 24F 4:14:51
14014 Brogniart, D, 27M 4:14:52
14015 Nieuwenhuizen, H, 48M 4:14:52
14016 Kerber, M, 51M 4:14:52
14017 Manley, R, 26M 4:14:52
14018 Fontaine, J, 38F 4:14:52
14019 Greenberg, D, 31M 4:14:53
14020 Franz, W, 56M 4:14:53
14021 Werner, B, 42M 4:14:53
14022 Becker, B, 51M 4:14:53
14023 Lindquist, J, 32M 4:14:53
14024 Egan , J, 28F 4:14:54
14025 Pfeifer, R, 56M 4:14:54
14026 Seckel, N, 33M 4:14:54
14027 Ellis-White, C, 31M 4:14:54
14028 Bourouis, A, 51M 4:14:54
14029 Forsyth, B, 31F 4:14:54
14030 Giglioli, M, 53M 4:14:54
14031 Kim, D, 29M 4:14:55
14032 Healy, T, 33M 4:14:55
14033 Demers, A, 25F 4:14:55
14034 Van Ijzeren, J, 33M 4:14:55
14035 Herb, E, 24F 4:14:55
14036 Martin, D, 44M 4:14:56
14037 Cohen, G, 27M4:14:56
14038 Soulie Clappe, N, 30F 4:14:56
14039 Weingrow, C, 25M 4:14:56
14040 Barbier, P, 37M 4:14:56
14041 Alvarez, F, 36M 4:14:56
14042 De Vos, J, 43M 4:14:57
14043 Evans, D, 38M 4:14:57
14044 Bogaard, A, 41M 4:14:57
14045 Buckley, T, 38M 4:14:58
14046Martin, H, 35F 4:14:58
14047 Sagara, R, 42M 4:14:58
14048 Bachoue, G, 39M 4:14:58
14049 Aviles, F, 33M 4:14:59
14050 Landin, P, 32M 4:15:00
14051 Schlebaum, J, 55M 4:15:00
14052 Harson, J, 25M 4:15:00
14053 Osborn, K, 31M 4:15:00
14054 Cole, P, 39M 4:15:00
14055 Michels, P, 21M 4:15:01
14056 Catanzaro, E, 30M 4:15:01
14057 Sojo, J, 45M 4:15:01
14058 Jurdith, C, 43M 4:15:01
14059 Adamsen, R, 38M 4:15:01
14060 Iacometti, G, 51M 4:15:01
14061 Leliveld, J, 42M 4:15:01
14062 Restine Jr., C, 31M 4:15:02
14063 Villarino, E, 35M 4:15:02
14064 Hochman, J, 42M 4:15:02
14065 Overgaauw, J, 40M 4:15:03
14066 Lafuente, E, 36M 4:15:03
14067 Sheppard, P, 37M 4:15:03
14068 Bustamante Guerrero, G, 26F 4:15:03
14069 Keyloun, E, 35F 4:15:03
14070 Scott, M, 29M 4:15:04
14071 Morales, R, 50M 4:15:04
14072 Parker, L, 54M 4:15:04
14073 Mastenbroek, P, 47M 4:15:04
14074 Anderson, P, 32F 4:15:05
14075 Shaw, N, 53M 4:15:05
14076 Fasano, C, 30M 4:15:05
14077 Negomireanu, L, 21F 4:15:05
14078 Hurley, J, 37F 4:15:05
14079 Sheridan, O, 33M 4:15:06
14080 Roberts, R, 35F 4:15:06
14081 Burgis, J, 53M 4:15:06
14082 Lodovisi, S, 35M 4:15:06
14083 Fusco, M, 42M 4:15:06
14084 Rousse, P, 59M 4:15:07
14085 Nergaard , A, 47M 4:15:07
14086 Tuan, S, 35M 4:15:07
14087 Underwood, R, 43M 4:15:07
14088 Weber, K, 45M 4:15:07
14089 Faludi, S, 36F 4:15:08
14090 Joachim, R, 39M 4:15:08
14091 Littierre, H, 35M 4:15:08
14092 Cervantes Padilla, G, 43M 4:15:08
14093 Sternheimer, S, 54F 4:15:09
14094 Stanicki, L, 25M 4:15:09
14095 Parente, N, 25M 4:15:09
14096 Geffrouais, A, 44M 4:15:09
14097 Verrier, M, 45F 4:15:09
14098 Menez, A, 55M 4:15:09
14099 Le, R, 29M 4:15:09
14100 Lanthony, L, 35M 4:15:09
14101 Den, T, 42M 4:15:09
14102 Copp, D, 42M 4:15:09
14103 Breque, J, 45M 4:15:09
14104 Esteban, J, 50M 4:15:10
14105 Smith, D, 39F 4:15:10
14106 Grant, P, 27F 4:15:10
14107 Fabreque, C, 44M 4:15:10
14108 Arruda, M, 40M 4:15:11
14109 Carr, C, 28F 4:15:11
14110 Sauvet, V, 52M 4:15:11
14111 Sarzetto, F, 35M 4:15:11
14112 Legare, H, 41F 4:15:11
14113 Steenaert, R, 46M 4:15:11
14114 Jordan, R, 37M 4:15:12
14115 Damen, A, 32M 4:15:12
14116 Martinez, C, 50M 4:15:12
14117 Laskodi, M, 46M 4:15:12
14118 Pidsosny, J, 59M 4:15:13
14119 Ludwick, C, 46F 4:15:13
14120 San Filippo, C, 39M 4:15:13
14121 Fullam, J, 34F 4:15:13
14122 Svensson, B, 48F 4:15:13
14123 Francois, B, 57M 4:15:14
14124 Kaufhold, K, 52M 4:15:14
14125 Hochvert, D, 54M4:15:15
14126 Schmalen, W, 45M 4:15:16
14127 Waldhuter, J, 42M 4:15:16
14128 Martensson, L, 50M 4:15:16
14129 Horner, D, 41M 4:15:16
14130 Leverty, R, 33M 4:15:16
14131 Gainard, G, 48M 4:15:17
14132 Wargo, B, 39M 4:15:17
14133 Schmalen, S, 46F 4:15:17
14134Springer, P, 45F 4:15:18
14135 Calvia, B, 55M 4:15:18
14136 Van De Poll, I, 32F 4:15:18
14137 Ivens, B, 37M 4:15:18
14138 Evans, M, 44F 4:15:19
14139 Nelson, P, 54M 4:15:19
14140 Atienza, J, 54M 4:15:20
14141 Stelman, M, 55M 4:15:20
14142 Salafsky, I, 56M 4:15:20
14143 Crane, I, 46M 4:15:21
14144 Gaucher, J, 38M 4:15:21
14145 Haney, C, 28M 4:15:21
14146 Badillo, E, 43M 4:15:22
14147 Senf, G, 40M 4:15:22
14148 Pusch, D, 54M 4:15:23
14149 Hinton, J, 39M 4:15:23
14150 Sisk, G, 31M 4:15:23
14151 Latt, N, 26F 4:15:23
14152 Priest, S, 36M 4:15:23
14153 Carroll, R, 31M 4:15:23
14154 Plunkett, P, 47M 4:15:23
14155 Pettitt, J, 42M 4:15:23
14156 Gillen, P, 31M 4:15:23
14157 Hussey, J, 31M 4:15:24
14158 McLaughlin, M, 39F 4:15:24
14159 Diyanni, E, 43M 4:15:24
14160 Puklin MD, J, 53M 4:15:24
14161 Petersen, M, 45M 4:15:24
14162 Norman, J, 30M4:15:24
14163 Robinson, N, 54M 4:15:25
14164 Wampold, J, 28M 4:15:25
14165 Jasso Vega, C, 45M 4:15:26
14166 Butcher, J, 29M 4:15:26
14167 Cain, B, 42M 4:15:26
14168 Goff, S, 40F 4:15:26
14169Stachelek, S, 38F 4:15:27
14170 Moore, D, 48M 4:15:27
14171 Berta, J, 47M 4:15:27
14172 Burner, D, 18M 4:15:28
14173 Augustine, L, 35F 4:15:28
14174 Pugh, D, 36M 4:15:28
14175 Bisschop, R, 49M 4:15:28
14176 Chomin, B, 45M 4:15:28
14177 White, M, 42M 4:15:29
14178 Guidos, B, 52F 4:15:29
14179 Bilobran, J, 48M 4:15:29
14180 Blumberg, M, 35M 4:15:29
14181 Smith, G, 31M 4:15:29
14182 Smith, L, 54M 4:15:29
14183 Rehnborg, R, 27M 4:15:29
14184 Melis, J, 52M 4:15:29
14185 Verniere, J, 44M 4:15:30
14186 Parker, M, 36M 4:15:30
14187 Dixon Jr, H, 41M 4:15:30
14188 Falk, D, 36M 4:15:30
14189 James, A, 47M 4:15:30
14190 Hernandez, J, 44M 4:15:30
14191 Augello, P, 34M 4:15:30
14192 Sestoso, N, 37M 4:15:30
14193 Rahill, P, 37M 4:15:30
14194 Bodoh-Stone, M, 35F 4:15:30
14195 Mikkelson, M, 38M 4:15:30
14196 Bodoh, J, 42M 4:15:30
14197 Hagens, R, 35M 4:15:31
14198 Dewees, W, 44M 4:15:31
14199 Appel, M, 37F 4:15:31
14200 Boucher, M, 38M 4:15:31
14201 Logan, L, 41F 4:15:32
14202 Berroeta, M, 47F 4:15:32
14203 Medlich, P, 38F 4:15:33
14204 Infante De Tamez, B, 36F 4:15:33
14205 Saydah, P, 31M 4:15:33
14206 Denuel, P, 34M 4:15:33
14207 Flood, D, 37F 4:15:33
14208 Shadid, R, 28M 4:15:33
14209 Plummer, Y, 27M 4:15:34
14210 Hoffstot, H, 38M 4:15:34
14211 Rodriguez, N, 46M 4:15:34
14212 Muenzberg, R, 36M 4:15:34
14213 Daly, J, 36M 4:15:34
14214 Jeppsson, F, 32M 4:15:35
14215 Hurwitz, D, 25F 4:15:35
14216 McWilliams, R, 39M 4:15:35
14217 Elliott, M, 37M 4:15:35
14218 Jamison, R, 25M 4:15:36
14219 Imaki, H, 49F 4:15:36
14220 Kesler, T, 33M 4:15:37
14221 Briones, G, 45M 4:15:37
14222 Leeflang, T, 62M 4:15:37
14223 Henderson, T, 26F 4:15:37
14224 Clancy, K, 37F 4:15:38
14225 Oynes, R, 30M 4:15:38
14226 Piper, R, 27F 4:15:38
14227 Jackson, S, 39M 4:15:39
14228 Lopez Arizpe, B, 30F 4:15:39
14229 Germain, C, 29M 4:15:40
14230 Hodges, J, 47M 4:15:40
14231 Timmons, J, 31F 4:15:40
14232 Lutz, J, 40M 4:15:40
14233 Bogatzki, S, 55M 4:15:40
14234 Egberts, J, 44M 4:15:41
14235 Muldoon, F, 54M 4:15:41
14236 Burge, K, 28F 4:15:41
14237 Brouwer, L, 39M 4:15:41
14238 Nilson, K, 29F4:15:41
14239 Hines, H, 46F 4:15:42
14240 Johnson, R, 50M 4:15:42
14241 Traum-Winckler, H, 38F 4:15:42
14242 Buhl, S, 26M 4:15:42
14243 Niemi, K, 49M 4:15:43
14244 Pedroso, F, 37M 4:15:43
14245 Krutainis, A, 38M 4:15:43
14246 Kellerman, L, 36F 4:15:43
14247Kind, T, 22F 4:15:44
14248 Luo, J, 31M 4:15:44
14249 Biging, P, 34M 4:15:44
14250 Jeudy, P, 38M 4:15:44
14251 Derkatch, E, 29M 4:15:44
14252 Sauer, S, 29M 4:15:45
14253 Spivey, M, 43M 4:15:45
14254 McMuldroch, J, 40M 4:15:45
14255 Berberich, F, 37M 4:15:45
14256 Cree, A, 43M 4:15:45
14257 Devine, J, 40M 4:15:45
14258 Dominique, Y, 35M 4:15:45
14259 Kreijger, K, 55M 4:15:45
14260 Bobin, D, 32M 4:15:45
14261 Blacharski, D, 28F 4:15:46
14262 Bolton, C, 48M 4:15:46
14263 Granofsky, G, 42F 4:15:46
14264 Rojas, E, 39M 4:15:46
14265 Benagli, G, 24M 4:15:46
14266 Lynch, A, 44M 4:15:46
14267 Camunas, J, 49M 4:15:47
14268 Bebi, E, 60F 4:15:47
14269 Medalin-Moret, M, 50M 4:15:48
14270 Wasser, M, 35M 4:15:48
14271Mazzola, D, 30M 4:15:48
14272 Bolduc, G, 47M 4:15:48
14273 Bruck, A, 50F 4:15:49
14274 Meuleman, W, 40M 4:15:49
14275 Meuleman, A, 33M 4:15:49
14276 Fernau, J, 40F 4:15:50
14277 Claas, W, 38M 4:15:50
14278 Fukuoka, Y, 44M 4:15:50
14279 Spruengli, R, 28M 4:15:51
14280 Custer, P, 45M 4:15:51
14281 Holtermann, H, 58M 4:15:51
14282 Basurto, A, 52M 4:15:51
14283 Orobona, C, 39F 4:15:51
14284 Ritter, K, 45M 4:15:52
14285 Martin, G, 49M 4:15:52
14286 Morrison, J, 39M 4:15:52
14287 Acker, H, 58M 4:15:53
14288 Tyler, E, 32F 4:15:53
14289 Duke, M, 26F 4:15:53
14290 Crawley, R, 32M 4:15:53
14291 Henney, M, 36F 4:15:53
14292 Henney, P, 43M 4:15:53
14293 Kruse, B, 46M 4:15:53
14294 Nielsen, M, 34F 4:15:54
14295 Gonzalez, M, 29F 4:15:54
14296 Burns, P, 29F 4:15:54
14297 Kewish, L, 36F 4:15:54
14298 Conn, A, 27M 4:15:54
14299 Oechies-De Boo, N, 45F 4:15:55
14300 Gallardo, L, 43M 4:15:55
14301 Zeeman, M, 33F 4:15:55
14302 Martinez, G, 44M 4:15:55
14303 Ottaviano, P, 56M 4:15:55
14304 Miner, L, 33M 4:15:55
14305 Guarneri, G, 31M 4:15:55
14306 Raassen, G, 43M 4:15:55
14307 Novellon, A, 40M 4:15:55
14308 Benson, L, 52M 4:15:55
14309 Martinez, G, 34M 4:15:55
14310 Mobasser, F, 25M 4:15:56
14311 Mobasser, S, 49M 4:15:56
14312 Lazarin Reyes, G, 41F 4:15:57
14313 Steltman, D, 45M 4:15:57
14314 De Wit, J, 53M 4:15:58
14315 Parella, P, 43M 4:15:58
14316 Baruffaldi, A, 38M 4:15:58
14317 Percox, M, 43M 4:15:59
14318 Belden, K, 31F 4:15:59
14319 Sobrie, J, 46M 4:16:00
14320 Guerrero, J, 57M 4:16:00
14321 Okey, D, 34M 4:16:00
14322 McCoach, R, 46M 4:16:01
14323 Meldrum, H, 36F 4:16:01
14324 Gorenberg, P, 27M 4:16:01
14325 Hochenberger, R, 41M 4:16:01
14326 Ladiges, A, 50F 4:16:02
14327 Pallock, J, 51M 4:16:02
14328 Sinigallia, D, 54M 4:16:02
14329 O'Reilly, J, 29F 4:16:02
14330 Mihalko, A, 27M 4:16:02
14331 Maruhn, M, 37M 4:16:03
14332 Sterkenburg, A, 26M 4:16:03
14333 Faedo, F, 42M 4:16:03
14334 Wooden, J, 27M 4:16:03
14335 Strain, J, 28M 4:16:03
14336 Clerc, M, 40M 4:16:03
14337 Sichel, B, 29M 4:16:03
14338 Buth, W, 35M 4:16:03
14339 Drain, W, 49M 4:16:04
14340 Kanen, M, 23F 4:16:04
14341 Bilger, A, 41M 4:16:04
14342 Marchesani, R, 32M 4:16:04
14343 Sipple, B, 53M 4:16:04
14344 Henderson, J, 51M4:16:04
14345 Havran, M, 47M 4:16:04
14346 Harse, D, 37F 4:16:06
14347 Aguayo, E, 29M 4:16:07
14348 Storr-Paulsen, A, 47M 4:16:07
14349 Homma, H, 31M 4:16:07
14350 Wright, M, 25F 4:16:07
14351 Burchett, S, 31F 4:16:08
14352 Flynn, M, 25M 4:16:08
14353 Monroe, N, 52F 4:16:08
14354 Clapie, A, 36F 4:16:09
14355 Caro, J, 44M4:16:10
14356 Butler, R, 36M 4:16:10
14357 Mazur, J, 37F 4:16:11
14358 Madden, J, 34F 4:16:11
14359 Mobley, M, 31F 4:16:11
14360 Salvatori, L, 42M 4:16:11
14361 Passik, S, 35M 4:16:12
14362 Cullen, J, 50M 4:16:13
14363 Paskewich, B, 42M 4:16:13
14364 Millard, T, 37M 4:16:14
14365 Wobst-Jeney, A, 28F 4:16:15
14366 Glogowsky, M, 40F 4:16:15
14367 Watts, T, 24M 4:16:15
14368 Sanchez Gardea, M, 30F 4:16:16
14369 Garsh, B, 48F 4:16:16
14370 Garsh, T, 62M 4:16:16
14371 Froehlich, J, 38M 4:16:17
14372 Reeves, K, 34M 4:16:17
14373 Longchamps, J, 47M 4:16:17
14374 Corbin, A, 57M 4:16:18
14375 Boeljes, U, 47M 4:16:18
14376 Lanham, J, 29F 4:16:18
14377 Zanetti, R, 37M 4:16:19
14378 Demby, G, 41F 4:16:19
14379 Ghiara, F, 56M 4:16:19
14380 Kessler, M, 61M 4:16:19
14381 Sheerin, W, 32M 4:16:19
14382 Karlen, S, 34M 4:16:19
14383 Ehman, R, 30M 4:16:20
14384 Sauer, R, 28M 4:16:20
14385 Knauer, G, 40M 4:16:20
14386 Azoz, A, 36M 4:16:20
14387 Macedo Sanchez, J, 42M 4:16:21
14388 Ausseil, G, 34M 4:16:21
14389 Shao, L, 36M 4:16:21
14390 Lundkvist, O, 39M 4:16:21
14391 Durif, C, 45M 4:16:21
14392 Arango, C, 50M 4:16:21
14393 Ramirez Arango, E, 38M 4:16:21
14394 Pihlainen, R, 39M 4:16:21
14395 Matthews, M, 29M 4:16:21
14396 Lyon, M, 33M 4:16:21
14397 Ishikawa, K, 60M 4:16:21
14398 Ait Ouakli, R, 40M 4:16:21
14399 Marooney, R, 30M 4:16:21
14400 Wiik, S, 41M 4:16:21
14401 Jallais, D, 43M 4:16:21
14402 Myers, W, 46M 4:16:21
14403 Kawai, A, 29M 4:16:21
14404 Nordin, G, 40M 4:16:22
14405 Charles, F, 38M 4:16:22
14406 Auer, M, 38M 4:16:22
14407 Carroll, T, 46M 4:16:23
14408 Doubert, A, 30M 4:16:23
14409 Artioli, M, 30M 4:16:23
14410 Brueland, H, 51M 4:16:23
14411 Peebles, M, 45M 4:16:23
14412 Hines, R, 57M 4:16:23
14413 Levins, R, 51M 4:16:23
14414 Sussman, R, 36F 4:16:24
14415 Crotty, B, 24M 4:16:24
14416 Russell, P, 36M 4:16:24
14417 Bachmann, F, 46M 4:16:24
14418 Muniz, R, 43M 4:16:24
14419 Theuer, W, 55M 4:16:24
14420 Miller, C, 35M 4:16:25
14421 Jeans, N, 54M 4:16:25
14422 Van Belleghem, W, 60M 4:16:25
14423 Koppenberg, J, 29M 4:16:25
14424 Vothien, T, 39M 4:16:25
14425 Gallardo Salazar, P, 31M 4:16:25
14426 McCarthy, B, 40M 4:16:25
14427 Morel, J, 52M 4:16:25
14428 Justus, P, 55M 4:16:25
14429 Prather, K, 32M 4:16:25
14430 Murphy, M, 25M 4:16:25
14431Payne, W, 30M 4:16:25
14432 Kreis, R, 39F 4:16:26
14433 Velier, M, 40M 4:16:26
14434 Wilson, C, 45M 4:16:26
14435 Lakeman, N, 35F 4:16:26
14436 Kelly, J, 48M 4:16:26
14437 Stevens, L, 44M 4:16:26
14438 Ragonese, J, 45M 4:16:27
14439 Given, J, 42M 4:16:27
14440 Versteeg, W, 47M 4:16:27
14441 Finn, D, 43M 4:16:27
14442 Zegas, A, 42M 4:16:28
14443 Simprini, C, 45F 4:16:28
14444 Gallo, A, 36F 4:16:28
14445 Stolka, K, 42F 4:16:28
14446 Champion, F, 34F 4:16:28
14447 Lundquist, J, 56M 4:16:28
14448 Romer, J, 38M 4:16:28
14449 Rickerson, S, 45M 4:16:29
14450 Greyson, C, 27M 4:16:29
14451 Macaire, D, 25M 4:16:29
14452 Rietzke, B, 41M 4:16:29
14453 Ramos Herrera, C, 42F 4:16:30
14454 Matioschat, G, 51M 4:16:30
14455 Gordillo, J, 43M 4:16:30
14456 Nonoue, D, 24M 4:16:31
14457 Platzer, R, 30M 4:16:31
14458 Matsuda, H, 52M 4:16:31
14459 Henkels, A, 30F 4:16:31
14460 Klunk, L, 48M 4:16:32
14461 Hyar, U, 51M 4:16:32
14462 Timm, P, 57M 4:16:32
14463 Kenchington, E, 30M 4:16:32
14464 Buytendyk, R, 29M 4:16:32
14465 Russo, R, 42F 4:16:33
14466 Knee, R, 56M 4:16:34
14467 Na, E, 44F 4:16:34
14468 Aguilar Flores, E, 53M 4:16:34
14469 Kringstein, R, 36M 4:16:35
14470 Veenis, D, 43M 4:16:35
14471 Bittdorf, J, 49M 4:16:35
14472 Bartholdsson, H, 44M 4:16:35
14473 Clivio, P, 32F 4:16:35
14474 Chery, E, 33M 4:16:36
14475 Bartmuss, M, 49M 4:16:36
14476 Pollitt, M, 35F4:16:36
14477 Marrin, M, 26F 4:16:36
14478 Das, R, 50M 4:16:37
14479 Ashida, K, 48F 4:16:37
14480 McGill, J, 47M 4:16:37
14481 Coutier, L, 60M 4:16:37
14482 Schulte, C, 27F 4:16:37
14483 Fagan, M, 52M 4:16:37
14484 Wagemakers, A, 35M 4:16:38
14485 Schneider, P, 28M 4:16:38
14486 Fisherman, W, 51M 4:16:39
14487 Garcia, E, 27M 4:16:39
14488 Bernson, M, 33F 4:16:39
14489 Soedje, D, 56M 4:16:39
14490 Preinitz, F, 19M 4:16:39
14491 Figuera, P, 50M 4:16:39
14492 Lake, J, 27F 4:16:39
14493 Tsubata, M, 24M 4:16:40
14494 Harrod, B, 19F 4:16:40
14495 Lettiere, W, 54M 4:16:40
14496 Forde, M, 50M 4:16:40
14497 Hewett, C, 21F 4:16:40
14498 Tauber, A, 45M 4:16:40
14499 Wyer, K, 26M 4:16:40
14500 Tualena, B, 45M 4:16:41
14501 Cardona, J, 29M 4:16:42
14502 Ripond, J, 60M 4:16:42
14503 Del Cerro, J, 26M 4:16:42
14504 Tekstra, T, 33M 4:16:42
14505 Harrison, H, 31F 4:16:43
14506 Metz-Glogger, B, 38F 4:16:43
14507 Graham, M, 29M 4:16:43
14508 Crocker, F, 35F 4:16:43
14509 Corrie, K, 48F 4:16:44
14510 Chyriwski, J, 37M 4:16:44
14511 Araujo, A, 24F 4:16:44
14512 Oudshoorn, N, 48M 4:16:44
14513 O'Connell, D, 37M 4:16:45
14514 Gula, S, 45M 4:16:45
14515 Silen, R, 42F 4:16:45
14516 Ovando, L, 45M 4:16:45
14517 Cortes, E, 49M 4:16:46
14518 Teixeira, P, 41M 4:16:46
14519 Areg, K, 26M 4:16:46
14520 Sandmann, O, 54F 4:16:46
14521 Isbell, R, 57M 4:16:46
14522 Bakker, P, 41M 4:16:47
14523 Eppright, B, 38M 4:16:47
14524 Sevilla, J, 44M 4:16:47
14525 Dronkowski, D, 35M 4:16:47
14526 Dowdall, S, 38M 4:16:48
14527 Yutronic, T, 54M 4:16:48
14528 Thomas, D, 48M 4:16:48
14529 Kouba, M, 37F 4:16:48
14530 Lujano Hernandez, O, 42M 4:16:48
14531 Voss, H, 57M 4:16:49
14532 Kirchmaier, W, 59M 4:16:49
14533 Philbrook, E, 29M 4:16:49
14534 Santos, M, 36M 4:16:49
14535 Epple, M, 54M 4:16:50
14536 Jensicke, R, 37M 4:16:50
14537 Bell, S, 20F 4:16:50
14538 Rodriguez, E, 30F 4:16:51
14539 Schultz, J, 34M 4:16:51
14540 Fesles, T, 43F 4:16:51
14541 Tufts, P, 51M 4:16:51
14542 Kukovic, H, 56M 4:16:51
14543 Train, S, 25F 4:16:51
14544 Turquie, J, 40M 4:16:51
14545 Cadieu, B, 32F 4:16:52
14546 Barnet, P, 56M 4:16:52
14547 Broomfield, S, 37F 4:16:53
14548Medaglia, S, 59F 4:16:53
14549 Kirscher, E, 30F 4:16:53
14550 Limberg, M, 41F 4:16:53
14551 Komes, U, 35M 4:16:53
14552 Wilhite, P, 38M 4:16:53
14553 Wan, T, 35M 4:16:54
14554 Saline, D, 40M 4:16:54
14555 Geisler, J, 31F 4:16:54
14556 Corcoran, G, 33M 4:16:54
14557 Connors, J, 36M 4:16:55
14558 Badders, S, 35F 4:16:55
14559 Shenk, J, 41F 4:16:55
14560 Kligler, B, 33M 4:16:55
14561 Braam, D, 36M 4:16:56
14562 Barroso, E, 45M 4:16:56
14563 Neubueser, P, 50F 4:16:56
14564 Gonthier, R, 50M 4:16:57
14565 Weil, E, 23M 4:16:57
14566 Kreel, S, 28F 4:16:58
14567 Tona, R, 42M 4:16:58
14568 Rouet, P, 38M 4:16:58
14569 Plaza, N, 33M 4:16:58
14570 Pesky, G, 26M 4:16:59
14571 Luehr, M, 49F 4:16:59
14572 Vottero, R, 51M 4:16:59
14573 Solera, L, 43M 4:17:00
14574 Gardner, E, 43M 4:17:00
14575 Mallon, J, 33M 4:17:00
14576 Overby, K, 47F 4:17:00
14577 Mather, V, 30M 4:17:01
14578 DuPont, W, 35M 4:17:01
14579 Soto, M, 26M 4:17:02
14580 Harrell, P, 29F 4:17:02
14581 Kiester, P, 30M 4:17:02
14582 Brien, N, 21F 4:17:03
14583 Nicosia, L, 48M 4:17:03
14584 Rob, M, 37M 4:17:04
14585 Kneer, M, 38F 4:17:04
14586 Reitsma, T, 34M 4:17:04
14587 Posner, A, 40M 4:17:04
14588 De Jong, W, 39M 4:17:04
14589 Andersen, K, 52M 4:17:05
14590 Colon, G, 24M 4:17:05
14591 Maes, A, 47M 4:17:05
14592 Schwolow, W, 44M 4:17:05
14593 Gardner, M, 36M 4:17:05
14594 Flores Munoz, R, 40M 4:17:05
14595 Mogena, J, 49M 4:17:05
14596 Van Boxtel Gysen, T, 52F 4:17:05
14597 Maher, D, 41F 4:17:06
14598 Mennella, K, 52M 4:17:06
14599 Bazzini, P, 24M 4:17:06
14600 Jung, M, 36F 4:17:06
14601 Harris, R, 46M 4:17:07
14602 Perche, R, 40F 4:17:07
14603 Dolan, K, 44M 4:17:08
14604 Stemmerik, K, 41M 4:17:08
14605 O'Brien-Perosi, P, 27F 4:17:08
14606 Callahan, J, 48M 4:17:08
14607 Petersen, E, 43F 4:17:08
14608 Desportes, P, 23M 4:17:08
14609 Samuelsen, F, 42M 4:17:09
14610 McKay, M, 31M 4:17:09
14611 Peddle, J, 29M 4:17:09
14612 Tomlinson, C, 23F 4:17:09
14613 Egonsson, P, 34M 4:17:09
14614 Stecher, M, 36M 4:17:10
14615 Husman, T, 47M 4:17:10
14616 Bienfait, C, 51M 4:17:10
14617 Bottolf, R, 46M 4:17:10
14618 Beall, D, 28M 4:17:11
14619 Goicoechea, R, 45M 4:17:11
14620 Manela, C, 33F 4:17:11
14621 Boccardi, K, 37M 4:17:11
14622 Meuwsen, K, 48M 4:17:12
14623 Ross Jr., G, 24M 4:17:12
14624 Kanai, S, 54M 4:17:12
14625 Mallon, M, 30M 4:17:12
14626 Trakinski, A, 31F 4:17:13
14627 Neuman, M, 26M 4:17:13
14628 Imhof Jr., J, 31M 4:17:13
14629 Woodbridge, R, 46M 4:17:13
14630 Debonne, E, 64M 4:17:14
14631 Cofer, C, 44M 4:17:14
14632 Pinske, K, 48M 4:17:16
14633 Bernson, S, 39F 4:17:16
14634 Thaler, C, 29M 4:17:17
14635 Verkooyen, A, 53M 4:17:17
14636 Cannelis, L, 35F 4:17:17
14637 Homsher, P, 27M 4:17:18
14638 Bennis, R, 38M 4:17:19
14639 Deloubes, J, 43M 4:17:19
14640 Haferkamp, M, 35M 4:17:19
14641 Cyarto, E, 29F 4:17:19
14642 Woltman, T, 28M 4:17:19
14643 Bijsterveld, R, 42M4:17:19
14644 Seynaeue, S, 34M 4:17:20
14645 Cohen, R, 34M 4:17:20
14646 Tessarek, G, 49M 4:17:20
14647 Tucker, D, 29F 4:17:20
14648 Tavares Gonzalez, J, 38M 4:17:20
14649 Shore, A, 34M 4:17:21
14650 Vogel, T, 28M 4:17:21
14651 Grundner, U, 51M 4:17:22
14652 Delacotte, V, 33M 4:17:22
14653 Poissonneau, M, 45M 4:17:22
14654 Mallory, P, 28F 4:17:22
14655 Sommer, M, 34M 4:17:22
14656 Arumugum, D, 54F 4:17:23
14657 Sutin, R, 43M 4:17:23
14658 Janosi, Z, 27M 4:17:24
14659 Hill, Q, 44M 4:17:24
14660 Wlosek, K, 34M 4:17:24
14661 Russo, G, 34M 4:17:24
14662 Holmgren, C, 50M 4:17:24
14663 Montesa, L, 34F 4:17:24
14664 Nix, M, 38M 4:17:25
14665 McKenna, A, 36M 4:17:25
14666 Ferguson, J, 19M 4:17:25
14667 Dugan, J, 61M 4:17:26
14668 Chivers, F, 47M 4:17:26
14669 Geaney, J, 43M 4:17:26
14670 Cusack, S, 36M 4:17:26
14671 Duncan, J, 51M 4:17:26
14672 Gildea, J, 42M 4:17:26
14673 Thomas, S, 49M 4:17:27
14674 Gnudtzmann, G, 48F 4:17:27
14675 Fontana, S, 34M 4:17:27
14676Toro, M, 38F 4:17:27
14677 Latter, L, 27F 4:17:27
14678 Stevens, T, 45M 4:17:27
14679 Ellis*, L, 50M 4:17:28
14680 Loza, L, 32F 4:17:28
14681 Thompson, G, 23M 4:17:29
14682 Walsh, K, 31F 4:17:29
14683 Tavella, G, 34M 4:17:29
14684 Grogan, M, 36M 4:17:29
14685 Bork, M, 47F 4:17:30
14686 Dearden, C, 44M 4:17:30
14687 Power, T, 43M 4:17:30
14688 Kingore, W, 35M 4:17:30
14689 Bailis, D, 31M 4:17:30
14690 McKinley, F, 39F 4:17:31
14691 Johnson, K, 53M 4:17:31
14692 Glass, J, 54M 4:17:31
14693 Lopez, R, 35M 4:17:31
14694 Ross, J, 25F 4:17:31
14695 Cramer, N, 24F 4:17:31
14696 Sicard, B, 46M 4:17:31
14697 O'Neill, T, 34M 4:17:31
14698 Heilmann, J, 36M 4:17:31
14699 McPoland, A, 27F 4:17:31
14700 Groeber, P, 53M 4:17:32
14701 Tebbs, T, 19F 4:17:32
14702 Crank, S, 29M 4:17:32
14703 Higgins, R, 40M 4:17:32
14704 Hageman, M, 44F 4:17:33
14705 Burr, K, 41M 4:17:33
14706 Millard, S, 41F 4:17:33
14707 Boutin, J, 43M 4:17:33
14708 Kofsky, I, 47M 4:17:33
14709 Badura, J, 40M 4:17:34
14710 Anliker, R, 43F 4:17:34
14711 Rosenberg, K, 42M 4:17:34
14712 Dobson, R, 36M 4:17:35
14713 Koomen, W, 37M 4:17:35
14714 Osborne, W, 45M 4:17:35
14715 Bell, K, 41M 4:17:35
14716 Schaefer, J, 29F 4:17:36
14717 Gettinger, M, 27M 4:17:37
14718 Van Den Brandhof, J, 51M 4:17:38
14719 Lobel, D, 33M 4:17:38
14720 Rodriguez-Naaz, E, 34M 4:17:38
14721 Matius, C, 38F 4:17:38
14722 Brusselers, E, 39M 4:17:38
14723 Harrison, C, 40M 4:17:39
14724 Levit, L, 43M 4:17:39
14725 Rufleth, W, 44M 4:17:39
14726 Holden, M, 27F 4:17:39
14727 Fairbanks, A, 27M 4:17:39
14728 Whisenant, S, 27F 4:17:39
14729 Holden, C, 61M 4:17:40
14730 Whisenant, B, 30M 4:17:40
14731 Rose, A, 21F 4:17:40
14732 Barney, K, 48M 4:17:40
14733 Zajac, T, 31M 4:17:40
14734 Baum, R, 35M 4:17:40
14735 Chung, T, 31M 4:17:40
14736 Dool, R, 49M 4:17:41
14737 Whelehan, T, 26M 4:17:41
14738 Waters, S, 50M 4:17:41
14739 Lang, J, 39M 4:17:42
14740 Schade, K, 35M 4:17:42
14741 Balsino, C, 29M 4:17:43
14742 Cassiere, J, 41M 4:17:43
14743 Bonk, D, 39M 4:17:43
14744 Perrot, M, 35M 4:17:43
14745 Ulbrich, R, 57M 4:17:43
14746 Neighbors, C, 32M 4:17:43
14747 Chevrier, J, 51M 4:17:43
14748 Hinkly, R, 32M 4:17:43
14749 Tapper, G, 44M 4:17:44
14750 Romano, J, 29M 4:17:44
14751 Solomon, A, 50M 4:17:44
14752 Vega Velasco, D, 50M4:17:45
14753 Michael, D, 63M 4:17:45
14754 Armstrong, J, 45M 4:17:46
14755 Turowska, K, 48F 4:17:46
14756 Voboril, D, 44M 4:17:46
14757 Bonesso, L, 54M 4:17:47
14758 Cheng, E, 24M 4:17:47
14759 Schmidt, D, 29M 4:17:47
14760 Haas, W, 37M 4:17:48
14761 Doladille, I, 35F 4:17:48
14762 Thomas, C, 38F 4:17:48
14763 Laperou, I, 24F 4:17:49
14764 Platt, L, 45M 4:17:49
14765 Comer, J, 25M 4:17:50
14766 Grant, G, 31M 4:17:50
14767 Lilintahl, B, 56M 4:17:50
14768 Roessler, S, 58M 4:17:50
14769 Wieland, H, 61M 4:17:50
14770 Keutmann, D, 36F 4:17:50
14771 Talwar, D, 29M 4:17:51
14772 Frey, H, 34M 4:17:51
14773 Papa, A, 49M 4:17:53
14774 Boehmer, T, 42M 4:17:53
14775 Scott, P, 40F 4:17:53
14776 Amat Salas, J, 32M 4:17:54
14777 Fowler, R, 45M 4:17:54
14778 McBride, M, 43M 4:17:54
14779 Lefkovic, L, 41M 4:17:54
14780 Jensen, L, 46M 4:17:54
14781 Shalev, A, 22M 4:17:55
14782 Gaboff, S, 34M 4:17:55
14783 Chassie, H, 38M 4:17:55
14784 Blom, A, 35F 4:17:55
14785 Oberkampf, D, 27M 4:17:56
14786 Diaz, C, 27F 4:17:57
14787 Fritz, C, 25F 4:17:57
14788 Wiedie, D, 39M 4:17:57
14789 Schachtel, A, 27F 4:17:57
14790 Goldberg, B, 24M 4:17:57
14791 Demonet Hetland, J, 30M 4:17:57
14792 Torres, I, 56M 4:17:58
14793 Legrand, D, 46M 4:17:58
14794 Goldband, P, 40M 4:17:58
14795 Goldstein, E, 21M 4:17:58
14796 Conyers Jr, M, 33M 4:17:59
14797 Wildenhaus, W, 44M 4:17:59
14798 Saksida, B, 55M 4:18:00
14799 Moreno, N, 29F 4:18:00
14800 Leclerc, C, 43F 4:18:01
14801 De Meij, J, 35M 4:18:01
14802 Blanco, G, 59F 4:18:01
14803 Stalmeier, P, 50M 4:18:01
14804 Grabow, W, 53M 4:18:01
14805 Janes, S, 49M 4:18:01
14806 Dieterich, K, 37M 4:18:01
14807 McClure, A, 37M 4:18:01
14808 Skopp, P, 24M 4:18:01
14809 Stauffer, B, 61M 4:18:02
14810 Castellano, G, 37M 4:18:02
14811 Stubbe, D, 45M 4:18:02
14812 Ehring, D, 20M 4:18:02
14813 Ladera, F, 43M 4:18:02
14814 Dweck, S, 29M 4:18:03
14815 Van Hamelsveld, E, 44M 4:18:03
14816 Oszustowicz, E, 28M 4:18:03
14817 Franceschini, A, 47M 4:18:04
14818 Rojas, L, 51M 4:18:04
14819 Bastard, J, 38M 4:18:04
14820 Vierboom, P, 36M 4:18:05
14821 Koop, P, 43F 4:18:05
14822 Rambaldi, E, 28M 4:18:05
14823 Rauseo, J, 44M 4:18:05
14824 Polley, D, 25F 4:18:05
14825 Maya, C, 39F 4:18:06
14826 Valadez, J, 54M 4:18:06
14827 Branigan, J, 45M 4:18:06
14828Halucha, C, 29M 4:18:06
14829 Mahoney, J, 32M 4:18:07
14830 Carvalho, C, 42M 4:18:07
14831 Garger, A, 36M 4:18:07
14832 Drzewiecki, P, 37M 4:18:07
14833 Slater, B, 24M 4:18:07
14834 Menendez Hume, R, 42M 4:18:08
14835 Lewis, A, 43M 4:18:08
14836 Bokelmann, L, 31F 4:18:08
14837 Antikainen, H, 42F 4:18:08
14838 Anderson, K, 27F 4:18:08
14839 Sakai, S, 51M 4:18:08
14840 Alanis Gaona, H, 55M 4:18:08
14841 Sullan, M, 39M 4:18:08
14842 Cooper, D, 41M 4:18:09
14843 Mougey, M, 53M 4:18:09
14844 Reilly, M, 36M 4:18:09
14845Hernandez Martinez, J, 40M 4:18:09
14846 Hoogendoorn, C, 49M 4:18:09
14847 Leinaas, T, 51M 4:18:09
14848 Bruns, J, 23F 4:18:09
14849 Bertucci, A, 42F 4:18:10
14850 Azcargorta, J, 47M 4:18:10
14851 Fournier, F, 34F 4:18:11
14852 Hayes, W, 40M 4:18:11
14853 Foubert, H, 34F 4:18:11
14854 Pohmer, K, 34M 4:18:11
14855 Pollet, T, 32M 4:18:11
14856 Chadburn, A, 37F 4:18:11
14857 Schulze, H, 48M 4:18:12
14858 Marseille, O, 25M 4:18:12
14859 Parker, D, 40F 4:18:12
14860 McCarthy, J, 28M 4:18:12
14861 Sullivan, M, 27M 4:18:12
14862 McCarthy, T, 30M 4:18:12
14863 Davis, D, 41F 4:18:13
14864Riehl, R, 46M 4:18:13
14865 Letteboer, G, 58M 4:18:13
14866 Guillaume, P, 39M 4:18:14
14867 Rousmaniere, W, 23M 4:18:14
14868 Roest, W, 29M 4:18:14
14869 Bertrand, C, 37M 4:18:14
14870 Hoffman, R, 44F 4:18:14
14871 Aguilera, J, 31M 4:18:14
14872 Paredes, I, 35M 4:18:15
14873 Graf, W, 52M 4:18:15
14874 Lauer, T, 30M 4:18:15
14875 Loury, P, 31M 4:18:15
14876 Sanak, S, 44F 4:18:15
14877 Lefevere, M, 55M 4:18:15
14878 Van Beek, W, 54M 4:18:15
14879 Gutsche, S, 40F 4:18:15
14880 Char, R, 30F 4:18:16
14881 Top, P, 41M 4:18:16
14882 Stephen, D, 43M 4:18:16
14883 Bona, V, 36F 4:18:16
14884 Paladino Jr, W, 46M 4:18:16
14885 Taylor, J, 33F 4:18:16
14886 Clement, J, 40F 4:18:17
14887 Rennie, A, 34M 4:18:17
14888 Cepek, O, 30M 4:18:17
14889 Dick, P, 40F 4:18:17
14890 Gillespie, T, 57M 4:18:17
14891 Ross, D, 51M 4:18:17
14892 Wilson, J, 37F 4:18:17
14893 Abernathy, S, 37M 4:18:17
14894 Funk, H, 44M 4:18:17
14895 Bergang, J, 52F 4:18:18
14896 Iglesias Del Rio, F, 40M 4:18:18
14897 Mora, J, 38M 4:18:18
14898 Parkinson, D, 23M 4:18:18
14899 Bouley, M, 42F 4:18:19
14900 Margarita, E, 39F 4:18:19
14901 Hughes, P, 34M 4:18:19
14902 Fernandez, C, 50M 4:18:19
14903 Schulz, R, 59M 4:18:20
14904 McClenathan, A, 34F 4:18:20
14905 Moelgaard, A, 34F 4:18:20
14906 Muri, E, 31F 4:18:20
14907 Guggisberg, T, 37F 4:18:20
14908 McLaughlin, K, 25F 4:18:20
14909 Resler, S, 52M 4:18:20
14910 Padian, B, 29F 4:18:20
14911 Brown, W, 18M 4:18:20
14912 Palizi, A, 42M 4:18:20
14913 Broichhagen, A, 28M 4:18:20
14914 Abraham, F, 34M 4:18:20
14915 Haber, M, 33M 4:18:21
14916 Horowitz, B, 46M 4:18:21
14917 Dekker, A, 41M 4:18:21
14918 Wolf, J, 47F 4:18:21
14919 Midboee, S, 44M 4:18:22
14920 Righi, N, 41F 4:18:22
14921 Wasum, I, 54F 4:18:22
14922 Gibbons, A, 48M 4:18:22
14923 Bradshaw, G, 30F 4:18:22
14924 Dorrepaal, K, 47M 4:18:22
14925 Steffens, K, 55M 4:18:23
14926 Blok, J, 46M 4:18:23
14927 Jackson, J, 44M 4:18:23
14928 Jacobsen, W, 33M 4:18:23
14929 Chambre, F, 31M 4:18:24
14930 Platteel, J, 59M 4:18:24
14931 Ferrari, B, 38M 4:18:24
14932 De Vries, Y, 38M 4:18:24
14933 Zuniga, A, 61F 4:18:25
14934 Reinberger, W, 32M 4:18:26
14935 Thornton, M, 40M 4:18:26
14936 Lutz, K, 26F 4:18:26
14937 Biebrich, J, 52M 4:18:26
14938 Roijakkers, M, 29M 4:18:26
14939 Rist, E, 51M 4:18:26
14940 Darve, M, 63M 4:18:26
14941 Andreas, W, 37M 4:18:27
14942Friedman, D, 36M 4:18:27
14943 Hoarau, R, 52M 4:18:27
14944 Meijer, R, 47M 4:18:27
14945 Mounier, G, 48M 4:18:27
14946 Kamphaus, M, 26F 4:18:27
14947 Boirayon, P, 35M 4:18:27
14948 Gentile, D, 29M4:18:27
14949 Nacer, L, 42M 4:18:27
14950 Bennett, C, 24F 4:18:27
14951 Ayala Olvera, M, 36M 4:18:27
14952 Rindt, R, 42F 4:18:28
14953 Erdel, B, 50M 4:18:28
14954 Laforest, I, 51F 4:18:28
14955 Shore, B, 38F 4:18:29
14956 McMurray, M, 30M 4:18:29
14957 Zorn, G, 34M 4:18:29
14958 Torrey, B, 37F 4:18:29
14959 Vogelberg, U, 64M 4:18:29
14960 Bollinger, R, 50M 4:18:30
14961 Olesen, L, 30F 4:18:30
14962 Rigoletti, G, 45M 4:18:30
14963 La Rosa, E, 59M 4:18:31
14964 Siewert, D, 35F 4:18:31
14965 Harkins, W, 39M 4:18:31
14966 Dory, D, 40M 4:18:31
14967 Tamburin, M, 25M 4:18:31
14968 Azocar, H, 62M 4:18:31
14969 Chevillard, D, 46M 4:18:32
14970 Dutcher, S, 31M 4:18:32
14971 Hughes, A, 30F 4:18:32
14972 Barrio Aguirre, J, 37M 4:18:32
14973 Brouwer, M, 42M 4:18:32
14974 Daly, M, 63M 4:18:32
14975 Ficsor, S, 33M 4:18:32
14976 Hartung, M, 41M 4:18:33
14977 Devaux, C, 31M 4:18:33
14978 McCann, S, 25M 4:18:33
14979 Cashin, A, 55M 4:18:33
14980 Velez, D, 41F 4:18:33
14981 Topfstedt, B, 33F 4:18:33
14982 Neupert, J, 42F 4:18:34
14983 Topfstedt, K, 46M 4:18:34
14984 Stott, P, 50M 4:18:34
14985 Van Rossum, V, 30F 4:18:34
14986 Rene, M, 34M 4:18:34
14987 Kirby, M, 38M4:18:34
14988 Louis, M, 34M 4:18:34
14989 Summers, S, 25F 4:18:34
14990 Speelman, W, 42M 4:18:35
14991 Muller, B, 69M 4:18:35
14992 Grauer, A, 25M 4:18:35
14993 Hasselback, C, 24M 4:18:35
14994 Emmert, G, 54M 4:18:35
14995 Flores Vega, S, 48M 4:18:35
14996 Pellicciari, G, 63M 4:18:35
14997 De Zeeuw, J, 42M 4:18:36
14998 Heath, J, 38M 4:18:36
14999 Block, S, 34M 4:18:36
15000 Havel, M, 33M 4:18:36


Caution Greets Plan On New PC
Attempting to regain the leadership roles that each once held in the personal computer market, I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc. will announce today the details of their plan to develop a shared computer design.
Many corporate buyers, companies that sell computers and computer industry consultants say they welcome the development but made clear that they were skeptical about its prospects for success.


Father and Daughter On the Idea of Home
What the actress Hallie Foote achieves by simply opening her eyes fully is a marvel of the current theater season.
Portraying Laura Lee Weems, a small-town, family-smothered spinster in "Night Seasons," the drama by her father, Horton Foote, at the Signature Theater Company, she seems at first a curtained character, absorbing the disappointments her small world deals her with a polite self-containment kept in place by a flicker of hope.
But toward the middle of the first act, there comes a moment when Laura Lee, who has just learned of the marriage of a former suitor, seems to hear one door too many closing behind her.
All Ms.
Foote does is look directly into the audience, but in such a manner that you may want to turn away.
Her gaze brims with the realization that her life is a cul-de-sac.
And though she soon steps back into the harness of civilized convention that guides her through each day, the play has acquired a haunting throb it won't shake for the rest of the evening.


As Bosnian War Intensifies, Debate Grows Over Partition Plan
In the Sarajevo office of Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, a map that divides Bosnia and Herzegovina under an American-backed peace plan hangs on a wall.
Gazing at it recently, an aide to the general scornfully said, "If you were a Serb, would you accept that?"
The map, prepared by the United States and four other countries as part of a peace agreement, is regarded by General Rose and the British officers who surround him as unrealistic, ill-conceived and unfair to the Bosnian Serbs.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 4 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
9001 Rambally, R, 30M 3:54:58
9002 Jonckheer, J, 29F 3:54:59
9003 Brown, B, 29M 3:54:59
9004 Erbsland, M, 38M 3:54:59
9005 Wolff, I, 30F 3:54:59
9006 Sarubin, M, 53M 3:54:59
9007 Moreno, C, 24M 3:55:00
9008 Questel, R, 47M 3:55:00
9009 Rhodes, N, 30M 3:55:00
9010 Abrams, C, 38M 3:55:01
9011 Oeser, D, 34M 3:55:01
9012 Duerwachter, S, 46M 3:55:01
9013 Fletcher, A, 26M 3:55:01
9014 Hofsass, P, 35F 3:55:01
9015 Unger, H, 45M 3:55:02
9016 Granelli, C, 27M 3:55:02
9017 Meili, E, 48F 3:55:02
9018 Brustenghi, G, 54M 3:55:02
9019 Griesmer, E, 30M 3:55:03
9020 Winne, D, 30M 3:55:03
9021 Lips, J, 29M 3:55:03
9022 Perrin, J, 36M 3:55:03
9023 Amaro Guzman, R, 36M 3:55:03
9024 Clairenbeaud, Y, 32M 3:55:04
9025 Matthew, D, 33M3:55:04
9026 Cabrera, V, 48M 3:55:04
9027 Pacheco, I, 45M 3:55:04
9028 Perez-Gomez, A, 30M 3:55:04
9029 McDevitt, J, 43F 3:55:04
9030 Belloso, R, 47M 3:55:04
9031 Martinez, M, 38M 3:55:04
9032 Bolzon, A, 48M 3:55:05
9033 Curry, K, 44M 3:55:05
9034 Tobe, T, 35M 3:55:05
9035 Cohen, R, 39M 3:55:05
9036 Barillot, M, 50M 3:55:05
9037 Baudouin, M, 49M 3:55:06
9038 Sugano, S, 29F 3:55:08
9039 Cirera Nogueras, J, 39M 3:55:08
9040 Ponzio, G, 40M 3:55:08
9041 Montes, J, 26F 3:55:09
9042 James, V, 33M 3:55:09
9043 Barrientos Ildeponso, A, 42M 3:55:09
9044 Schroven, P, 37M 3:55:09
9045Perez, T, 40M 3:55:09
9046 Gutierrez, A, 52M 3:55:10
9047 Eidhammer, N, 51M 3:55:10
9048 Calas, N, 40F 3:55:10
9049 Pouillot, J, 26M 3:55:11
9050 Tascon Perez, B, 46M 3:55:12
9051 Liporace, L, 37F3:55:12
9052 Roman, V, 39M 3:55:12
9053 Rouet, Y, 39M 3:55:12
9054 Castillo, J, 36M 3:55:13
9055 Grobe, B, 46M 3:55:13
9056 Bodora, W, 42M 3:55:13
9057 Shimanek, G, 26F 3:55:14
9058 Heinhaus, R, 31M 3:55:14
9059 Pototschnigg, G, 32M 3:55:14
9060 Boe, S, 28M 3:55:15
9061 Wirths, M, 27M 3:55:15
9062 Carlotti, J, 30M 3:55:15
9063 Wallace, C, 51M 3:55:15
9064 Quarngesser, S, 28F 3:55:15
9065 Darmer, D, 43M 3:55:15
9066 Smith, C, 26F 3:55:15
9067 Wagman, B, 43M 3:55:16
9068 Gonzalez, A, 48M 3:55:16
9069 Rhenos, J, 41M 3:55:16
9070 Saniga, J, 42M 3:55:16
9071 Vargas, L, 51M 3:55:16
9072 Baglieri, G, 33M 3:55:16
9073 Skildheim, O, 48M 3:55:17
9074 Schlimm, V, 42M 3:55:17
9075 Winyard III, A, 41M 3:55:17
9076 Watanabe, K, 40M 3:55:17
9077 Birsh, S, 35F 3:55:18
9078 Ludot, P, 41M 3:55:18
9079 McGuire, M, 39M 3:55:18
9080 Gluf, C, 38M3:55:18
9081 Seda, E, 38M 3:55:18
9082 Asiaghi, A, 40M 3:55:18
9083 Heivers, K, 31M 3:55:19
9084 Epinette, J, 43M 3:55:19
9085 Zierke, L, 45M 3:55:19
9086 Courbatere, M, 40M 3:55:19
9087 Wist, S, 29F 3:55:20
9088 Gray, A, 42M 3:55:20
9089 Petry, K, 44M 3:55:20
9090 Leary, E, 48F 3:55:20
9091 Vounatsos, T, 30M 3:55:20
9092 Gaymard, P, 30M 3:55:21
9093 Minnick, J, 24M 3:55:21
9094 Rimolo, M, 38M 3:55:21
9095 Tabatchnick, L, 31F 3:55:21
9096 Fernandez, L, 41M 3:55:23
9097 Kenney, K, 35M 3:55:23
9098 Longfils, J, 50M 3:55:23
9099 Tasse, G, 33M 3:55:24
9100 Phillips, A, 30M 3:55:24
9101 Math, R, 29F 3:55:24
9102 Lopez, V, 40M 3:55:24
9103 Ando, K, 35F 3:55:25
9104 Sanko, T, 40M 3:55:25
9105 Fest, J, 44M 3:55:25
9106 Sager, C, 36F 3:55:25
9107 Pschorr, R, 45M 3:55:25
9108 Garibay, J, 37M 3:55:25
9109 Jorgensen, K, 29F 3:55:26
9110 Mueller, W, 48M 3:55:26
9111 Struyve, B, 42M 3:55:26
9112 Rossiter, M, 27M 3:55:26
9113 Makipaa, V, 53M 3:55:26
9114 Marquardt, J, 51M 3:55:26
9115 Praskins, L, 60F 3:55:26
9116 Wolf, T, 26M3:55:26
9117 Schroeder, J, 54M 3:55:27
9118 Warth, J, 34M 3:55:27
9119 Von Beesten, F, 54M 3:55:27
9120 Wilson, M, 33M 3:55:27
9121 De Bie, H, 49M 3:55:27
9122 Muus, P, 47M 3:55:28
9123 Bouillon, P, 46M 3:55:29
9124 Steigelfest, D, 27M 3:55:29
9125 Cruz Russek, J, 41M 3:55:29
9126 Duvert, B, 43M 3:55:30
9127 Lagarde, A, 28M 3:55:30
9128 Podda, C, 31F 3:55:30
9129 Radl, C, 33M 3:55:30
9130 Bruyn, R, 32M 3:55:30
9131 Meier, F, 32M 3:55:30
9132 Christopher, K, 40M 3:55:30
9133 Kanda, K, 35M 3:55:30
9134 Gabriel, H, 35M 3:55:31
9135 Maag, W, 51M 3:55:31
9136 Barillas, B, 28M 3:55:31
9137 Nilles, A, 53M 3:55:32
9138 Cioffi, J, 60M 3:55:32
9139 Gooten, L, 27M 3:55:32
9140 Sherman, R, 46M 3:55:33
9141 Darbyshire, C, 47M 3:55:34
9142 Matos, W, 37M 3:55:34
9143 Brilliant, J, 46M 3:55:34
9144 De Sutter, D, 38M 3:55:34
9145 Dominguez Arteaga, J, 60M 3:55:35
9146 Blad, R, 31M 3:55:35
9147 Mortelmans, T, 41M 3:55:35
9148 Snijders, J, 43M 3:55:35
9149 Whitfield, R, 36M 3:55:35
9150 Le Sausse, A, 31M 3:55:35
9151 Wetmore, E, 28F 3:55:35
9152 Perez, C, 37M 3:55:36
9153 Richter, A, 35M 3:55:36
9154 McDonnell, C, 31M 3:55:36
9155 Quattro, P, 35M 3:55:37
9156 Ganzi, F, 31M 3:55:37
9157 Van Dijk, W, 47M 3:55:37
9158 Rivera, S, 39M 3:55:37
9159 Mikami, K, 30M 3:55:37
9160 Brewster, W, 31M 3:55:38
9161 Erb, A, 46M 3:55:38
9162 Shimizu, M, 32F 3:55:38
9163 Micozzi, C, 30M 3:55:38
9164 Wood, S, 46M 3:55:38
9165 Beriot, D, 34M 3:55:38
9166 Poll, W, 45M 3:55:38
9167 Kacer, A, 50M 3:55:39
9168 Busseuil, B, 43M 3:55:39
9169 Milde, K, 23M 3:55:39
9170 Weil, P, 36M 3:55:40
9171 Destriez, D, 33M 3:55:40
9172 Kline, R, 34M 3:55:40
9173 Botas, F, 43M 3:55:40
9174 Fujii, K, 62M 3:55:40
9175 Damet, D, 45M 3:55:40
9176 Graham, M, 38M 3:55:41
9177 Markolwitz, H, 40M 3:55:41
9178 Ziegler, J, 27M 3:55:42
9179 Molliens, A, 39M 3:55:42
9180 Tel, P, 31M 3:55:42
9181 Brandsma, A, 40M 3:55:42
9182 Freeman, E, 53M 3:55:43
9183 Briggs Jr, D, 32M 3:55:43
9184 Lipsman, R, 48M 3:55:43
9185 Higgs, J, 30M 3:55:44
9186 Bolzius, R, 35M 3:55:44
9187 Ingenbleek, M, 31M 3:55:44
9188 Scremin, M, 34M 3:55:44
9189 Hackenberg, P, 30M 3:55:44
9190 Bold, J, 26M 3:55:45
9191 Laroye, A, 31M 3:55:45
9192 Maffioletti, F, 41M 3:55:45
9193 Fagerlid, E, 33M 3:55:45
9194 Burke, J, 29M 3:55:45
9195 Doyle, L, 46M 3:55:45
9196 Van Der Velden, J, 38M 3:55:46
9197 Iisalo, P, 49M 3:55:46
9198 Sponagel, W, 33M 3:55:46
9199 Livingston, J, 50M 3:55:46
9200 Gill Jr, K, 35M 3:55:46
9201 Plunkett, T, 36M 3:55:46
9202 Werner, E, 39M 3:55:47
9203 Steggerda, W, 58M 3:55:47
9204 Bodin, G, 48M 3:55:47
9205 Danner, P, 45M 3:55:47
9206 Moy, J, 46M 3:55:48
9207 Bramson, G, 37M 3:55:48
9208 Nemecek, M, 28M 3:55:48
9209 Socolowsky, D, 38M 3:55:48
9210 Krause, U, 36M 3:55:48
9211 Rannefeld, S, 43M 3:55:49
9212Bier, W, 49M 3:55:49
9213 Palmieri, A, 58M 3:55:49
9214 Gudka, P, 38M 3:55:49
9215 De Jong, W, 38M 3:55:50
9216 Shaw, E, 50M 3:55:50
9217 Goetsch, M, 32M 3:55:50
9218 Stevens, L, 35M 3:55:50
9219 Tashjian, D, 39M 3:55:51
9220 Hutchins, K, 32F 3:55:51
9221 Sow, M, 36M 3:55:51
9222 Janmaat, P, 56M 3:55:52
9223 Mac Donald, G, 41M 3:55:52
9224 Clement, J, 34M 3:55:52
9225 Sager, R, 30M 3:55:52
9226 Buzasi, K, 45M 3:55:52
9227 McConvey, T, 31M 3:55:53
9228 Denijs, G, 26F 3:55:53
9229 Powell, M, 30M 3:55:53
9230 Slusser, N, 32F 3:55:54
9231 Jamieson, W, 40M 3:55:54
9232 Wall, J, 39M 3:55:54
9233 Mathers, W, 43F 3:55:54
9234 Sichler, O, 40M 3:55:55
9235 Zalabak, W, 45M 3:55:55
9236 Cardona, A, 30M 3:55:55
9237 Smith, E, 41M 3:55:55
9238 Mendoza, E, 38M 3:55:56
9239 Petersen, L, 30M 3:55:56
9240 Pergolis, K, 39F 3:55:56
9241 De Cristofaro, A, 34M 3:55:56
9242 Velozo, L, 54M 3:55:56
9243 Kocaba, T, 59M 3:55:56
9244 Loiselle, D, 36M 3:55:56
9245 Marrese, M, 27F 3:55:58
9246 Chalmers, A, 61M 3:55:58
9247 Fevre, C, 47M 3:55:59
9248 Avella, B, 43M 3:55:59
9249 Kantrowitz, B, 46M 3:55:59
9250 Ramirez, J, 35M 3:55:59
9251 McMahon, M, 38M 3:55:59
9252 Cykiert, R, 42M 3:55:59
9253 Pivar, C, 55M 3:55:59
9254 Cashman, G, 29M 3:55:59
9255 Corcoran, T, 36M 3:55:59
9256 Bouland, J, 45M 3:56:00
9257 Chaapel, R, 48M 3:56:00
9258 Maury, S, 26M 3:56:00
9259 Clausen, C, 27M 3:56:00
9260 Girardin, J, 49M 3:56:00
9261 Swiatek, G, 44M 3:56:01
9262 Le Moal, D, 48M 3:56:01
9263 Smith, G, 41M 3:56:01
9264 Wege, F, 46M 3:56:02
9265 Gerber, J, 28F 3:56:02
9266 Duizendstra, K, 54M 3:56:02
9267 Fannin, R, 26M 3:56:03
9268 Archibald, D, 46M 3:56:03
9269 Byrom, R, 36M 3:56:04
9270 Flaherty, A, 29F 3:56:04
9271 Radzinski, G, 43M 3:56:04
9272 Golombek, D, 47M 3:56:04
9273 Pion, F, 37M 3:56:04
9274 Laffineur, H, 56M 3:56:04
9275 Hulin, A, 23M 3:56:04
9276 Uriarte Bilbao, J, 47M 3:56:04
9277 Pugh, B, 43M 3:56:04
9278 Soguel, M, 28F 3:56:05
9279 Posnock, S, 34M 3:56:05
9280 Vuorib, P, 50M 3:56:05
9281 Tercek, M, 37M 3:56:06
9282 Meyer, E, 49M 3:56:06
9283 Benson, S, 42M 3:56:06
9284 Reinert, R, 38M 3:56:06
9285 Hall, J, 24M 3:56:06
9286 Landess, S, 30M 3:56:06
9287 Edgar, R, 46F 3:56:06
9288 Hines, C, 30M 3:56:07
9289 Coimbra, P, 29F 3:56:07
9290 Arnold, S, 40M 3:56:07
9291 Montero, A, 59M 3:56:08
9292 Lippert, P, 39F 3:56:08
9293 Muller, L, 36F 3:56:08
9294 Hindin, P, 24M 3:56:08
9295 Mitchell, D, 26F 3:56:09
9296 Canales, O, 42M 3:56:09
9297 Sufka, E, 50M 3:56:09
9298 Harrison, N, 39F 3:56:09
9299 Denning, D, 33M 3:56:09
9300 Bergman, D, 63M 3:56:10
9301 Garshol, B, 54M 3:56:10
9302 Maury, A, 58M 3:56:11
9303 Stratis, D, 28M 3:56:11
9304 Johnston, W, 25M 3:56:11
9305 Oplacio, C, 38M 3:56:11
9306 Wibberg, H, 33M 3:56:12
9307 Gohde, J, 45M 3:56:12
9308 Gonzalez Rizo, C, 30M 3:56:12
9309 Smith, B, 26M 3:56:12
9310 Mout, A, 34M 3:56:13
9311 Dade, J, 30M 3:56:13
9312 Troake, R, 36M 3:56:14
9313 Jentsch, C, 27F 3:56:14
9314 Neill, T, 39F 3:56:14
9315 Jensen, D, 44M 3:56:16
9316 Lavoue, F, 28M 3:56:16
9317 Alexander, R, 25M 3:56:16
9318 Ellingsen, F, 44M 3:56:16
9319 Hofstein, C, 25F 3:56:16
9320 Noorlander, W, 33M 3:56:16
9321 Nicias, J, 39M 3:56:17
9322 Finzel, E, 41M 3:56:17
9323 Pagan, H, 51M 3:56:17
9324 Glass, D, 37M 3:56:17
9325 De Vries, D, 43M 3:56:18
9326 Routzon, R, 41M 3:56:18
9327 Torpey, E, 24F 3:56:18
9328 Wolf, R, 49M3:56:19
9329 Lund, M, 46M 3:56:19
9330 Palmese, P, 33M 3:56:19
9331 Stratos, K, 34F 3:56:19
9332 Kelly, L, 31M 3:56:19
9333 Drittler, C, 36M 3:56:19
9334 Fellmann, A, 25F 3:56:20
9335 Read, M, 23M 3:56:20
9336 Labarde, P, 36M 3:56:20
9337 Dempsey, D, 43M 3:56:20
9338 O'Mara, J, 28M 3:56:21
9339 Delgado, A, 28M 3:56:21
9340 Roe, J, 36M 3:56:21
9341 Adams, R, 49M 3:56:21
9342 McKiernan, F, 27M 3:56:21
9343 Richards, W, 46M 3:56:21
9344 Roe, M, 37F 3:56:21
9345 Sands, J, 39M 3:56:21
9346 Farrell, E, 29M 3:56:22
9347 Kohn, A, 36F 3:56:22
9348 Iovine, V, 49M 3:56:22
9349 Ashnault, K, 28F 3:56:22
9350 Geldreich, D, 43M 3:56:22
9351 Nakahama, M, 32M 3:56:22
9352 Pitzen, R, 38M 3:56:22
9353 Tannenbaum, G, 36M 3:56:22
9354 Saperstein, A, 30M 3:56:23
9355 Maher, D, 37M 3:56:23
9356 Nielsen, J, 29M 3:56:23
9357 Evans, M, 29M 3:56:23
9358 Davies, R, 43M 3:56:23
9359 Liliano, V, 40M 3:56:24
9360 Van Oranje-Nassau, M, 26M 3:56:24
9361 Veld, R, 50M 3:56:24
9362 McCall, P, 24F 3:56:24
9363 Van Der Stap, T, 50M 3:56:24
9364 Peetz, B, 33F 3:56:24
9365 Stapel, L, 50M 3:56:24
9366 Camertoni, A, 45M 3:56:25
9367 Dobischok, C, 24F 3:56:25
9368 Krebs, K, 24M 3:56:25
9369 Suthers, H, 24F 3:56:25
9370 Boehm, E, 55M 3:56:25
9371 Temple, P, 50M 3:56:25
9372 Cukerman, A, 63M 3:56:26
9373 Vuyk, C, 46M 3:56:26
9374 Goertz, R, 18M 3:56:26
9375 Olsen, O, 32M 3:56:26
9376 Wood, M, 36F 3:56:26
9377 Rice, P, 41M 3:56:27
9378 Wood, S, 47M 3:56:28
9379 Kay, P, 25M 3:56:28
9380 Daini, R, 43M 3:56:28
9381 Pellet, J, 46M 3:56:28
9382 Pfeufer, H, 55M 3:56:29
9383 Govender, T, 44M 3:56:29
9384 Benjamin, E, 34M 3:56:30
9385 Hohn, R, 58M 3:56:30
9386 Castillo, J, 27M 3:56:30
9387 Ferreiro, J, 47M 3:56:30
9388 Hamann, B, 40M 3:56:30
9389 Swartz, D, 37F 3:56:31
9390 Glaser, B, 22F 3:56:31
9391 Gaude, P, 34M 3:56:31
9392 Di-Francesco, G, 36M 3:56:31
9393 Suau, D, 32M 3:56:32
9394 Ryan, T, 51M 3:56:32
9395 Bourgain, V, 34M 3:56:32
9396 Oliveira, A, 58M 3:56:32
9397 Hucklesby, T, 32M 3:56:32
9398 Gonzalez Roman, T, 28F 3:56:33
9399 Lowe, S, 49M 3:56:33
9400 Rodriquez, R, 39M 3:56:33
9401 Chisholm, S, 29M 3:56:33
9402 Southern, J, 31M 3:56:33
9403 Novogratz, J, 33F 3:56:33
9404 Van Cleve, E, 29M 3:56:33
9405 Hammel, D, 28M 3:56:33
9406 Hinman, W, 51M 3:56:33
9407 Donnelly, T, 29M 3:56:33
9408 Peralta, J, 41M 3:56:34
9409 O'Riordan, P, 51M 3:56:34
9410 Kimori, S, 39M 3:56:34
9411 Graf, J, 28M 3:56:34
9412 Fox, D, 23M 3:56:34
9413 Blandin, M, 33F 3:56:35
9414 Marolt, V, 50M 3:56:35
9415 Carson, V, 29F 3:56:35
9416 Courtney, B, 44M 3:56:36
9417 Ratliff, D, 26M 3:56:36
9418 Miley, R, 33M 3:56:37
9419 Hennessey, N, 35F 3:56:37
9420 Charriere, D, 40M 3:56:37
9421 Potier, S, 27M 3:56:37
9422 McClenathan, D, 42M 3:56:37
9423 Anderson, K, 38F 3:56:37
9424 Zimmermann, G, 29F 3:56:38
9425 Pacheco Gutierrez, M, 53M 3:56:38
9426 Mai, L, 35M 3:56:38
9427 D Ercole, G, 47M 3:56:39
9428 DePanfilis, L, 39M 3:56:39
9429 Aleman, G, 42M 3:56:39
9430 Bensojo Rico, F, 41M 3:56:39
9431 Gruenwald, F, 56M 3:56:39
9432 Torcat, D, 44F 3:56:39
9433Sautter, R, 31M 3:56:39
9434 Apel, S, 27F 3:56:40
9435 Macchiaroli, A, 49M 3:56:40
9436 Simon, R, 43M 3:56:40
9437 Bausbacher, P, 53M 3:56:40
9438 Delia, D, 39M 3:56:40
9439 Fallon, N, 36M 3:56:40
9440 Coe, M, 23M 3:56:41
9441 Foppen, J, 48M 3:56:41
9442 Lange, D, 40M 3:56:41
9443 Moloney, J, 31M 3:56:41
9444 Bohman, L, 30F 3:56:42
9445 Satriano, J, 43M 3:56:42
9446 Cintron, D, 58M 3:56:42
9447 Reynaud, P, 45M 3:56:43
9448 Dobroski, D, 29M 3:56:43
9449 Kragtwijk, F, 51M 3:56:43
9450 Hamart, O, 32M 3:56:43
9451 Gonzalez, E, 40M 3:56:43
9452 Wit, F, 46M 3:56:43
9453 Balcon, M, 42M 3:56:44
9454 Richard, S, 31F 3:56:44
9455 Natal, E, 32F 3:56:44
9456 Nardi, F, 50M 3:56:44
9457 Lambeck, R, 52M 3:56:45
9458 Helbling, A, 44M 3:56:45
9459 Quinn, T, 41M 3:56:45
9460 Barnes, S, 28M 3:56:45
9461 Richard, A, 32M 3:56:45
9462 Meyer, A, 43M 3:56:45
9463 Filippi, C, 46M 3:56:45
9464 Meister, K, 53M 3:56:46
9465 Te Kulve, A, 36M 3:56:46
9466 Roddy-Reeg, P, 46F 3:56:46
9467 Medvetz, R, 51M 3:56:46
9468 Douglas, M, 30M 3:56:46
9469 Miller, G, 42M 3:56:46
9470 Hosomi, T, 33M 3:56:46
9471 Hutheesing, S, 34M 3:56:46
9472 Moore, G, 50M 3:56:47
9473 Studley, B, 36M 3:56:47
9474 See, C, 26F 3:56:47
9475 Carmaux, G, 42M 3:56:47
9476 Alvarez Leal, S, 51M 3:56:47
9477 Casey, B, 48M 3:56:47
9478 Alvira, C, 41M 3:56:48
9479 Weigand, W, 48M 3:56:48
9480 Puma, A, 65M 3:56:48
9481 Pellettieri, C, 27M 3:56:48
9482 Hlmskoh, E, 48M 3:56:48
9483 Chojnacki, C, 37M 3:56:48
9484 Wilkins MD., R, 41M 3:56:48
9485 Cavillon, D, 30M 3:56:48
9486 Furey, D, 38F 3:56:48
9487 Mack, D, 41M 3:56:48
9488 Biolchini, E, 28M 3:56:48
9489 Cordova Geirdal, C, 30M 3:56:48
9490 Chuu, L, 22F 3:56:49
9491 Damon, W, 51M 3:56:49
9492 Carter, J, 41M 3:56:49
9493 Pritchard, C, 36F 3:56:49
9494 De Winkel, P, 40M 3:56:49
9495 Carroll, W, 40M 3:56:49
9496 Gherardi, G, 40M 3:56:50
9497 Gilliver, G, 45M 3:56:50
9498 Menesguen, M, 39M 3:56:50
9499 Crochet, D, 35M 3:56:50
9500 Kramer, M, 31F 3:56:50
9501 Black, D, 27M 3:56:50
9502 Winn, R, 25M 3:56:51
9503 Mackey, D, 30F 3:56:51
9504 Coerts, M, 29M 3:56:51
9505 Cardwell, D, 30M 3:56:51
9506 Carpentier, S, 24M 3:56:51
9507 Osteen, E, 29F 3:56:52
9508 Garrett, J, 26M 3:56:52
9509 Lago, H, 46M 3:56:52
9510 Francis, D, 29M 3:56:53
9511 Lambert, J, 47M 3:56:54
9512 Campos, P, 32M 3:56:54
9513 Pullen, T, 29M 3:56:55
9514 Cantu Montalvo, D, 34F 3:56:55
9515 Tobler, R, 42M 3:56:55
9516 Fugistier, B, 40M 3:56:55
9517 Ortiz, C, 46M 3:56:55
9518 Feldman, L, 36M 3:56:56
9519 Marrero, J, 47M 3:56:56
9520 Albero, M, 47F 3:56:56
9521 Haavikko, M, 32M 3:56:56
9522 Wirth, K, 36M 3:56:56
9523 Le Balc'H, A, 55M 3:56:57
9524 Mark, P, 40M 3:56:57
9525 Smith, G, 32M 3:56:57
9526 Casasnovas, J, 38M 3:56:58
9527 Garza, M, 28M 3:56:58
9528 Coira, R, 40M 3:56:58
9529 Saunders, W, 50M 3:56:58
9530 Knight, T, 37M 3:56:58
9531 Rodriguez Aguirre, A, 23M 3:56:58
9532 Schliwo, P, 52M 3:56:58
9533 Whitler, R, 39M 3:56:59
9534 Frank, L, 29F 3:56:59
9535 Godron, J, 38M 3:56:59
9536 Phalon, P, 28M 3:56:59
9537 Barker, R, 29M 3:57:00
9538 Gruver, R, 42M 3:57:00
9539 Martin, P, 40M 3:57:00
9540 Simmons, B, 33M 3:57:00
9541 Locilento, A, 50M 3:57:00
9542 Lorge, J, 30M 3:57:00
9543 Drake, R, 26M 3:57:00
9544 Espinoza, M, 47M 3:57:01
9545 Veldman, J, 39M 3:57:01
9546 Klafehn, H, 25F 3:57:01
9547 Monaco, L, 32F 3:57:01
9548 Richman, A, 37M 3:57:01
9549 Gafner, W, 23M 3:57:01
9550 Gallego, S, 46M 3:57:02
9551 Gordon, H, 37M 3:57:02
9552 Bryant, E, 37M 3:57:02
9553 Cervone, M, 35F 3:57:02
9554 Dupont, M, 52M 3:57:02
9555 Schoner, C, 37M 3:57:03
9556 Flute, S, 22M 3:57:03
9557 Hoglund, G, 52M 3:57:03
9558 Mosenhauer, S, 45M 3:57:03
9559 Bourdon, J, 42M 3:57:03
9560 Zweig, E, 26F 3:57:04
9561 Palacios Barro, R, 36M 3:57:04
9562 Meyers, R, 37M 3:57:04
9563 Rojas, M, 35M 3:57:04
9564 Sanchez, E, 40M 3:57:04
9565 Walder, S, 28M 3:57:05
9566 Constanzo, R, 29M 3:57:05
9567 Leal, A, 35F 3:57:05
9568 Gentile, R, 38M 3:57:06
9569 McCaffrey, C, 39F 3:57:06
9570 Seufer Wasserthal, P, 33M 3:57:06
9571 Sokol, R, 39M 3:57:06
9572 Nieves, L, 37M 3:57:07
9573 Bastian Dr., W, 50M 3:57:07
9574 Coffey, W, 36M 3:57:07
9575 Steeger, U, 34M 3:57:08
9576 Cashin, B, 47M 3:57:09
9577 Ellis, T, 35M 3:57:09
9578 Schwartz, M, 44M 3:57:10
9579 Smith, C, 31M 3:57:10
9580 Andrews, W, 41M 3:57:10
9581 Van Acker, H, 39M 3:57:11
9582Webb, R, 42M 3:57:11
9583 Vobis, J, 33M 3:57:11
9584 Teixeira, D, 34M 3:57:12
9585 Nyssen, E, 40F 3:57:12
9586 Wagner, T, 27M 3:57:12
9587 Flynn, L, 29F 3:57:12
9588 Granville, J, 29M 3:57:13
9589 Anderson, J, 37M 3:57:13
9590 Young, P, 24M 3:57:13
9591 Leloup, J, 42M 3:57:13
9592 Van Der Heijden, A, 30M 3:57:14
9593 Prieto, V, 31M 3:57:14
9594 Victoria, S, 45M 3:57:14
9595 Warmflash, L, 35M 3:57:14
9596 Higdon, C, 34M 3:57:15
9597 Benkrim, A, 27M 3:57:15
9598 Lobjois, M, 19M 3:57:15
9599 Peter, M, 44F 3:57:15
9600 Fehrenbach, H, 26M 3:57:15
9601 Hochster MD, H, 40M 3:57:15
9602 Southworth, H, 52M 3:57:16
9603 Miller, G, 34F 3:57:16
9604De Conihout, R, 47M 3:57:16
9605 Peter, H, 44M 3:57:16
9606 Becker, H, 47M 3:57:16
9607 McCauley, B, 35M 3:57:16
9608 Bielsa, M, 52M 3:57:16
9609 Alcalde, L, 62M 3:57:17
9610 Degen, E, 45M 3:57:17
9611 Lefevre, M, 29M 3:57:17
9612 Corrochano, J, 31M 3:57:17
9613 Gomez, A, 42M 3:57:17
9614 Fischer, J, 30M 3:57:17
9615 Richard, C, 35F 3:57:18
9616 Ramos, J, 34M 3:57:18
9617 Parker, M, 22M 3:57:18
9618 Lansen, T, 36F 3:57:18
9619 Murray, J, 45M 3:57:18
9620 Anker, J, 44F 3:57:19
9621 Mason, F, 69M 3:57:20
9622 Jensen, A, 31M 3:57:20
9623 Kirchman, S, 29F 3:57:20
9624 Gutowski, W, 40M 3:57:20
9625 Ruhdorfer, M, 35M 3:57:20
9626 Rutti, A, 44M 3:57:21
9627 Belej, J, 50M 3:57:21
9628 Serale, E, 50M 3:57:21
9629 Sinclair, J, 23M 3:57:21
9630 Shepard, S, 34M 3:57:21
9631 Chiko, B, 32M 3:57:22
9632 Kostros, D, 44M 3:57:22
9633 Schell, G, 58M 3:57:22
9634 De Gregori, V, 40M 3:57:22
9635 Legendre, F, 34M 3:57:22
9636 Shilling, J, 30M 3:57:22
9637 Schroeder, J, 34M 3:57:22
9638 Cannon, A, 25M 3:57:22
9639 Brouwers, S, 30M 3:57:22
9640 Burns, J, 36M 3:57:23
9641 Danilla, M, 39M 3:57:23
9642Hurtado, C, 29M 3:57:23
9643 Rice, R, 43M 3:57:23
9644 Adams, A, 23F 3:57:23
9645 Kristiansen, L, 37M 3:57:23
9646 Carrasco, E, 43M 3:57:24
9647 Loza Hernandez, J, 58M 3:57:24
9648 Sanchez, L, 41M3:57:24
9649 Habib, H, 36M 3:57:25
9650 Derwort, J, 47M 3:57:25
9651 Mei, J, 46M 3:57:25
9652 Johannessen, O, 53M 3:57:25
9653 Davidson, J, 33F 3:57:25
9654 Jennings, R, 53M 3:57:25
9655 Fuglestad, M, 50M 3:57:25
9656 Grant, M, 36M 3:57:26
9657 Roach, K, 42M 3:57:26
9658 Franco, R, 40M 3:57:26
9659 Leon, P, 56M 3:57:27
9660 Burns, M, 41M 3:57:27
9661 Shepard, A, 27M 3:57:27
9662 Rypma, B, 31M 3:57:27
9663 Levine, C, 23M 3:57:27
9664 Obara, S, 46M 3:57:28
9665 McShane, B, 40M 3:57:28
9666 Macintosh, J, 27M 3:57:28
9667 Paer, G, 35M 3:57:28
9668 Moyer, J, 37M 3:57:28
9669 Slimak, R, 42M 3:57:29
9670 Vilboux, A, 45M 3:57:29
9671 Schumacher, U, 50M 3:57:29
9672 Dumartheray, P, 39M 3:57:29
9673 Rinks, J, 23M 3:57:29
9674 Savatovsky, A, 45M 3:57:29
9675 Slusher, H, 57M 3:57:29
9676 Fuentes, P, 51M 3:57:30
9677 Romano, P, 43M 3:57:30
9678 Sherline, C, 34M 3:57:30
9679 Meagher, R, 35M 3:57:30
9680 Ludwig, W, 50M 3:57:30
9681 Nielsen, L, 33M 3:57:30
9682 Pepper, G, 34M 3:57:31
9683 Evens Jr., R, 32M 3:57:31
9684 Perkins, G, 57M 3:57:31
9685 Pickering, M, 28F 3:57:32
9686 Llorens-Valverde, C, 37M 3:57:32
9687 Rocha, A, 37M 3:57:32
9688 Lopez, F, 41M 3:57:32
9689 Horta, A, 51M 3:57:32
9690 Jeulin, D, 47M 3:57:33
9691 Stetson, A, 38M 3:57:34
9692 Alfandary, F, 32F 3:57:34
9693Cassier, P, 37M 3:57:34
9694 Panzarino, G, 37M 3:57:34
9695 Matter, H, 51M 3:57:34
9696 Gummelt, U, 39M 3:57:34
9697 Bonhomme, P, 51M 3:57:34
9698 Yamazaki, M, 27F 3:57:35
9699 Adams, R, 28F 3:57:35
9700 Valdes, A, 48M 3:57:35
9701 Lambrechts, M, 41F 3:57:35
9702 Hunter, L, 34F 3:57:36
9703 Finley Iii, J, 47M 3:57:36
9704 DeNavarra, C, 26M 3:57:36
9705 Ryan, S, 39M 3:57:37
9706 Belingheri, R, 44M 3:57:37
9707 Castagnola, J, 28F 3:57:37
9708 King, P, 43M 3:57:38
9709 Vietmeier, H, 42M 3:57:38
9710 Myers, S, 29M 3:57:39
9711 Gulaker, H, 42M 3:57:39
9712 Block, J, 31M 3:57:39
9713 Otters, J, 40M 3:57:39
9714 Wingate, G, 28M 3:57:40
9715 Van Weelden, D, 43F 3:57:40
9716 Blanchard, E, 33M 3:57:40
9717 Thouvenin, D, 43M 3:57:41
9718 Daenens, B, 49F 3:57:41
9719 Weinstein, M, 38M 3:57:41
9720 Rogelj, I, 42M 3:57:41
9721 Napoli, D, 28M 3:57:42
9722 Le Lay, B, 39M 3:57:42
9723 Lipavsek, J, 36M 3:57:42
9724 Doherty, M, 42M 3:57:43
9725 Lariccia, V, 51M 3:57:43
9726 Bassu, G, 36M 3:57:43
9727 Barnes, V, 31M 3:57:43
9728 Ibano, M, 43M 3:57:44
9729 Austin Jr., W, 27M 3:57:44
9730 Barnes, J, 65M 3:57:44
9731 Burton, T, 45M 3:57:44
9732 Timm, G, 51M 3:57:44
9733 Waltemate, L, 34F 3:57:45
9734 Pruvost, J, 19M 3:57:45
9735Marcus, J, 44M 3:57:45
9736 Kramer, J, 52F 3:57:45
9737 Maloney, K, 30M 3:57:46
9738 Sinclair Jr., C, 44M 3:57:46
9739 Davoux, P, 53M 3:57:46
9740 Rebella, R, 41F 3:57:46
9741 Henderson, P, 34M 3:57:46
9742 Dominguez, A, 34M 3:57:46
9743 Binder, M, 43M 3:57:46
9744 Alexander, S, 42M 3:57:47
9745 Meier, R, 28M 3:57:47
9746 Mayen, J, 45M 3:57:47
9747 Makoshi, Y, 42M 3:57:47
9748 Kurz, J, 40M 3:57:48
9749 Evans, J, 41M 3:57:48
9750 Meitz, R, 32M 3:57:48
9751 Paiva, Y, 39F 3:57:48
9752 Krajacic, J, 41M 3:57:49
9753 Zuffo, S, 58M 3:57:49
9754 Hebert, A, 45M 3:57:49
9755 Tahuilan, T, 23M 3:57:49
9756 Sabatini, S, 60M 3:57:49
9757 Alcorn, M, 48M 3:57:49
9758 Salazar, A, 43M 3:57:49
9759 Hadden, P, 45M 3:57:49
9760 Rognebakke, A, 49M 3:57:49
9761 Stanger, A, 36M 3:57:49
9762 Balza, A, 44F 3:57:50
9763 Cafaro, J, 36M 3:57:50
9764 Moser, M, 31M 3:57:50
9765 Kambolis, N, 30M 3:57:50
9766 Van Der Peet, J, 45M 3:57:50
9767 Flugge, A, 29M 3:57:51
9768 Obrien, K, 40M 3:57:51
9769 Davis, E, 25M 3:57:51
9770 Cahn, L, 28F 3:57:51
9771 Alder, P, 43M 3:57:51
9772 Fry, T, 40M 3:57:51
9773 Averbach, M, 35M 3:57:51
9774 Seeliger, M, 32M 3:57:51
9775 Colaizy, M, 44M 3:57:52
9776 Croc, E, 22M 3:57:52
9777 Boka, A, 55M 3:57:52
9778 Mundt, R, 40M 3:57:52
9779 Herrmann, J, 29M 3:57:52
9780 Maxton, R, 31M 3:57:52
9781 Clodic, J, 32M 3:57:52
9782 Davenport, C, 30F 3:57:53
9783 Parisen, R, 35M 3:57:53
9784 Lashinsky, P, 36F 3:57:53
9785 Wilson, J, 30M 3:57:53
9786 Hogenhout, L, 36M 3:57:53
9787 Rice, D, 51M 3:57:53
9788 Walling, C, 24M 3:57:53
9789 Jacks, D, 55M 3:57:53
9790 Trigg, M, 24M 3:57:54
9791 Haudemann Andersen, J, 36M 3:57:54
9792 Pileggi, J, 41M 3:57:54
9793 Piron, L, 30M 3:57:54
9794 Rudloff, A, 37M 3:57:54
9795 Parzermair, F, 43M 3:57:54
9796 Paetsch, M, 32M 3:57:54
9797 Wolvovitz, E, 41F 3:57:54
9798 Maluso, M, 33M 3:57:54
9799 Becker, S, 47M 3:57:55
9800 Johnson, S, 32M 3:57:55
9801 Gmeiner, A, 25M 3:57:55
9802 Rallis, J, 37M 3:57:55
9803 Eustance, R, 39M 3:57:56
9804 Dyngeland, A, 54M 3:57:56
9805 Steiner, W, 35M 3:57:56
9806 Lahtinen, T, 30F 3:57:56
9807 Mukherjee, G, 22M 3:57:56
9808 Lorenzo, S, 36M 3:57:56
9809 Vernis, A, 30M 3:57:57
9810 Quiquine, G, 42M 3:57:57
9811 Silverblatt, F, 57M 3:57:57
9812 Belfer, S, 44M 3:57:57
9813 Bermudez, L, 55M 3:57:58
9814 Mauro, M, 34M 3:57:58
9815 Sarshalom, E, 34M 3:57:58
9816 Den Broeder, E, 44F 3:57:58
9817 Christophe, C, 26M 3:57:58
9818 Kunze, U, 54M 3:57:59
9819 Rubio, G, 29M 3:57:59
9820 Tyrell, A, 30M 3:57:59
9821 Buchanan, T, 44M 3:57:59
9822 Asci, S, 31M 3:57:59
9823 Morales, C, 45M 3:57:59
9824 Iodice, B, 46M 3:57:59
9825 Lavenziano, A, 27M 3:58:00
9826 Pruitt, D, 24M 3:58:00
9827 Delgado-Perez, R, 42M 3:58:00
9828 Conti, M, 37M 3:58:00
9829 Schneiderman, R, 34M 3:58:00
9830 Fontaine, R, 47M 3:58:00
9831 Zaugg, W, 45M 3:58:00
9832 Garcia, A, 40M 3:58:00
9833 Marek, J, 32M 3:58:01
9834 Olivier, A, 31M 3:58:01
9835 Foresti, R, 31M 3:58:02
9836 Siffrid, M, 40M 3:58:02
9837 Dziedzic, J, 44M 3:58:02
9838 Berzin, B, 44M 3:58:02
9839 Salas Ocampo, A, 34M 3:58:02
9840 Stith, R, 52M 3:58:02
9841 Van Schrick, G, 40M 3:58:02
9842 Burns, M, 34M 3:58:03
9843 Schroeder, M, 51M 3:58:03
9844 Heckman, R, 28M 3:58:03
9845 Rama, B, 50M 3:58:03
9846 Meyer, R, 33M 3:58:03
9847 Thompson, R, 35M 3:58:03
9848 Pokela, D, 29M 3:58:03
9849 Sartor, K, 33M 3:58:03
9850 Clausen, C, 35M 3:58:04
9851 Schweppe, M, 31M 3:58:04
9852 Clement, P, 40M 3:58:04
9853 Young, S, 39M 3:58:04
9854 Schuermann, K, 43M 3:58:05
9855 Hatesse, G, 46M 3:58:05
9856 Nelson, M, 30M 3:58:05
9857 Bubenheimer, M, 40F 3:58:05
9858 Harlem, E, 54M 3:58:05
9859 Quinn, A, 42M 3:58:05
9860 Falcao, M, 39M 3:58:05
9861 Krott-Roiger, W, 45M 3:58:06
9862 Hauser, E, 47M 3:58:06
9863 Ness, D, 26M 3:58:06
9864 Groeneveld, B, 31M 3:58:06
9865 Busquet, L, 30M 3:58:06
9866 Bergeroy, R, 59M 3:58:06
9867 Ullman, B, 46F 3:58:06
9868 Sherman, S, 45M 3:58:07
9869 Brignol, J, 50M 3:58:07
9870 Eshelman, J, 36F 3:58:07
9871 Fahey, C, 46M 3:58:07
9872 Collon-Windelinckx, L, 29M 3:58:07
9873 Wilson, P, 48M 3:58:07
9874 Balint, P, 31M 3:58:07
9875 Weinberger, E, 35F 3:58:07
9876 Zaugg, S, 41F 3:58:08
9877 Langset, F, 35M 3:58:08
9878 Shin, D, 26M 3:58:08
9879 Castello, F, 48M 3:58:08
9880 Van Spengler, F, 31M 3:58:08
9881 Becker, V, 34F 3:58:08
9882 Monaghan, A, 25F 3:58:09
9883 De Heij, J, 45M 3:58:09
9884 Johnson, L, 34M 3:58:09
9885 Van Teeseling, I, 31F 3:58:09
9886 Sandreuter, J, 29M 3:58:09
9887 Bruehland, W, 47M 3:58:09
9888 Koep, D, 26M 3:58:10
9889 Hoogstraten-Mil, S, 37F 3:58:10
9890 Hicks, M, 31M 3:58:10
9891 Baeuml, H, 51M 3:58:10
9892 Hunt, J, 28F 3:58:10
9893 Davids, J, 49F 3:58:11
9894 Sabados, W, 44M 3:58:11
9895 Tuthill, W, 47M 3:58:11
9896 Patten, A, 27F3:58:11
9897 Cardoso, M, 50M 3:58:11
9898 Driver, A, 32M 3:58:11
9899 Forkey, S, 40F 3:58:12
9900 Gotsch, B, 50M 3:58:12
9901Zaslow, J, 30M 3:58:12
9902 Dossantos, J, 32M 3:58:12
9903 Ustaran, E, 25M 3:58:12
9904 Dietz, H, 30M 3:58:12
9905 Ustaran, M, 53M3:58:12
9906 Lanini, B, 40M 3:58:12
9907 Heaney, M, 23M 3:58:12
9908 Berg, J, 35M 3:58:12
9909 Mann, J, 33M 3:58:12
9910 Ebner, R, 58M 3:58:12
9911 Carsey, A, 23F 3:58:13
9912 Spangenberg, R, 50M 3:58:13
9913 Smith, P, 41M 3:58:14
9914 Bodden, C, 35M 3:58:14
9915 Curnillon, G, 44M 3:58:14
9916 Kutash, J, 24M 3:58:14
9917 Wulff, T, 32M 3:58:15
9918 Welte, J, 34M 3:58:15
9919 Terrone, J, 50M 3:58:16
9920 Contla, R, 41M 3:58:16
9921 Dekker, A, 29M 3:58:16
9922 Masana, L, 45F 3:58:16
9923 Norskov, J, 35M 3:58:16
9924 Andersen, T, 49M 3:58:16
9925 Chaiken, B, 38M 3:58:17
9926 Lang, C, 25F 3:58:17
9927 Carrington, T, 41M 3:58:17
9928 Ortega Arriaga, E, 53M 3:58:17
9929 Hartmeyer, M, 35F 3:58:17
9930 Torrey, M, 36M 3:58:17
9931 Calmels, G, 44M 3:58:17
9932 Brunaud, J, 40M 3:58:18
9933 Lavidalie, J, 40M 3:58:18
9934 Paulsen, R, 30M 3:58:18
9935 Francis, O, 34M 3:58:18
9936 Paolillo, C, 32M 3:58:18
9937 Ott, C, 33F 3:58:18
9938 Arteaga Lechuga, F, 40M 3:58:18
9939 Suchocki, B, 42M 3:58:18
9940 Dykeman, S, 30M 3:58:18
9941Ayala, M, 37M 3:58:19
9942 Billepp, M, 57M 3:58:19
9943 Estrada, J, 40M 3:58:20
9944 Spicer, F, 42M 3:58:20
9945 Flora, J, 45M 3:58:20
9946 Gotz-Martin, H, 41M 3:58:20
9947 Kern, J, 27M 3:58:20
9948 Difranco, O, 64M 3:58:20
9949 Buckley, N, 41M 3:58:20
9950 Hussaerts, H, 44M 3:58:21
9951 Lach, T, 31M 3:58:21
9952 Drolet, G, 47M 3:58:22
9953 Hinrichsen, K, 56M 3:58:22
9954 Johnson, M, 29M 3:58:22
9955 Huesemann, J, 37M 3:58:22
9956 Christensen, K, 28F 3:58:23
9957 Seeley, R, 43F 3:58:23
9958 Finegan, J, 35M 3:58:23
9959 Jensen, H, 53M 3:58:24
9960 Hellstrom, J, 29M 3:58:24
9961 Briancon, P, 40M 3:58:24
9962 Bom, E, 35M 3:58:24
9963 Reparon, T, 44M 3:58:25
9964 Sutton, R, 42M 3:58:25
9965 Redlich, A, 30F 3:58:25
9966 Feldmann, D, 55M 3:58:25
9967 Adams, W, 59M 3:58:25
9968 Sanchez, K, 28F 3:58:26
9969 Tiernan, D, 31M 3:58:26
9970 Wijngaard, J, 38M 3:58:26
9971 Barouzdin, M, 25M 3:58:26
9972 Breen, D, 41M 3:58:26
9973 Weiss, E, 43M 3:58:26
9974 Vicari, V, 33M 3:58:26
9975 Tobin, M, 37M 3:58:27
9976 Vavasseur, G, 46M 3:58:27
9977 Hashim, H, 26M 3:58:27
9978 Behrends, E, 53M 3:58:27
9979 Kluwig, J, 47M 3:58:27
9980 Arruiz, A, 50M 3:58:27
9981 Foulkes, B, 39M 3:58:27
9982 Mongredien, J, 45M 3:58:27
9983 Misbare, C, 28M 3:58:27
9984 Martin, B, 30F 3:58:27
9985 Sutherland, L, 50M 3:58:27
9986 Vreeling, J, 44M 3:58:27
9987 Schneider, S, 51F 3:58:28
9988 Nicholas, G, 41M 3:58:28
9989 Kleinesper, R, 55M 3:58:28
9990 Scott, D, 31M 3:58:28
9991 Spang, R, 42M 3:58:28
9992Logue, M, 42M 3:58:29
9993 Johnson, R, 37M 3:58:29
9994 Kiess, W, 33M 3:58:30
9995 Gilbert, R, 27M 3:58:30
9996 Vidal, M, 46M 3:58:30
9997 Shepherd, B, 43M 3:58:30
9998 Tom, W, 33M 3:58:31
9999 Sturgeon, L, 29F 3:58:31
10000 Pesky, D, 25F 3:58:31
10001 Jimenez, A, 58M 3:58:31
10002 Herndon, M, 30M 3:58:32
10003 Ritchie, A, 32M 3:58:32
10004 Sutin, J, 56M 3:58:32
10005 Eull, W, 45M 3:58:32
10006 Gerber, J, 44F 3:58:32
10007 Bartocci, J, 52M 3:58:32
10008 Wardrop, S, 38F 3:58:33
10009 Dever, J, 41M 3:58:33
10010 Hannath, S, 47M 3:58:33
10011 Sturgeon, R, 33M 3:58:33
10012 Greenock, C, 21F 3:58:33
10013 Vanleuvan, H, 32M 3:58:34
10014 Kline, C, 40M 3:58:34
10015 Wuensch, U, 41M 3:58:34
10016 Vargas, G, 49M 3:58:34
10017 Hoots, S, 34M 3:58:34
10018 Catino, D, 55M 3:58:34
10019 Sheehan, M, 30F 3:58:34
10020 MacNaughton, C, 23F 3:58:34
10021 Saperstein*, M, 33M 3:58:35
10022 Tolson, A, 24M 3:58:35
10023 Todd, S, 32F 3:58:35
10024 Olsen, K, 38M 3:58:35
10025 Gott, T, 45M 3:58:35
10026 Gascouin, J, 46F 3:58:35
10027 Gaita, A, 36M 3:58:35
10028 Beauvisage, D, 55M 3:58:35
10029 Kuiper, A, 42F3:58:35
10030 Leloutre, F, 27M 3:58:36
10031 Mills, M, 44F 3:58:36
10032 Kavanagh, K, 36M 3:58:36
10033 Graef, R, 43M 3:58:36
10034 Aquino Busquets, A, 44M 3:58:36
10035 Pajot, M, 44F 3:58:36
10036 Stellmacher, K, 28M 3:58:36
10037 Knecht, D, 42F 3:58:37
10038 Weidemann, F, 35M 3:58:37
10039 Flanagan, G, 29M 3:58:37
10040Truccolo, W, 43F 3:58:37
10041 Alcantara, E, 47F 3:58:37
10042 Lang, D, 42M 3:58:37
10043 Van Dijk, J, 36M 3:58:37
10044 Warmenhoven, P, 34M 3:58:37
10045 Walsh, J, 25M 3:58:37
10046 Kellison, K, 26F 3:58:37
10047 Rohde, R, 41M 3:58:38
10048 Josefsson, C, 49M 3:58:38
10049 Albrigtsen, R, 49M 3:58:38
10050 Van Doorn, J, 48M 3:58:38
10051 Inderberg, H, 52M 3:58:38
10052 McKennirey, M, 34M 3:58:39
10053 Thioulouse, J, 32M 3:58:39
10054 Ou, E, 30M 3:58:39
10055 Bullis, J, 30M 3:58:39
10056 Gooch, G, 40F 3:58:40
10057 Leriche, G, 52M 3:58:40
10058 Sabito, F, 59M 3:58:40
10059 Smith, T, 33M 3:58:40
10060 De Jong, J, 52M 3:58:40
10061 Buckley, C, 34M3:58:40
10062 Urbina, C, 40M 3:58:40
10063 Skildheim, N, 44F 3:58:41
10064 Harrison, M, 36M 3:58:41
10065 Escobar, T, 38F 3:58:41
10066 Porges, R, 64M 3:58:41
10067 Rud, B, 47F 3:58:41
10068 Vallier, M, 42M 3:58:42
10069 Benn, P, 27M 3:58:42
10070 Schwartz, D, 34M 3:58:42
10071 Leitermann, H, 60M 3:58:42
10072 Plick, W, 46M 3:58:42
10073 Gonzalez, C, 48M 3:58:42
10074 Renaudet, M, 55M 3:58:42
10075 Jenkinson, P, 37M 3:58:42
10076 Gamez Martinez, J, 38M 3:58:42
10077 Polen, B, 29M 3:58:42
10078 Lopez, M, 57M 3:58:42
10079 Clark, S, 56M 3:58:42
10080 Kunihiro, T, 23M 3:58:42
10081 Priore, M, 33M 3:58:43
10082 Holden, R, 41F 3:58:43
10083 Moloney, P, 28M 3:58:43
10084 Suzuki, S, 32F 3:58:43
10085 Max, W, 45M 3:58:43
10086 Santoni, L, 36M 3:58:44
10087 Leibowitz, M, 24M 3:58:44
10088 Dundas, M, 49M 3:58:44
10089 Goldfarb, L, 33M 3:58:44
10090 Piccoli, C, 39M 3:58:44
10091 Erasmo, F, 35M 3:58:45
10092 Sohng, D, 23M 3:58:45
10093 Crouton, M, 34M 3:58:45
10094 Schwarzmann, E, 29F 3:58:45
10095 Osland, T, 46M 3:58:45
10096 Palvarini, F, 47M 3:58:45
10097 Nedzel, R, 30M 3:58:45
10098 Emerson, P, 42M 3:58:45
10099 Storms, R, 30M 3:58:46
10100 Mazon, R, 50M 3:58:46
10101 Merritt, J, 29M 3:58:46
10102 Faltermeier, J, 41M 3:58:46
10103 Martinowicz, P, 37M 3:58:46
10104 Liaud, C, 46M 3:58:46
10105 Colon, E, 32M 3:58:46
10106 McCarthy, J, 39M 3:58:47
10107 Abrahams, M, 47M 3:58:47
10108 Bogutsky, S, 36F 3:58:47
10109 Goldstein, B, 40M 3:58:47
10110 Davies, K, 30M 3:58:47
10111 Baxley, K, 34F 3:58:48
10112 Zisler, R, 47M 3:58:48
10113 Adams, R, 32M 3:58:48
10114 Zwetzbacher, V, 27F 3:58:48
10115 Snoek, W, 45M 3:58:48
10116 Lovik, T, 29M 3:58:48
10117 Shiromoto, K, 41M 3:58:48
10118 Lacroix, P, 42M 3:58:49
10119 Tolboom, L, 29M 3:58:49
10120 Higley, T, 30M 3:58:49
10121 Prichard, J, 25M 3:58:49
10122 Versano, M, 30M 3:58:49
10123 Bischoff, P, 32M 3:58:49
10124 Anderson, B, 33F 3:58:50
10125 Franken, A, 24M 3:58:50
10126 Dalton, S, 49M 3:58:50
10127 Verwaal, P, 41M 3:58:50
10128 Donen, S, 37M 3:58:50
10129 Broderick, T, 33M 3:58:50
10130 Bilenker, A, 38M 3:58:51
10131 Little, P, 60M 3:58:51
10132 Taga, M, 53M 3:58:51
10133 Van Bedaf, A, 34F 3:58:51
10134 Gleeson, T, 29M 3:58:51
10135 Richards, D, 41M 3:58:51
10136 Melnick, D, 41M 3:58:52
10137 Kani, H, 63M 3:58:52
10138 Millet, R, 40M 3:58:52
10139 Frenz, C, 34M 3:58:52
10140 Crotteau, A, 27M 3:58:53
10141 Kegge, E, 45M 3:58:53
10142 Nel, D, 25M 3:58:53
10143 Coffey, C, 42M 3:58:53
10144 Hasegawa, H, 58M 3:58:54
10145 Nelson, M, 31M 3:58:54
10146 Legcevic, J, 36M 3:58:54
10147 Van Ryssel, L, 35M 3:58:54
10148 Le-Nouail, S, 48M 3:58:54
10149 Lustig, J, 33M 3:58:54
10150 Mauguin, J, 43M 3:58:55
10151 Freeman, D, 35M 3:58:55
10152 Arduini, N, 44M 3:58:55
10153 Gross, K, 45M 3:58:56
10154 Walsh, N, 24M 3:58:56
10155 Winner, S, 35M 3:58:56
10156 Pena Bravo, G, 28M 3:58:56
10157 Salomon, R, 51M 3:58:56
10158 Olaya, A, 39M 3:58:56
10159Zembricki, M, 31M 3:58:57
10160 Benghalem, A, 37M 3:58:57
10161 Hobler, D, 52M 3:58:57
10162 Dunn, D, 39M 3:58:58
10163 Marshalek, R, 48M 3:58:58
10164 McCullagh, J, 53M 3:58:58
10165 Marshall, N, 48F 3:58:59
10166 Mikkelsen, S, 33M 3:58:59
10167 Voyer, J, 40M 3:58:59
10168 Drefenstedt, H, 41M 3:58:59
10169 Marshall, J, 50M 3:58:59
10170 Bozza, G, 54M 3:58:59
10171 Bush, T, 31M 3:59:00
10172 Axelrod, H, 39M 3:59:00
10173 Dutton, D, 58M 3:59:00
10174 Weant, J, 36M 3:59:00
10175 Vazquez Vera, J, 49M 3:59:00
10176 Sterns, J, 31M 3:59:01
10177 Smith, J, 41M 3:59:01
10178 Caussanel, C, 26F 3:59:02
10179 Rathey, C, 55M 3:59:02
10180 Christiaen, M, 42F 3:59:02
10181 Hiraldo, E, 38M 3:59:02
10182 Polvi, E, 47M 3:59:02
10183 Tyler, G, 42M 3:59:02
10184 Touhey, B, 38M 3:59:02
10185 Apostol, K, 35M 3:59:02
10186 Reynolds, P, 46M 3:59:02
10187Scanzi, M, 40M 3:59:03
10188 Oizumi, K, 28M 3:59:03
10189 Van Sevencoten, J, 43M 3:59:03
10190 Vasquez, P, 39M 3:59:04
10191 Benton, T, 38M 3:59:04
10192 Hume, S, 43F 3:59:04
10193 Beauvir, D, 30M3:59:04
10194 Evans, S, 25M 3:59:04
10195 Allary, H, 43M 3:59:05
10196 Artner, E, 30M 3:59:05
10197 Vandenberghe, P, 35M 3:59:05
10198 Null, G, 49M 3:59:05
10199 Smith, T, 35M 3:59:06
10200 Tinsley, H, 37M 3:59:06
10201 Goodwin, L, 40M 3:59:06
10202 Oshrin, A, 30M 3:59:06
10203 Farinacci, P, 43M 3:59:06
10204 Jensen, B, 45F 3:59:06
10205 Menusan, H, 37M 3:59:06
10206 Van De Voort, R, 38M 3:59:06
10207 Kehl, K, 38M 3:59:06
10208 Allen, S, 40M 3:59:07
10209 Bjerrine, S, 45M 3:59:07
10210 Pope, F, 39M 3:59:07
10211 Ferris, J, 28M 3:59:07
10212 Farmer, D, 30M 3:59:07
10213 Scruggs, H, 36M 3:59:07
10214 Bijenveld, R, 38M 3:59:07
10215 Scheffel, A, 44M 3:59:08
10216 RUNNER NO. 15914, 35M 3:59:08
10217 Pritchard, C, 43M 3:59:09
10218 Lawton, J, 43M 3:59:09
10219 Bourdette, B, 44M 3:59:09
10220 Velazquez, R, 42M 3:59:09
10221 Somer, R, 32M3:59:10
10222 Zisk, D, 29M 3:59:10
10223 Sugiura, M, 51M 3:59:10
10224 Phillips, C, 38M 3:59:10
10225 Keane, J, 43M 3:59:10
10226 Greene, R, 33M 3:59:11
10227 Urda, J, 31M 3:59:11
10228 La Pasta, C, 45M 3:59:11
10229 Smith, G, 29M 3:59:11
10230 Konrad, G, 34M 3:59:11
10231 Silva, F, 48M 3:59:11
10232 Hayashi, R, 42F 3:59:11
10233 Duerst, W, 45M 3:59:11
10234 Cot Rosell, M, 36F 3:59:11
10235 Hendriksen, D, 24M 3:59:12
10236 Gramzow, E, 53M 3:59:12
10237 Geurts, G, 34M 3:59:12
10238 Skjold, R, 50M 3:59:12
10239Sweeney, D, 45M 3:59:12
10240 Saint-Marc, A, 55M 3:59:12
10241 Hartikka, R, 32F 3:59:12
10242 Carrasquero, I, 51M 3:59:12
10243 Kim, Y, 44M 3:59:13
10244 Patti, S, 30M 3:59:13
10245 Volpi, A, 37M 3:59:13
10246 Low, C, 34F 3:59:13
10247 Sayer, N, 47F 3:59:13
10248 Fontes, C, 28F 3:59:13
10249 Plante, G, 57M 3:59:13
10250 Beekers, A, 29F 3:59:14
10251 Guarino, T, 35F 3:59:14
10252 Santoro, W, 37M 3:59:14
10253 Massy, F, 28M 3:59:14
10254 Hynes, E, 51M3:59:14
10255 Szkolnik, M, 46M 3:59:15
10256 Berlin, D, 40F 3:59:15
10257 Zoppi, P, 42M 3:59:15
10258 Spang, B, 32M 3:59:15
10259 Markussen, J, 41M 3:59:15
10260 Hall, D, 32F 3:59:15
10261 Salem, C, 28M 3:59:16
10262 Martin, K, 45F 3:59:16
10263 Diawatan, R, 41M 3:59:16
10264 Van Den Boogaart, R, 36M 3:59:16
10265 Bolzon, P, 25M 3:59:16
10266 James, C, 26M 3:59:16
10267 Vizhnay, R, 52M3:59:16
10268 Kollar, R, 32M 3:59:16
10269 Sandig, K, 53M 3:59:16
10270 Van De Pol, B, 46F 3:59:17
10271 Jurisic, Z, 40M 3:59:17
10272 Kammerer, K, 61M 3:59:18
10273 Allen, J, 28F 3:59:18
10274 Goodman, S, 35M 3:59:18
10275 Schaffert, E, 49F 3:59:18
10276 Bohn, R, 40M 3:59:18
10277 Moeller, P, 43M 3:59:18
10278 Weis, L, 52M 3:59:18
10279 Prihar, G, 24M 3:59:18
10280 Boisvert, R, 34M 3:59:19
10281 Oiestad, A, 43M 3:59:19
10282 Harper, S, 30M 3:59:19
10283 Gronli, A, 20M 3:59:19
10284 Phillips, J, 29M 3:59:19
10285 Kaliardos, C, 33F 3:59:19
10286 Campbell, J, 29M 3:59:20
10287 Haller, L, 37F 3:59:20
10288 Moorefield, P, 40M 3:59:20
10289 Haller, L, 37F 3:59:20
10290 Blake, J, 31F 3:59:21
10291 Muldoon, J, 53M 3:59:21
10292 Thomas, W, 36M 3:59:21
10293 Lobig, T, 37M 3:59:21
10294 MacGowan, W, 47M 3:59:21
10295 Ciatti, A, 28F 3:59:21
10296 Keppler, W, 48M 3:59:21
10297 Perrelli, L, 39M 3:59:21
10298 Garcia Rodriguez, G, 39F 3:59:22
10299 Lindell, H, 60M 3:59:22
10300 Holen, L, 46M 3:59:22
10301 Gross*, J, 24M 3:59:23
10302 Steinmetz, B, 38M 3:59:23
10303 Growney, J, 43M 3:59:23
10304 Turek, J, 26M 3:59:23
10305 Butler, N, 45M 3:59:24
10306 Kriel, H, 33F 3:59:24
10307 D'Alessandro, K, 39F 3:59:24
10308 Lorente, E, 35M3:59:24
10309 Larsen, I, 43M 3:59:24
10310 Swanenburg, P, 31M 3:59:25
10311 Engel, S, 47M 3:59:25
10312 Kaneko, Y, 49M 3:59:25
10313 Last, M, 42M 3:59:26
10314 Malu, V, 39M 3:59:26
10315 Gonzalez, H, 28M 3:59:26
10316 McCune, M, 40M 3:59:26
10317 Lagendijk, G, 33M 3:59:27
10318 Arena, A, 26F 3:59:27
10319 Bauer, H, 43M 3:59:27
10320 Zaidman Goodman, Z, 27M 3:59:27
10321 Bender, M, 42M 3:59:27
10322 Gauthier, P, 35M 3:59:27
10323 Dougan, K, 31M 3:59:28
10324 Rilling, M, 43M 3:59:28
10325 Kalach, A, 40M 3:59:28
10326 Breederland, A, 36M 3:59:28
10327 Stein, J, 33M 3:59:29
10328 Perrot, Y, 22M 3:59:29
10329 Schreyer, H, 38M 3:59:29
10330 Murtagh, M, 44M 3:59:29
10331 Lefebvre, L, 30M 3:59:29
10332 Waumans, P, 30M 3:59:29
10333 Hegarty, B, 34M 3:59:30
10334 Saal, M, 46M 3:59:30
10335 Woodward, M, 36F 3:59:30
10336 Campbell, K, 35M 3:59:31
10337 Wade III, A, 31M 3:59:31
10338 Pinchoff, B, 40M 3:59:31
10339 McNeill, P, 33M 3:59:32
10340 Rabilloud, K, 24M 3:59:32
10341 Alvarez, E, 28M 3:59:32
10342 Lidman, M, 46M 3:59:32
10343Morrell, J, 43M 3:59:32
10344 Padovich, M, 45M 3:59:32
10345 Rodriguez, C, 35M 3:59:33
10346 Martinez, N, 35M 3:59:33
10347 Ludwig, I, 47F 3:59:33
10348 Rossmann, A, 53M 3:59:33
10349 LaDu, T, 40M3:59:33
10350 Federico, A, 28F 3:59:33
10351 Tilroe, E, 47M 3:59:34
10352 Van Veen, A, 28M 3:59:34
10353 Pent, L, 33F 3:59:34
10354 Forrest, W, 32M 3:59:34
10355 Young, S, 27M 3:59:34
10356 Morales, J, 48M 3:59:34
10357 Fey, D, 39M 3:59:34
10358 Bonett, S, 30F 3:59:34
10359 Gross, T, 30F 3:59:34
10360 Fischer, J, 49M 3:59:34
10361 Arces, D, 35M 3:59:35
10362 Cutler, M, 31M 3:59:35
10363 Coleman, T, 47M 3:59:35
10364 Lieberman, M, 42M 3:59:35
10365 Hallden, O, 36M 3:59:35
10366 Canepa, A, 40M 3:59:35
10367 Olsen, S, 40M 3:59:35
10368 Baker, J, 34M 3:59:35
10369 Fagan, K, 42F 3:59:36
10370 McNally, T, 43M 3:59:36
10371 Beauchamp, J, 38M 3:59:36
10372 Schalow, T, 31M 3:59:36
10373 Schoenholzer, R, 26M 3:59:36
10374 Kruikemeier, B, 34M 3:59:37
10375 Glumpf, W, 40F 3:59:37
10376 Krueger, G, 41M 3:59:37
10377 Hoerner, K, 37M 3:59:37
10378 Steines, M, 28M 3:59:37
10379 Vakiparta, J, 49M 3:59:37
10380 Braun, L, 51M 3:59:38
10381 Fricke, E, 51M 3:59:38
10382 Marks, E, 30M 3:59:38
10383 Trabert, S, 61M 3:59:38
10384 Garza Sepulveda, J, 39M 3:59:38
10385 Hood, R, 43M 3:59:38
10386 Hagemann, A, 46F 3:59:39
10387 Yeager, S, 40M 3:59:39
10388 Knevels, P, 44M 3:59:39
10389 Wagner, D, 27M 3:59:40
10390 Gallmann, H, 54M 3:59:40
10391 O'Donnell, K, 33M 3:59:40
10392 Leemans, P, 39M 3:59:41
10393 Reinike, H, 25M 3:59:41
10394 Gmuer, R, 55M 3:59:41
10395 Toendel, J, 23M 3:59:41
10396 Willis, J, 54M 3:59:41
10397 El Boubkari, S, 20M 3:59:41
10398 Ketterer, M, 45M 3:59:41
10399 Sparrow, M, 62M 3:59:41
10400 Maldonado, R, 31M 3:59:41
10401 Graham, E, 26M 3:59:41
10402 Saltiel, S, 32M 3:59:41
10403 Colon, C, 48M 3:59:41
10404 Graham, J, 39M 3:59:42
10405 Holmes, D, 54M 3:59:42
10406 Wiren, T, 27M 3:59:42
10407 Schonfelder, R, 33M 3:59:42
10408 Janis Jr., J, 49M 3:59:42
10409 Vellequette, T, 39M 3:59:42
10410 Moore, K, 36F 3:59:42
10411 Lewis, L, 37M 3:59:42
10412 Knieps, E, 38F 3:59:42
10413 Williams, W, 34M 3:59:43
10414 Knieps, G, 35M 3:59:43
10415 Mooris, J, 38M 3:59:43
10416 Carrera, R, 40M 3:59:43
10417 Cohan, J, 29M 3:59:43
10418 Shields, S, 35M 3:59:44
10419 Davis, R, 62M 3:59:44
10420 Bell, R, 59M 3:59:44
10421 Hohl, A, 33F 3:59:44
10422 Lawrence, P, 34F 3:59:45
10423 McNutt, J, 34F 3:59:45
10424 Arnesen, R, 33M 3:59:45
10425 Hutcheson, C, 46M3:59:46
10426 Dodson, M, 35M 3:59:46
10427 Mendel, J, 31M 3:59:46
10428 Theunissen, M, 41M 3:59:46
10429 Tracy, J, 33M 3:59:46
10430 Burke, S, 45M 3:59:46
10431 Trapp, S, 28F 3:59:46
10432 Hamilton, D, 26M 3:59:47
10433 Ulrich, C, 41M 3:59:47
10434 Rombout, W, 55M 3:59:47
10435 Dickinson, M, 29M 3:59:47
10436 Utz, E, 30M3:59:47
10437 Zukofsky, B, 43M 3:59:47
10438 Kirchner, R, 38M 3:59:47
10439 Geiss, T, 37M 3:59:48
10440 Borin, J, 48M 3:59:48
10441 Ades, S, 20M 3:59:48
10442 Williamson, D, 48M 3:59:48
10443Dawson, J, 25M 3:59:48
10444 Hsieh, M, 27M 3:59:48
10445 Rosekrans, J, 48M 3:59:48
10446 Liss, S, 42M 3:59:49
10447 Mooney, G, 50F3:59:49
10448 Russell, K, 46M 3:59:49
10449 Willem, J, 40M 3:59:49
10450 Berraute, C, 44M 3:59:49
10451 Rowan, W, 47M 3:59:49
10452 Van Dijk, E, 29M 3:59:49
10453 Grimm, M, 23F 3:59:49
10454 Rodenkirchen, W, 50M 3:59:49
10455 Boyko, J, 42F 3:59:49
10456 Traina, C, 39F 3:59:50
10457 Causland, J, 46M 3:59:50
10458 Grande, J, 36M 3:59:50
10459 Della-Ragione, D, 28M 3:59:50
10460 Bakker, J, 53M 3:59:50
10461 Demeo, J, 42M 3:59:50
10462 Dooms, J, 40M 3:59:50
10463 Brambilla, M, 45M 3:59:50
10464 Masuda, T, 32F 3:59:51
10465 Pubill, F, 35M 3:59:51
10466 Branon, J, 26F 3:59:51
10467 Stanford, D, 43M 3:59:51
10468 Schwenck, J, 50M 3:59:51
10469 Doeviken, J, 34M 3:59:51
10470 Wegner, P, 25M 3:59:51
10471 Jobert, T, 51M 3:59:51
10472 Gillette, W, 63M 3:59:52
10473 Hewett, P, 29M 3:59:52
10474 Bleijs, P, 38M 3:59:52
10475 Harrold, S, 23M 3:59:52
10476 Cowan, J, 50F 3:59:53
10477 Clark, C, 49M 3:59:53
10478 Marcero, M, 25M 3:59:53
10479 Tanners, L, 24F 3:59:54
10480 Martin, C, 34M 3:59:54
10481 Prestandrea, L, 24F 3:59:54
10482 Van Zandvoort, J, 37M 3:59:55
10483 Piaia, E, 43M 3:59:55
10484 Agoyer, M, 51M 3:59:55
10485 Lopez Rodriguez, L, 52M 3:59:55
10486 Ruemmele, P, 50M 3:59:55
10487 Ruemmele, B, 44F 3:59:55
10488 Gordon, E, 52M 3:59:56
10489 Hoogendoorn, F, 42M 3:59:56
10490 Gaona De La Porte, X, 36M 3:59:56
10491 Sieniewicz, T, 34M 3:59:56
10492 Glasgow, D, 31M 3:59:56
10493 Peralta, L, 33M 3:59:57
10494 Van Meeteren, R, 35M 3:59:57
10495 Myrvoll, J, 21M 3:59:57
10496 Baraff, A, 32M 3:59:57
10497 Campbell, J, 31M 3:59:57
10498 Persson, B, 31F 3:59:57
10499 Imes, M, 27M 3:59:57
10500 Westra, R, 36M 3:59:57
10501 Flynn, B, 55M 3:59:57
10502 Molsbergen, J, 38M 3:59:57
10503 McInnis, M, 44M 3:59:58
10504 Huish, E, 42F 3:59:58
10505 Connaghan, J, 28M 3:59:58
10506 Coleman, M, 33M 3:59:58
10507 Barkwell, C, 35F 3:59:58
10508 Saavedra, P, 23M 3:59:58
10509 Corcoran, D, 30M 3:59:59
10510 Scheefhals, T, 40M 3:59:59
10511 Kulkarni, S, 30M 3:59:59
10512 Joyce, P, 48M 3:59:59
10513 Price, D, 31M 4:00:00
10514 Jovin, E, 29F 4:00:00
10515 Kaufmann, E, 30F 4:00:00
10516 De Visser, E, 38M 4:00:00
10517 Schellenburg, D, 39M 4:00:00
10518 Weispfennig, G, 53M 4:00:00
10519 Monzat, H, 41M 4:00:00
10520 Fahey, J, 43M 4:00:00
10521 Raoult, B, 44M 4:00:00
10522 Blanco, M, 22M 4:00:00
10523 Pankratz, J, 34M 4:00:00
10524 Brant, E, 32F 4:00:00
10525 Townsend, R, 51F 4:00:01
10526 Cunningham, V, 27M 4:00:01
10527 Stengle, W, 33M 4:00:01
10528 Gustafsson, R, 48M4:00:01
10529 Sutton, K, 26F 4:00:02
10530 Morvan, J, 61M 4:00:02
10531 Murray, P, 30M 4:00:02
10532 Kelly, G, 30M 4:00:03
10533 Ortman, M, 31M 4:00:04
10534 Giphart, R, 38M 4:00:04
10535 Polanka, J, 38F 4:00:04
10536 Dambeck, M, 40M 4:00:05
10537 Roeske, E, 30F 4:00:05
10538 Reghem, D, 41M 4:00:05
10539 Soprani, M, 51M 4:00:06
10540 Sprunger, A, 26M 4:00:06
10541 Roeske, W, 43M 4:00:06
10542 Garstman, T, 29M 4:00:06
10543 Wilsmann, L, 34F 4:00:06
10544 Rodriguez Moreno, A, 41M 4:00:07
10545 Santomassino, M, 23F 4:00:07
10546 Haun, A, 24M 4:00:07
10547 Shubeck, T, 35F 4:00:07
10548 Armes, M, 44M 4:00:07
10549 Cornou, R, 44F 4:00:07
10550 Bannout Solliman, I, 53M 4:00:08
10551 Hamisch, H, 26M 4:00:08
10552 Levy, J, 46F 4:00:08
10553 Birkeland, B, 41F 4:00:09
10554 Berntsen, H, 52M 4:00:09
10555 Offutt, T, 27M 4:00:09
10556 Shaalan, M, 34M 4:00:10
10557 Buyer, D, 38M 4:00:11
10558 Newton, R, 45M 4:00:11
10559 Craney, R, 30M 4:00:11
10560 Bloch, J, 46M 4:00:11
10561 Shilling, T, 70M 4:00:11
10562 Guyon, J, 54M 4:00:12
10563 Zarazua Vazquez, S, 30M 4:00:12
10564 Couturier, B, 38M 4:00:12
10565 Milo, S, 36M 4:00:13
10566 Hodson, T, 35M 4:00:13
10567 Woodrow, J, 25M 4:00:13
10568 Candella, J, 41M 4:00:13
10569 Lopez Bernal, R, 43M 4:00:13
10570 Crossman, A, 36M 4:00:13
10571 Schlosser, A, 29M 4:00:13
10572 Jaeger, F, 36M 4:00:14
10573 Huber, J, 44M4:00:14
10574 Weilbaker, J, 36M 4:00:14
10575 Van Tol, P, 40M 4:00:15
10576 Tuz, P, 38F 4:00:15
10577 Jacobi, A, 38M 4:00:15
10578 Violano, T, 40M 4:00:15
10579 Lacroix, F, 50M 4:00:16
10580 Scinta, G, 35M 4:00:16
10581 Golden, P, 34F 4:00:16
10582 Moodley, R, 31M 4:00:16
10583 Pennings, H, 40M 4:00:16
10584 Mueller-Tyl, F, 24M 4:00:16
10585 Lorek, H, 32M 4:00:17
10586 Airoldi, P, 47M 4:00:17
10587 Warren, D, 42M 4:00:17
10588 Serrone, R, 40M 4:00:17
10589 Martinez, M, 29M 4:00:18
10590 Hierweck, E, 45F 4:00:18
10591 Salazar Barrera, S, 57M 4:00:18
10592 Jansen, S, 31M 4:00:18
10593 Achteresch, L, 60M 4:00:19
10594 Linn, D, 45M 4:00:19
10595 Ginestroni, M, 23M 4:00:19
10596 Lionel, T, 22M 4:00:19
10597 Heldeweg, E, 40M 4:00:19
10598 Mauro, C, 29F 4:00:20
10599 Stransky, T, 43M 4:00:20
10600 Lee, D, 38F 4:00:20
10601 Gimbert, N, 32F4:00:21
10602 Veeder, H, 25F 4:00:21
10603 Law, A, 38M 4:00:21
10604 Falcon Isunza, E, 39M 4:00:22
10605 Madsen, T, 53M 4:00:22
10606 Samuels, M, 28F 4:00:22
10607 Gomez-Gonzalez, M, 54M 4:00:22
10608 Mahony, J, 38M 4:00:22
10609 Robert, M, 47M 4:00:23
10610 Noonan, D, 28M 4:00:23
10611 Hattais, M, 38M 4:00:23
10612 Pellicelli, N, 40M 4:00:24
10613 Mendoza Cruz, R, 47M 4:00:24
10614 Ertel, R, 55M 4:00:24
10615 Ito, M, 53M 4:00:25
10616 Marchois, J, 52M 4:00:25
10617 Balducci, A, 41M 4:00:25
10618 Townley, O, 56M 4:00:25
10619 Alanko, R, 43M 4:00:26
10620 Maldonado, L, 39F 4:00:28
10621 Santana, A, 28M 4:00:28
10622 Tsiatsis, C, 40M 4:00:29
10623 Rault, P, 29M 4:00:29
10624 Schroder, W, 47M 4:00:29
10625Arias, E, 35M 4:00:29
10626 Negm, M, 44M 4:00:30
10627 Henry, C, 33M 4:00:30
10628 Knapstad, B, 47M 4:00:30
10629 Woods, K, 38M 4:00:30
10630 Blisch, H, 50M 4:00:30
10631 Piana, J, 25M 4:00:31
10632 Wunderle, W, 55M 4:00:31
10633 Norgate, J, 31F 4:00:31
10634 Navsaria, D, 21M 4:00:31
10635 Damkjaer Jensen, K, 35M 4:00:32
10636 Valanchon, S, 27M 4:00:32
10637 Delage, F, 29F 4:00:32
10638 Hammann, E, 34M 4:00:32
10639 Bourhis, M, 50M 4:00:32
10640 Ives, R, 37M 4:00:33
10641 Andrade Sobrinho, J, 29M 4:00:33
10642 Orchard, J, 49M 4:00:34
10643 Vecere, M, 42M 4:00:34
10644 Colunga, F, 46M 4:00:34
10645 Nogueira, J, 46M 4:00:35
10646 Whitworth, J, 25M 4:00:35
10647 Gillespie, R, 36M 4:00:35
10648 Roussel, C, 29F 4:00:36
10649 Bourget, J, 51M 4:00:36
10650 Fourmaux, J, 47M 4:00:36
10651 Waters, F, 37M 4:00:37
10652 Ames, M, 33M 4:00:37
10653 Hines, M, 43M 4:00:37
10654 Henry, B, 39M 4:00:37
10655 Karreman, L, 53M 4:00:37
10656 Sheppard, S, 37F 4:00:38
10657 Freese, E, 38F 4:00:38
10658 Vieira, J, 52M 4:00:38
10659 Wolther, G, 37M 4:00:38
10660 Guillmain, S, 32M 4:00:38
10661 Hardy, T, 44M 4:00:39
10662 Jouanneau, L, 32M 4:00:39
10663 Fletcher, K, 35M 4:00:39
10664 West, C, 43M 4:00:40
10665 Callahan, M, 28F 4:00:40
10666 Frohl, J, 38M 4:00:40
10667 Callahan, W, 37M 4:00:40
10668 Gieck, K, 37F 4:00:41
10669 Ward, J, 26M 4:00:41
10670 Hernandez, F, 35M 4:00:41
10671 Zieger, V, 32M 4:00:41
10672 Panichi, M, 59M 4:00:42
10673 Kvarme, G, 32M 4:00:42
10674 Funke, A, 43F 4:00:42
10675 Oosterveld, M, 40M 4:00:42
10676 Siegieniuk, V, 55M 4:00:43
10677 Dolan, P, 23M 4:00:43
10678 Bass, J, 40M 4:00:43
10679 Czachor, J, 47M 4:00:44
10680 Belard, M, 39F 4:00:44
10681 Greenhow, M, 30F 4:00:44
10682 Ross, C, 28F 4:00:44
10683 Agostinello, A, 29F 4:00:44
10684 Stevenson, D, 32M 4:00:46
10685 Loughran, B, 56M 4:00:46
10686 Spooner, J, 42M 4:00:46
10687 Paku Filho, R, 37M 4:00:46
10688 Linotte, J, 34M 4:00:47
10689 Champagne, R, 50M 4:00:47
10690 Mallouh, R, 41M 4:00:47
10691 Pratt, P, 40M 4:00:48
10692 McKibben, A, 28F 4:00:48
10693 Potthoff, M, 33F 4:00:48
10694 Karhu, B, 35F 4:00:48
10695 Borucki, L, 36F 4:00:48
10696 Capon, G, 48M 4:00:48
10697 Durand, P, 29M 4:00:50
10698 El Atra, S, 34F 4:00:50
10699 Gergaud, J, 45M 4:00:50
10700 Lachner, H, 28M 4:00:50
10701 Gomez Vidaurri, O, 46M 4:00:50
10702 Wastelein, H, 34M 4:00:51
10703 Robinson, R, 42M 4:00:51
10704 Palmier, D, 33M 4:00:52
10705 Knapp, L, 38F 4:00:52
10706 Hutmacher, P, 52M 4:00:52
10707 Tarnowski, A, 28F 4:00:52
10708 Tarnowski, M, 27M 4:00:52
10709 Rand, M, 36M 4:00:52
10710 Piccoli, P, 41M 4:00:53
10711 Basile, L, 33M 4:00:53
10712 Lyngbek, K, 33M 4:00:53
10713 Lopez, M, 41M 4:00:53
10714 Sureau, P, 42M 4:00:54
10715 Harper, J, 46M 4:00:55
10716 Gebauer, L, 38M 4:00:55
10717 Berschadski, S, 48M 4:00:55
10718 Evans, T, 54M 4:00:55
10719 Falcone, F, 32M 4:00:55
10720 Sutherland, M, 33M 4:00:56
10721 Lipscomb, C, 24M 4:00:57
10722 Valenti, M, 36M 4:00:57
10723 Rojas, E, 44M 4:00:57
10724 Dondero, S, 28M 4:00:57
10725 Hirschmann, H, 42M 4:00:57
10726 Greenlee, A, 32M 4:00:58
10727 Lenihan, P, 25M 4:00:58
10728 McManus, C, 40F 4:00:58
10729 Pettersson, P, 27M 4:00:58
10730 Nelson, L, 30M 4:00:58
10731 Schutzbank, S, 49M 4:00:58
10732 Otto, A, 44F 4:00:58
10733 Wennberg, V, 47M 4:00:58
10734 Barnes, N, 32F 4:00:59
10735 Cooper, J, 44F 4:00:59
10736 Niemann, F, 31M 4:00:59
10737Ballou, K, 39M 4:00:59
10738 Borgo, A, 52M 4:00:59
10739 Burkhardt, W, 47M 4:00:59
10740 Trustey, J, 32M 4:00:59
10741 Awazu, Y, 35M 4:00:59
10742 Peattie, W, 35M 4:00:59
10743 Simonis, D, 50M 4:00:59
10744 McClure, M, 50F 4:00:59
10745 Torres, G, 36F 4:00:59
10746 Carroll, T, 42F 4:01:00
10747 Lorenz, A, 28F 4:01:00
10748 Zirkle, D, 44F 4:01:00
10749 Nagai, K, 32F 4:01:00
10750 Curran, E, 40F 4:01:00
10751 Billand, P, 41M 4:01:00
10752 Van Reeth, L, 47M 4:01:00
10753 Pitman, R, 43M 4:01:00
10754 Tarallo, M, 37M 4:01:01
10755 Sanchez, J, 36M 4:01:02
10756 Markgraf, E, 60M 4:01:02
10757 Urena, J, 35M 4:01:03
10758 Ohagan, G, 41M 4:01:03
10759 Owens, R, 39M 4:01:04
10760 Korostuff, D, 34M 4:01:04
10761 Householder, J, 55M 4:01:04
10762 Brennan, R, 43M 4:01:04
10763 Klaasen, G, 30M 4:01:04
10764 Arias, C, 42M 4:01:05
10765 Brechtken, R, 49M 4:01:05
10766 Brechtken, G, 21M 4:01:06
10767 Brattan, G, 32M 4:01:06
10768 Kuhn, G, 45M 4:01:06
10769 Ludwig, M, 39M 4:01:07
10770 Schuchmann, J, 35M 4:01:07
10771 Brattan, L, 31F 4:01:07
10772 Egan, J, 31F 4:01:07
10773 Groesser, S, 32M 4:01:07
10774 Fuellhardt, K, 34M 4:01:08
10775 Birgel, C, 45M 4:01:09
10776 Sato, T, 27M 4:01:10
10777 Mizrahi, D, 44M 4:01:10
10778 Williams, P, 44M 4:01:10
10779 Marson, R, 44M 4:01:10
10780 Tsurui, A, 47M 4:01:11
10781 Obermaier, E, 33F 4:01:11
10782 Pagirsky, J, 38M 4:01:11
10783 Gardiner, K, 41M 4:01:11
10784 Peixoto, R, 54M 4:01:11
10785 Stresemann, A, 35M 4:01:12
10786 Kjeldstad, R, 40M 4:01:12
10787 Greenberg, J, 35M 4:01:12
10788 Obermaier, W, 53M 4:01:13
10789 Wuehrmann, P, 32M 4:01:13
10790 Cuevas, D, 34M 4:01:13
10791 Simons, D, 41M 4:01:14
10792 Zajkowski, P, 52M 4:01:14
10793 Trice, C, 25F 4:01:14
10794 Brown-Hamilton, E, 32M 4:01:14
10795 Eisendrath, E, 33M 4:01:15
10796 Bihrle, S, 25F 4:01:15
10797 Robitaille, G, 27M 4:01:16
10798 Tindal, M, 35M 4:01:16
10799 Skelly, P, 58M 4:01:16
10800 Turfe, A, 31M 4:01:17
10801 Hartmann, T, 36M 4:01:17
10802 Kartanos, B, 44M 4:01:17
10803 Suloway, J, 44M 4:01:17
10804 Monteaux, D, 27F 4:01:18
10805 Kehring, G, 23M 4:01:18
10806 Meibom, L, 28M 4:01:18
10807 Koyama, T, 35F 4:01:18
10808Ciraklar, R, 30M 4:01:18
10809 Bingley, P, 31M 4:01:18
10810 Devanthey, P, 36M 4:01:19
10811 Evans, J, 45M 4:01:20
10812 Hempelmann, U, 43M 4:01:21
10813 Gelin, S, 32M 4:01:21
10814 Blier, R, 47M 4:01:21
10815 Rivera, E, 47M 4:01:22
10816 Lanier, P, 41F 4:01:22
10817 Malo, M, 45M 4:01:23
10818 Ierace, D, 51M 4:01:24
10819 Tanaka, T, 29M 4:01:24
10820 Abrams, D, 46M 4:01:24
10821 Moniz, L, 47M 4:01:24
10822 McGuffin, J, 30M 4:01:24
10823 Pastori, M, 35M 4:01:24
10824 Brehamet, P, 41M 4:01:25
10825 Heinig, T, 26M 4:01:25
10826 Sole, A, 25F 4:01:25
10827 Fiorey, M, 40M 4:01:26
10828 Christian, T, 34M 4:01:26
10829 Poindexter, J, 41M 4:01:26
10830 Garavaglia, S, 26M 4:01:26
10831 Pretzell, H, 49M 4:01:26
10832 Colimon, P, 28M 4:01:27
10833 Gutz, E, 57M 4:01:27
10834 Van Den Oetelaar, G, 30M 4:01:27
10835 Haave, D, 28F 4:01:27
10836 Jefferson, M, 40M 4:01:28
10837 Dutton, M, 29M 4:01:28
10838 Leroy, C, 41F 4:01:28
10839 Clowes, J, 42F 4:01:28
10840 Boettcher, H, 45M 4:01:29
10841 Koslowski, F, 32M 4:01:29
10842 Malara, J, 48M 4:01:29
10843 Sgaglione, V, 30M 4:01:29
10844 Van Der Steen, M, 26F 4:01:30
10845 Minikes, J, 37M 4:01:30
10846 Borel, C, 49M 4:01:30
10847 Burke, J, 35M 4:01:31
10848 Brackett, K, 36F 4:01:31
10849 Lafaye, R, 41M 4:01:31
10850 Cribbelier, R, 31M 4:01:32
10851 Stofft, J, 44M 4:01:33
10852 Taylor, R, 36M 4:01:33
10853 Nagele, H, 45M 4:01:34
10854 Brewster, L, 47M 4:01:34
10855 Lopez, P, 41M4:01:34
10856 Klostermann, M, 47M 4:01:34
10857 Marceny, I, 45M 4:01:34
10858 Durand, G, 43M 4:01:35
10859 Van Alderwegen, F, 43M 4:01:36
10860 Divincenzo, M, 24M 4:01:36
10861 Eliopoulos, C, 36M 4:01:36
10862 Vazquez, A, 40M 4:01:36
10863 Sato, K, 33M 4:01:37
10864 Stiffler, C, 37M 4:01:37
10865 Morris, P, 40M 4:01:37
10866 Craft, R, 38M 4:01:37
10867 Bain, D, 39M 4:01:37
10868 Sanchez, R, 42M 4:01:38
10869 Horwitz, M, 26M 4:01:38
10870 Levy, R, 45M4:01:38
10871 Mai, L, 34M 4:01:38
10872 Griffith, J, 40M 4:01:38
10873 Gerome, S, 48M 4:01:38
10874 Gray, T, 53M 4:01:39
10875 Pelle, A, 38M 4:01:39
10876 Biber, A, 52M 4:01:40
10877 Hasan, C, 51F 4:01:40
10878 Kelly, D, 32M 4:01:40
10879 Ferrick, R, 28M 4:01:41
10880 Bucher, H, 44M 4:01:41
10881 Stiefeld, R, 36F 4:01:41
10882 Rivas, M, 31F 4:01:42
10883 Koh, R, 24F 4:01:42
10884Unaas, O, 34M 4:01:43
10885 Timoney, J, 46M 4:01:43
10886 Chien, D, 41M 4:01:43
10887 Trager, P, 49F 4:01:44
10888 Friedman, S, 33F 4:01:44
10889 Theidig, H, 57M 4:01:44
10890 Groot, J, 45M 4:01:44
10891 Egger, P, 48M 4:01:45
10892 Nahitchevansky, G, 37M 4:01:45
10893 Kallen, E, 48M 4:01:45
10894 Aune, K, 40M 4:01:46
10895 Sheets, D, 46M 4:01:46
10896 Iltis, A, 30M 4:01:46
10897 Schimmelpfennig, A, 33M 4:01:46
10898 Meinrich, D, 27M 4:01:46
10899 Becherer, R, 50M 4:01:47
10900 Pacheco, J, 36M 4:01:47
10901 Harkin, V, 29M 4:01:47
10902 Venturoli, L, 44M 4:01:47
10903 Keane, P, 46M 4:01:47
10904 Eicke, P, 40M 4:01:47
10905 Jung, G, 44M 4:01:48
10906 Fischer, J, 38M 4:01:48
10907 Gilligan, B, 31M 4:01:48
10908 Houghton, A, 31M 4:01:48
10909 Renneker, J, 53M 4:01:48
10910 Lynch, K, 40M 4:01:48
10911 Van Den Berg, E, 32M 4:01:48
10912 Lorntz, E, 47M 4:01:49
10913 Dunner, R, 27M 4:01:49
10914 Kaiser, W, 46M 4:01:49
10915 Walsh, P, 39M 4:01:49
10916 Newberg, E, 29M 4:01:49
10917 McGrath, C, 35M 4:01:49
10918 Barret, G, 37M 4:01:50
10919 Patz, D, 28F 4:01:50
10920 Simon, R, 31M 4:01:50
10921Nichols, D, 30M 4:01:50
10922 Grossman, P, 46M 4:01:50
10923 Brazzo, B, 28M 4:01:50
10924 Perrin, L, 36M 4:01:51
10925 Siegl, J, 35M 4:01:51
10926 Larsen, H, 43M 4:01:51
10927 Arpadi, A, 37F 4:01:51
10928 Bolger, C, 39F 4:01:52
10929 Blake, L, 36M 4:01:52
10930 Hortet Previ, L, 44M 4:01:52
10931 Massin, E, 50M 4:01:52
10932 Brandes, B, 53M 4:01:53
10933 Barford, M, 43M 4:01:53
10934 Abeel, L, 35M 4:01:53
10935 Mooy, J, 49M 4:01:53
10936 Bandeira, F, 36M 4:01:53
10937 Blaettler, W, 43M 4:01:53
10938 Harris, M, 38M 4:01:54
10939 Lonergan, D, 40F 4:01:54
10940 Hafif, S, 27M 4:01:54
10941 Chanel, P, 60M 4:01:55
10942 Kaufmann, W, 50M 4:01:55
10943 Chapa Valencia, V, 35M 4:01:56
10944 Li, A, 23M 4:01:56
10945 Sommer, A, 40F 4:01:56
10946 Kurman, D, 41M 4:01:56
10947 Burke, E, 32M 4:01:56
10948 Haberkorn, I, 53F 4:01:56
10949 Lemoine, D, 39M 4:01:56
10950 Parjadis, S, 36M 4:01:57
10951 Nichols, K, 40F4:01:57
10952 Ferris, M, 42M 4:01:57
10953 Thompson, C, 31M 4:01:57
10954 Moscetti, G, 39M 4:01:58
10955 Roto, R, 46M 4:01:58
10956 Deubler, T, 43M 4:01:58
10957 McNulty, C, 31M 4:01:58
10958Collins, M, 41M 4:01:58
10959 Angenendt, J, 44M 4:01:58
10960 Ueda, R, 56M 4:01:59
10961 Notarianni, M, 26M 4:01:59
10962 Colunga Cavazos, E, 51M 4:01:59
10963 Young, I, 32M 4:01:59
10964 Sayah, J, 25F 4:02:00
10965 Schmidt, H, 38M 4:02:00
10966 Ouwerkerk, P, 46M 4:02:00
10967 McLean, A, 29M 4:02:00
10968 Temple, P, 26M 4:02:00
10969 Lahlou, S, 42M 4:02:00
10970 Russell, B, 35F 4:02:01
10971 Keane, G, 28M 4:02:01
10972 Tacconi, P, 34F 4:02:01
10973 Nativel, F, 40M 4:02:01
10974 Shanahan, K, 29F 4:02:02
10975 Grindu, C, 44F 4:02:02
10976 Olson, J, 37F 4:02:03
10977 Nagler, S, 40F4:02:03
10978 Casiano, R, 39M 4:02:04
10979 Weiss, P, 46M 4:02:04
10980 Finn, K, 28F 4:02:04
10981 Schuh, M, 50M 4:02:04
10982 Venick, R, 32F 4:02:04
10983 Bianchi, R, 45M 4:02:05
10984 Idbihi, A, 37M 4:02:05
10985 Benner, A, 45M 4:02:05
10986 Yaffa, N, 28F 4:02:05
10987 Lembke, M, 39M 4:02:06
10988 DeJoannon, A, 28M 4:02:06
10989 Jiresch, A, 22M 4:02:06
10990 Mayr, T, 27F 4:02:06
10991 Ring, P, 47M 4:02:07
10992 Edwards, R, 37F 4:02:07
10993 Rollins Jr, N, 45M 4:02:07
10994 Raeside, D, 54M 4:02:07
10995 Perry, J, 31M 4:02:08
10996 Molina Garcia, A, 38M 4:02:08
10997 Garcia Fabregat, A, 37M 4:02:08
10998 McCormick, R, 45M 4:02:09
10999 Wilks, D, 46M 4:02:09
11000 Stuyven, G, 41M 4:02:09
11001 Marks, A, 50M 4:02:09
11002 Cambridge, R, 45M 4:02:10
11003 Ortmans, J, 32M4:02:10
11004 Smith, P, 54M 4:02:10
11005 Cardia, F, 37M 4:02:10
11006 Villareal Arizpe, T, 35M 4:02:10
11007 Bouthillier, J, 45M 4:02:11
11008 Silva, A, 65M 4:02:11
11009 Huth, J, 28M 4:02:11
11010 Flemming, T, 46M 4:02:11
11011 Rigot, S, 46M 4:02:12
11012Noble, M, 39M 4:02:12
11013 Muller, A, 28M 4:02:12
11014 Casey, M, 27M 4:02:13
11015 Malay, K, 31F 4:02:13
11016 Young, F, 53M 4:02:13
11017 Viard, G, 34M 4:02:13
11018 Landman, J, 41M 4:02:14
11019 Metzger, M, 45M 4:02:15
11020 Hoogerduijn-Strating, E, 32M 4:02:15
11021 Gnaser, G, 37M 4:02:15
11022 Bravo, E, 26M 4:02:16
11023 Gonzalez, J, 45M 4:02:16
11024 Paixao, R, 41M 4:02:16
11025Moser, C, 29M 4:02:16
11026 Ritzert, D, 27M 4:02:17
11027 Bachmann, T, 19M 4:02:17
11028 Womack, B, 41M 4:02:17
11029 Cleland, T, 43M 4:02:17
11030 Sturley, J, 47M 4:02:18
11031 Nienhuis, R, 46M 4:02:18
11032 Vilchis, A, 47M 4:02:19
11033 Bofondi, M, 21M 4:02:19
11034 Westhoff, M, 35M 4:02:19
11035 Hofmeier, D, 54M 4:02:19
11036 Cougard, J, 43M 4:02:20
11037 Farrell, M, 28M 4:02:20
11038 Quinonez, N, 46F 4:02:20
11039 Thevenet, J, 44M 4:02:20
11040 Butts, T, 33M 4:02:21
11041 Bernstein, L, 31F 4:02:21
11042 Spotti, J, 46M 4:02:21
11043 Troullier, J, 52M 4:02:21
11044 Barbier, E, 22M 4:02:22
11045 Melendez, E, 43M 4:02:22
11046 Vecchio, L, 42M 4:02:22
11047 Brannon, J, 27M 4:02:22
11048 Finch, K, 24F 4:02:22
11049 De Groot, J, 31F 4:02:22
11050 Potvin, T, 37M 4:02:23
11051 Anneback, G, 46F 4:02:23
11052 Seiderman, E, 41M 4:02:23
11053 Kraemer, H, 57M 4:02:23
11054 Post, G, 43M 4:02:23
11055 Muller, D, 30M 4:02:24
11056 Buehler, M, 43F 4:02:24
11057 Barber, A, 43M 4:02:24
11058 Villegas Abudez, A, 51M 4:02:25
11059 Snider, L, 33F 4:02:25
11060 Souza, L, 58M 4:02:25
11061 Kuchinskas, M, 34M 4:02:25
11062 McCool, J, 26F 4:02:26
11063 Kirsch, G, 40M 4:02:26
11064 Sanchez, J, 40M 4:02:26
11065 Otto, H, 47M 4:02:26
11066 Otto, M, 44F 4:02:27
11067 Torres-Ramos, J, 45M 4:02:27
11068 Kwatkoski, L, 33F 4:02:27
11069 Zvirgzdins, G, 50M 4:02:27
11070 Weingaertner, B, 30M 4:02:27
11071 Raunsbaek, J, 40F 4:02:27
11072 Jansen, A, 46M 4:02:27
11073 Guerrero, R, 60M 4:02:28
11074 Santarossa, M, 37M 4:02:28
11075 Rudolph, H, 63M 4:02:28
11076 Dolman, C, 35M 4:02:28
11077 Grills, P, 45M 4:02:28
11078 Neeser, J, 31F 4:02:28
11079 Rinaldi, C, 34M 4:02:29
11080 Miodownik, P, 33M 4:02:29
11081 Thiede, E, 55M 4:02:30
11082 Aguilera Delamo, E, 46M 4:02:30
11083 Martinez Miranda, J, 30M 4:02:30
11084 Leger, J, 27M 4:02:31
11085 Toulza, P, 40M 4:02:31
11086 Rhein, H, 57M 4:02:31
11087 Mangion, C, 50M 4:02:31
11088 Behlmer, T, 37M 4:02:31
11089 Razin, A, 49M 4:02:31
11090 Ross, W, 38M 4:02:32
11091 Yamamoto, Y, 49F 4:02:33
11092 Gonzalez Jaimes, R, 41M 4:02:33
11093 Matthews, W, 56M 4:02:33
11094 Foley, E, 41M 4:02:33
11095 Caprara, J, 40M 4:02:33
11096 Loeser, H, 33M 4:02:33
11097 Phariss, G, 48M 4:02:33
11098 Cervantes, H, 43M 4:02:33
11099 Reiners, M, 34M 4:02:33
11100 Young, A, 29M 4:02:33
11101 Reibold, G, 29M 4:02:33
11102 Rosals, M, 29F 4:02:33
11103 Rosales Diaz, O, 33M 4:02:33
11104Van Glabek, W, 37M 4:02:34
11105 Atamaniuk, H, 40M 4:02:35
11106 Tenhave, P, 40M 4:02:35
11107 Nemy, J, 36M 4:02:36
11108 Van Boven, S, 35M 4:02:36
11109 Benoit, B, 46M 4:02:36
11110 Kieran, T, 54M 4:02:36
11111 Reyna Quintanilla, J, 43M 4:02:36
11112 James, A, 50M 4:02:37
11113 Weinberg, A, 29F 4:02:37
11114 Metzinger, R, 40M4:02:37
11115 Le Pezron, M, 33M 4:02:37
11116 Webb, V, 28F 4:02:38
11117 Chavez, A, 48M 4:02:38
11118 Kistner, D, 36M 4:02:38
11119 Skillings, J, 44F 4:02:38
11120 Kreisberg, L, 36M 4:02:38
11121 Paul, H, 38M 4:02:39
11122 Tanaka, H, 48M 4:02:39
11123 Short, J, 33F 4:02:39
11124 De Bruyne, P, 46M 4:02:39
11125 Brady, M, 35F 4:02:39
11126 Van De Kamer, Y, 47F 4:02:39
11127 Henkel, H, 35M 4:02:40
11128 Gomez Alvarez Galvez, L, 45M 4:02:40
11129 Ehrman, P, 50M 4:02:40
11130 Aguirre, G, 44M 4:02:40
11131 Abbott, R, 47M4:02:40
11132 Brothersen, H, 43M 4:02:41
11133 Desvignes, R, 39M 4:02:41
11134 Holcomb Jr, T, 35M 4:02:41
11135 Pierce, A, 32F 4:02:41
11136 Grenier, C, 46F 4:02:42
11137 Nicolas, N, 38F 4:02:42
11138 Nicolas, Y, 39M 4:02:43
11139 Conze, Y, 38M 4:02:43
11140 Newton, M, 34F 4:02:43
11141 Snel, H, 51M 4:02:43
11142 Hubbard, L, 51M 4:02:43
11143 Hesch, M, 44F 4:02:43
11144 McCormick, M, 31M 4:02:43
11145 Murray, E, 24M 4:02:43
11146 Yung, M, 43F 4:02:43
11147 Motte, M, 40F 4:02:44
11148 Von Wedelstaedt, H, 35M 4:02:44
11149 Jamieson, S, 41M 4:02:44
11150 Lacoma, L, 37M 4:02:44
11151 Hertzberg, J, 40F 4:02:44
11152 Guerrero, M, 30F 4:02:46
11153 Seaton, B, 48M 4:02:47
11154 Rozman, A, 24M 4:02:47
11155 O'Gara, W, 39M 4:02:47
11156 Ancilotto, M, 36F 4:02:47
11157 Waxman, M, 22M 4:02:48
11158 Carroll, W, 32M 4:02:48
11159 Flemming, D, 42M 4:02:48
11160 Stewart, B, 36M 4:02:48
11161 Stanley, S, 46M 4:02:48
11162 Ruth, H, 53M 4:02:48
11163 Keenan, B, 38M 4:02:49
11164 Seeber, S, 33M 4:02:49
11165 Gmuer, R, 32M 4:02:49
11166 Lykakis, B, 44M 4:02:49
11167 Wiersum, K, 39F 4:02:49
11168 Debruyn, J, 29M 4:02:49
11169 Steine, J, 64M 4:02:49
11170 Pradier, L, 32M4:02:49
11171 Bossis, A, 47M 4:02:49
11172 Andersson, L, 42M 4:02:49
11173 Coleman, P, 45M 4:02:50
11174 Schweighofer, R, 21M 4:02:50
11175 De Jong, A, 46M 4:02:51
11176 Inoue, T, 46M 4:02:52
11177 Dontje, N, 36M 4:02:52
11178 Hook, J, 33M 4:02:52
11179 De La Fuente, R, 43M 4:02:52
11180 Rymes, L, 54M 4:02:53
11181 Martensson, A, 43M 4:02:53
11182 Escarilla, J, 47M 4:02:53
11183 Berrondo, E, 36M 4:02:53
11184 Wilson, E, 25F 4:02:53
11185 Perlman, M, 18M 4:02:54
11186 Meunier, H, 42M 4:02:54
11187 O'Neil, B, 32M 4:02:54
11188 Mabes Jr, L, 48M 4:02:54
11189 Hellings, C, 31M 4:02:54
11190 Bingham, J, 35F 4:02:55
11191 Moskowitz, W, 38F 4:02:55
11192 Hoenel, D, 48M 4:02:56
11193 Weinberger, H, 43M 4:02:56
11194 Murfee, M, 29F 4:02:57
11195 Baron, J, 34M 4:02:57
11196 Ehrenberger, M, 36M 4:02:58
11197 Cuttle, T, 32M 4:02:58
11198 Evens, R, 55M 4:02:58
11199 Baumann, A, 38M 4:02:59
11200 Murata, H, 20M4:02:59
11201 Kudera, A, 34M 4:03:00
11202 Suarez, V, 28F 4:03:00
11203 Boylan, R, 25M 4:03:00
11204 Calvano, M, 36M 4:03:00
11205 Fuentes H., F, 43M 4:03:00
11206 Hiltmann, J, 27M 4:03:01
11207 Borradori, G, 39M 4:03:01
11208 McGlynn, E, 38M 4:03:01
11209 Patry, A, 40M 4:03:02
11210 Dow, G, 28F 4:03:02
11211 Steele, D, 46M 4:03:02
11212 Sundh, P, 59M 4:03:03
11213 John, H, 49M 4:03:03
11214 Kaiser, F, 33M 4:03:03
11215 Graif, M, 28M 4:03:04
11216 Udis, A, 44M 4:03:04
11217 Madsen, K, 40M 4:03:05
11218 Rosano, S, 23F 4:03:05
11219 Webster, M, 27F 4:03:05
11220 Reyes, K, 31F 4:03:05
11221 Senge, J, 45M 4:03:05
11222 Epitalon, X, 38M 4:03:05
11223 Beal, D, 48M 4:03:06
11224 Palese, P, 45M 4:03:06
11225 Fair, M, 25M 4:03:06
11226 Crapella, L, 43F 4:03:07
11227 Cantons Boldu, M, 50M 4:03:07
11228 Racine, M, 50M 4:03:07
11229 Noguera Rico, M, 38F 4:03:07
11230 Romero Pozo, F, 43M 4:03:08
11231 McLachlan, R, 50M 4:03:09
11232 Resnick, J, 30M 4:03:09
11233 Kumazawa, O, 28M 4:03:09
11234 Baraldini, J, 35F 4:03:09
11235 Fagan, M, 40M 4:03:09
11236 Gast, J, 53M 4:03:09
11237 Conroy, B, 47M 4:03:10
11238 Allais, N, 25M 4:03:10
11239 Van Sint Annaland, H, 49M 4:03:11
11240 Shreeves, S, 32F 4:03:11
11241 Wagger, R, 36F 4:03:11
11242 Saliou, C, 26M 4:03:12
11243 Uhrman, J, 45M 4:03:12
11244 Etchecahar, C, 45M 4:03:12
11245 Bobach, C, 40F 4:03:12
11246 Williams, P, 37M 4:03:12
11247 Van Der Heiden, R, 37M 4:03:12
11248 Mozer, M, 41M 4:03:12
11249 Silvestry, B, 22M 4:03:12
11250 Burmeister, W, 38M 4:03:12
11251 Balletta, C, 50M 4:03:12
11252 Silvestry, S, 29M 4:03:12
11253 Wilensky, S, 31F 4:03:13
11254 Kinkopf, K, 33M 4:03:14
11255 Lieggi, N, 55M 4:03:14
11256 Lumer, L, 53M4:03:15
11257 Weisberg, R, 48M 4:03:15
11258 Hochman, S, 38M 4:03:15
11259 Gutierrez, J, 30M 4:03:16
11260 Badouard, S, 38M 4:03:17
11261 Budd, S, 43M 4:03:17
11262 Meyer, G, 56M 4:03:17
11263 Ramo Munoz, M, 34M 4:03:17
11264 Lurie, B, 39M 4:03:17
11265 Nurmi, P, 39M 4:03:17
11266 Bekkering, H, 44M 4:03:17
11267 Vicente, J, 34M 4:03:18
11268 Gonzalez Estrella, E, 34M 4:03:18
11269 Haney, C, 41F 4:03:18
11270 Borcyk, E, 30M 4:03:18
11271 Demange, J, 59M 4:03:18
11272 Walton, L, 23F 4:03:18
11273 Lebaz, F, 28M 4:03:19
11274 Ford, R, 58M 4:03:19
11275 Blanc, B, 55M 4:03:19
11276 Miller, W, 38F 4:03:20
11277 Ives, M, 40M 4:03:20
11278 Cortinas, J, 46M 4:03:20
11279 Hoock, P, 46M 4:03:20
11280 Gal, P, 45M 4:03:21
11281 Colomer, R, 35M 4:03:21
11282 Smith, C, 48M 4:03:21
11283 Winters, M, 54M 4:03:21
11284 Ahn, A, 45M 4:03:22
11285Healy, T, 31M 4:03:22
11286 Ross, D, 29M 4:03:22
11287 Frappell, A, 24M 4:03:22
11288 Nishida, T, 36M 4:03:22
11289 Wooten, B, 24M4:03:23
11290 Le-Boulanger, J, 38M 4:03:23
11291 Riera, P, 31F 4:03:23
11292 Lund, N, 34M 4:03:23
11293 Grandjean, S, 44M 4:03:24
11294 Primot, C, 47M 4:03:24
11295 Scheffer, P, 30M 4:03:25
11296 Nosal, M, 39F 4:03:25
11297 Dayrit, D, 32F 4:03:25
11298 Sosnowski, F, 38M 4:03:25
11299 Defebvre, P, 33M 4:03:26
11300 Juergens, W, 27M 4:03:26
11301 Sweeney, J, 27M 4:03:26
11302 Grimm-Gobat, G, 44F 4:03:26
11303 Rudnick, R, 37M 4:03:26
11304 Hansen, K, 44F 4:03:26
11305 Rarey, K, 46M 4:03:26
11306 Mekis, R, 35M 4:03:27
11307 Karlsson, S, 41M 4:03:27
11308 Durland Jr, D, 27M 4:03:27
11309 Hamersma, C, 22M 4:03:27
11310 Gibert, S, 44F 4:03:27
11311 Massimi, A, 56M 4:03:28
11312 Shields, T, 46M 4:03:28
11313 Sire, P, 43M 4:03:28
11314 Buettner, M, 43M 4:03:28
11315 Cutler, M, 29M 4:03:28
11316 Manchester, D, 52M 4:03:29
11317 Preslier, S, 35F 4:03:29
11318 Tibbetts, L, 33F 4:03:30
11319 Vos, O, 40M 4:03:30
11320 Voris, M, 38M 4:03:30
11321 Doesburg, A, 31M 4:03:30
11322 Ferran, C, 36F 4:03:30
11323 Ferran, E, 37M 4:03:31
11324 Blasie Jr, E, 28M 4:03:31
11325 Siderman, S, 49F 4:03:32
11326 Goa, J, 40M 4:03:32
11327 Bates, S, 41M 4:03:32
11328 Kingma, T, 47M4:03:32
11329 Behr, G, 55M 4:03:33
11330 Kumlin, T, 45M 4:03:33
11331 Cox, R, 40M 4:03:33
11332 Burghardt, D, 39M 4:03:33
11333 Gleitzman, S, 52M 4:03:34
11334 Sikora, D, 42M 4:03:34
11335 LeCroy, C, 40M 4:03:34
11336 Roy, A, 38M 4:03:35
11337 Matsuura, H, 54M 4:03:35
11338 Barnes, M, 56M 4:03:37
11339 Rath, N, 50M 4:03:38
11340 Arata, C, 33F 4:03:38
11341 O'Riordan, A, 44M 4:03:38
11342 Funke, R, 49M 4:03:39
11343 Fearon-Howard, K, 38F 4:03:39
11344 Russo, L, 33M 4:03:39
11345 Pacquelet, G, 46M 4:03:39
11346Chaplin, C, 27M 4:03:40
11347 Raulot, J, 33M 4:03:40
11348 Bates, L, 35F 4:03:40
11349 Parcer, M, 34M 4:03:40
11350 Wates, J, 27M 4:03:40
11351 Tulasne, J, 33M 4:03:40
11352 Jaime Calderon, M, 45M4:03:40
11353 Lewis, W, 25M 4:03:41
11354 Anthony, G, 48F 4:03:41
11355 Paine, D, 45M 4:03:41
11356 Huijssoon, C, 42M 4:03:41
11357 Spitler, T, 24M 4:03:42
11358 Davis, S, 33M 4:03:42
11359 Levin, D, 26M 4:03:42
11360 Muehlbauer, M, 31M 4:03:42
11361 Mattera, N, 40M 4:03:42
11362 Broich, J, 33M 4:03:42
11363 Powers, L, 40M 4:03:43
11364 Searle, H, 32F 4:03:43
11365 Jost, E, 34F 4:03:43
11366 Vives, M, 46M 4:03:44
11367 Moller, E, 48F 4:03:44
11368 Merritt, A, 54M 4:03:45
11369 Groner, M, 44M 4:03:45
11370 Kammann, H, 41M 4:03:45
11371 Garber, D, 48M 4:03:45
11372 Barger, M, 42F 4:03:45
11373 Arceo Guerrero, F, 48M 4:03:45
11374 Lorentzen, T, 30M 4:03:45
11375 Barnett, R, 43M 4:03:46
11376 Marques, S, 38F 4:03:46
11377 Weber, M, 24M 4:03:46
11378 Hernandez, A, 30M 4:03:46
11379 Dagrain, R, 46M 4:03:46
11380 Silverman, H, 34M 4:03:46
11381 Claeys, F, 41M 4:03:46
11382 Handlovits, M, 31F 4:03:47
11383 Moreno, J, 35M 4:03:47
11384 Girles, M, 35M 4:03:48
11385Mahala, D, 60M 4:03:48
11386 Pezzimenti, D, 32M 4:03:48
11387 Bernabeu, L, 32M 4:03:49
11388 Tenpenny, C, 49M 4:03:49
11389 Reimann, M, 47F 4:03:49
11390 Kawai, M, 30M 4:03:49
11391 Sutton, M, 39F4:03:49
11392 Clifford, M, 28M 4:03:49
11393 Diner, B, 36M 4:03:50
11394 Delcher, B, 41M 4:03:50
11395 Luciani, J, 48M 4:03:50
11396 Ravalli, S, 34M 4:03:50
11397 Villegas, G, 69M 4:03:50
11398 Franco, E, 54M 4:03:50
11399 Calamari III, J, 45M 4:03:50
11400Stahlke, W, 61M 4:03:50
11401 Theot, J, 60M 4:03:50
11402 Alty, D, 36M 4:03:50
11403 Bourgogne, R, 66M 4:03:50
11404 Bonnell, W, 35M 4:03:50
11405 Liebrecht, K, 60M 4:03:50
11406 Yarbrough, C, 44F4:03:50
11407 Brock, R, 31M 4:03:51
11408 Annezo, M, 32F 4:03:51
11409 Kerbl, H, 32M 4:03:51
11410 Monteleone, R, 33M 4:03:52
11411 Buetler, E, 50M 4:03:52
11412 Hall, T, 44M 4:03:52
11413 Doble, G, 50M 4:03:52
11414 Dolson, T, 38M 4:03:52
11415 Boehnke, F, 46M 4:03:53
11416 De Dood, B, 40F 4:03:53
11417 O'Connor, D, 34M4:03:53
11418 Van Dyke, C, 38F 4:03:53
11419 Strasser, R, 53M 4:03:54
11420 Millard, M, 36M 4:03:54
11421 Shapiro, B, 32F 4:03:54
11422 Cataldo, V, 30M 4:03:54
11423 Francois, C, 48F 4:03:55
11424 Lustenberger, P, 36M 4:03:55
11425 Gutierrez, L, 44M 4:03:55
11426 Gardner, A, 42M 4:03:55
11427 Hauke, U, 30F 4:03:55
11428 Joos, F, 57M 4:03:55
11429 Ostrowsky, M, 35M 4:03:56
11430 Reining, G, 53M 4:03:56
11431 Suer, R, 31M 4:03:56
11432 Jacoby, D, 32M 4:03:56
11433 Cottin, S, 45F 4:03:57
11434 Schuster, H, 41M 4:03:57
11435 Leopold, M, 22F 4:03:57
11436 Tinchant, E, 22M 4:03:58
11437 Feinstein, R, 51M 4:03:58
11438 Lampasona, S, 36M 4:03:58
11439 Sheppard, D, 32F 4:03:59
11440 Ranallo, F, 29M 4:03:59
11441Van Den Akker, E, 46F 4:03:59
11442 Simonutti, C, 46M 4:04:00
11443 Mercer*, C, 24M 4:04:00
11444 Jensen, M, 31M 4:04:00
11445 Machat, J, 31M 4:04:00
11446 Ogiolda, S, 32M 4:04:00
11447 Mattei, A, 39M 4:04:01
11448 Hoek, W, 26M 4:04:01
11449 Takeshita, H, 48M 4:04:01
11450 Staufer, J, 42M 4:04:01
11451 Velasquez, C, 37M 4:04:01
11452 Anibarro, P, 58M 4:04:01
11453 Georgin, M, 39F 4:04:01
11454 Vernegeol, J, 46M 4:04:01
11455 Levit, L, 40M 4:04:02
11456 Colley, D, 63M 4:04:02
11457 Mahoney, K, 28F 4:04:03
11458 Christian, H, 44F 4:04:04
11459 Feinberg, G, 39M 4:04:04
11460 Gantioler, M, 43F 4:04:04
11461 Boyer, C, 51M 4:04:05
11462 Halbrooks, D, 35M 4:04:05
11463 Pileszczak, J, 48M 4:04:06
11464 Szabo, N, 19F4:04:06
11465 Lokhorst, O, 42M 4:04:06
11466 Beaver, T, 52M 4:04:06
11467 Flueckiger, S, 42F 4:04:07
11468 Wolf, S, 43M 4:04:07
11469 Thompson, N, 38F 4:04:07
11470 Gannac, Y, 47F 4:04:07
11471 Ostrom, J, 56M 4:04:07
11472 Blazer, K, 39F 4:04:07
11473 Gannac, Y, 47M 4:04:07
11474 Iglesias, C, 25F 4:04:08
11475 Goree Vi., L, 41M 4:04:08
11476 Athey, W, 45M 4:04:08
11477 Neil, D, 29M 4:04:08
11478 Bhargava, S, 22M 4:04:08
11479 Haworth, I, 34M 4:04:08
11480 Abramson, L, 43M 4:04:08
11481 Quinn, P, 38M 4:04:08
11482 Hodapp, S, 53M 4:04:08
11483 Olsson, T, 47M 4:04:08
11484 Mahaffey, R, 45M 4:04:08
11485 Saint-Louis, D, 28F 4:04:09
11486 Fabi, L, 29M 4:04:09
11487 Applegate, L, 28F 4:04:09
11488 Groters, T, 31M 4:04:09
11489 Santander, A, 32M 4:04:10
11490 Lepley, J, 43M4:04:10
11491 Murrisch, T, 32M 4:04:10
11492 Tabiasco, C, 44F 4:04:11
11493 McElroy, S, 37M 4:04:11
11494 Meyer, J, 43M 4:04:11
11495 McAuliffe, D, 32F 4:04:11
11496 Horton, D, 32M 4:04:11
11497 Urmann, R, 44M 4:04:11
11498 Latham, M, 30M 4:04:12
11499 McGeary, P, 25M 4:04:12
11500 Corcoran, G, 47M 4:04:12
11501 Scala, L, 30M 4:04:12
11502 Scott, V, 51M 4:04:13
11503 Bownes, D, 29F 4:04:13
11504 Rubin, E, 53M 4:04:13
11505 Luff, R, 30F 4:04:14
11506 Tuffli, A, 52M 4:04:15
11507 Davis, J, 40M 4:04:15
11508 De Graaf, A, 39M 4:04:15
11509 Atwater, J, 33M 4:04:15
11510 Rubin, S, 48F 4:04:16
11511 De Pierre, G, 37M 4:04:16
11512 Samuelsen, T, 46M 4:04:17
11513 Riveraburgos, J, 38M 4:04:18
11514 Fetterolf, E, 25F 4:04:18
11515 Salvesen, C, 51M 4:04:18
11516 Ocanas, D, 37M 4:04:18
11517 Coudriet, G, 40M 4:04:19
11518 De Kruyff, W, 38M 4:04:19
11519 Tripi, A, 28M 4:04:19
11520 Dahlen, B, 50M 4:04:19
11521 Huijs, R, 38M 4:04:20
11522 Ackerman, M, 54M 4:04:20
11523Robert, C, 29M 4:04:20
11524 Woelk, J, 25M 4:04:20
11525 Coffing, P, 39F 4:04:20
11526 Takoudes, T, 26M 4:04:20
11527 Jochmann II, A, 40M 4:04:21
11528 Early, M, 32M 4:04:21
11529 Stodiek, G, 29M 4:04:21
11530 Eyraud, Y, 43M 4:04:21
11531 Skall, A, 40M 4:04:21
11532 Notley, R, 33M 4:04:21
11533 Reardon, L, 24F 4:04:21
11534 Cordero, E, 37M 4:04:22
11535 Paus, B, 44F 4:04:22
11536 Twombly, P, 38M 4:04:22
11537 Rodriguez, S, 36M 4:04:22
11538 Gautier, C, 43F 4:04:23
11539 Van Seenus, R, 56M 4:04:23
11540 Barrameda, B, 35M 4:04:23
11541 Strehl, N, 51M 4:04:23
11542 Malmin, K, 23F 4:04:24
11543 Benz, G, 49M 4:04:24
11544 Sage, R, 58M 4:04:24
11545 Postel, M, 42F 4:04:24
11546 Zajac, P, 39M 4:04:25
11547 Bonnet, R, 59M 4:04:25
11548 Gaulin, J, 27F 4:04:25
11549 Martin, J, 53M 4:04:26
11550 Den Hertog, T, 47M 4:04:26
11551 Morrow, M, 31M 4:04:26
11552 Andrade, O, 60M 4:04:26
11553 Bessard, M, 54M 4:04:26
11554 Kloehn, H, 49M 4:04:27
11555 Atwood, M, 44F 4:04:27
11556 Dopfel, G, 30M 4:04:27
11557 Leparfait, P, 37M 4:04:28
11558 Andersson, M, 41F 4:04:28
11559 Klingemann, P, 45M 4:04:28
11560 Dallet, V, 33F 4:04:28
11561 Dubreuil, P, 73M 4:04:29
11562 Southall, P, 39M 4:04:29
11563 Burack, D, 30F 4:04:29
11564 Larson, D, 56M 4:04:30
11565 Meyer, D, 37M 4:04:30
11566 Schroschk, K, 27M 4:04:30
11567 Cordova Geirdal, R, 27M 4:04:30
11568 Tagliaferri, M, 47F 4:04:31
11569 Panaro, M, 33M 4:04:31
11570 Lewis, S, 26M 4:04:31
11571 Gross, D, 27M 4:04:31
11572 Levitsky, J, 48M 4:04:32
11573 Powers, S, 27M 4:04:32
11574 Nagtegaal, R, 35M 4:04:32
11575 Fahje, N, 30M 4:04:32
11576 Croake, G, 50M 4:04:33
11577 Leduc, D, 47M 4:04:33
11578 Tschiltsch, W, 51M 4:04:33
11579 Marquez, L, 30M 4:04:33
11580 Egan, T, 37F 4:04:33
11581 Throne, G, 34F 4:04:34
11582 Chick, J, 36M 4:04:34
11583 Servoz, R, 41M 4:04:34
11584 Touzeau, P, 45M 4:04:34
11585 Theodosakis, J, 37M 4:04:34
11586 Ivanov, D, 38F 4:04:34
11587 Klestinec, S, 45M 4:04:35
11588 Peduzzi, F, 43M 4:04:35
11589 Banga, J, 45M 4:04:35
11590 De Geus, E, 35F 4:04:35
11591 Hepplewhite, T, 27M 4:04:35
11592 Lang, H, 57M 4:04:35
11593 Isshiki, S, 38M 4:04:36
11594 Azoulay, J, 35M 4:04:36
11595 Kleuser, T, 44M 4:04:36
11596 Van Vliet, D, 40M 4:04:36
11597 Salmi, T, 35M 4:04:37
11598 Pinar, A, 39M 4:04:37
11599 Gost, B, 39M 4:04:39
11600 Donaldson, M, 27F 4:04:39
11601 Gavin, J, 34M 4:04:39
11602 Queste, P, 33M 4:04:39
11603 Schoeps, J, 54F 4:04:39
11604 Mailuhu, P, 38M 4:04:40
11605 Lauga, B, 45M 4:04:40
11606 Polan, F, 36M 4:04:40
11607 Johannesson, B, 52M 4:04:40
11608 Wichmann, H, 43M 4:04:40
11609 Petrillo, S, 54M 4:04:40
11610 Stentz, T, 46M 4:04:40
11611 Maroulis, S, 30M 4:04:41
11612 Louick, D, 50M 4:04:41
11613 Marchione, F, 37M 4:04:41
11614 Richard, A, 38M 4:04:41
11615 Izuka, S, 58M 4:04:41
11616 Paula, M, 36M 4:04:42
11617 Santana, M, 44M 4:04:42
11618 Rogers, J, 44F 4:04:42
11619 Bouland, A, 42M 4:04:42
11620 Bowen, D, 35M 4:04:42
11621 Kinoshita, A, 29F 4:04:43
11622 Pouliquen, P, 37M 4:04:43
11623 Auld, T, 32M 4:04:44
11624 Duchene, J, 46M 4:04:44
11625Hobicorn, B, 29M 4:04:44
11626 Burt, T, 27M 4:04:44
11627 Robinet, J, 32M 4:04:45
11628 Sapadin, D, 24M 4:04:45
11629 Carnevale, S, 40M 4:04:45
11630 Armitage, S, 33M 4:04:45
11631 Luznik, K, 60F 4:04:45
11632 Foley, W, 39M 4:04:46
11633 Lehmkuhl, M, 44M 4:04:46
11634 Gonzalez Martinez, M, 55M 4:04:46
11635 Mauger, M, 34M 4:04:46
11636 Roxstrom, E, 54F 4:04:47
11637 Ahl, R, 32M 4:04:47
11638 Grabienski, W, 41M 4:04:47
11639 Meadows, T, 35M 4:04:47
11640 Caputo, D, 25M 4:04:48
11641 Probst, H, 37M 4:04:48
11642 Vielmetter, C, 27M 4:04:48
11643 Miller, J, 25F 4:04:48
11644 Massonneau, D, 47M 4:04:48
11645 Rojas, J, 37M 4:04:49
11646 Desjardins, C, 32M 4:04:49
11647 Steinberg, J, 31F 4:04:49
11648 Van Loan, E, 51M 4:04:49
11649 Munoz Jr, E, 52M 4:04:49
11650 Nolz, W, 51M 4:04:49
11651 Daniel, M, 54M 4:04:50
11652 Van Andel, J, 52M 4:04:50
11653 Metzger, R, 37M 4:04:50
11654 Hange, H, 31M 4:04:50
11655 Dailey, M, 42M 4:04:50
11656 Makatcheff, N, 32M 4:04:50
11657 Reisinger, K, 39M 4:04:51
11658 Ruta, J, 48M 4:04:51
11659 Marcillac, A, 40M 4:04:51
11660 Van Den Berg, J, 45M 4:04:51
11661 Daileader Jr, R, 40M 4:04:51
11662 Altruie, G, 48M 4:04:51
11663 Porcella, G, 34M 4:04:51
11664 Huge, G, 43F 4:04:51
11665 Kaspar, M, 49M 4:04:52
11666 Kunze, W, 38M 4:04:52
11667 Damoiseau, P, 40M 4:04:52
11668 Quesada Roldan, C, 31M 4:04:52
11669 Mosquera, S, 35M 4:04:52
11670 Sheets, B, 44M 4:04:53
11671 Fitts, R, 31M 4:04:53
11672 Bouleau, C, 43M 4:04:53
11673 Crawford, J, 32M 4:04:53
11674 Racine, C, 40M 4:04:53
11675 Rempel, R, 31F 4:04:53
11676 Pierotti, T, 34M 4:04:54
11677 Marcot, G, 39M 4:04:54
11678 Pecquet, M, 35F 4:04:54
11679 Golinvaux, J, 21M 4:04:54
11680 Huetter, M, 57M4:04:54
11681 Van Dyk, J, 65M 4:04:55
11682 Tielbeek, B, 39M 4:04:55
11683 O'Donnell, J, 48M 4:04:55
11684 Appleton, S, 39M 4:04:55
11685 Canzilli, V, 57M 4:04:55
11686 Sanchez, H, 43M 4:04:55
11687 Cavalier, D, 34F 4:04:55
11688 Carre Campos, M, 39M 4:04:55
11689 Morales Reyes, J, 48M 4:04:55
11690 Olson, R, 35M 4:04:56
11691 O'Keefe, S, 25M 4:04:56
11692 Franco, S, 34M 4:04:56
11693 Schwarz, H, 55M 4:04:56
11694 Biasch, G, 49M 4:04:56
11695 Bergonia, M, 37F 4:04:56
11696 Pezzano, A, 33M 4:04:56
11697 Meacham, S, 41M 4:04:56
11698 Cronan, D, 25M 4:04:57
11699 Chatillon, J, 53M 4:04:57
11700 Ranguin, C, 32M 4:04:57
11701 Villon, D, 51M 4:04:57
11702 Olsen, B, 42M 4:04:57
11703 Fernandez, A, 42M 4:04:58
11704 Day, M, 41M 4:04:58
11705 Brenner, R, 33M 4:04:58
11706 Pawluck, A, 43M 4:04:58
11707 Dunn, R, 25M 4:04:59
11708 Berman, J, 36M 4:04:59
11709 Murcott, R, 49M 4:04:59
11710 Sacco, D, 27M 4:04:59
11711 Moore, M, 43F 4:04:59
11712 Visser, N, 42M 4:04:59
11713 Lynch, J, 34F 4:05:00
11714 Amato, L, 42M 4:05:00
11715 Heineck, L, 45F 4:05:00
11716 Zaga, M, 35M 4:05:01
11717 Lyster, T, 23M 4:05:02
11718 McGuffin, S, 42M 4:05:02
11719 Smith, P, 30M 4:05:02
11720 Breier, D, 35M 4:05:03
11721 Meyer, H, 59M 4:05:03
11722 Fischenich, R, 47M 4:05:03
11723 Clough, D, 39M 4:05:03
11724 Hunt, M, 36M 4:05:04
11725 Fraser, R, 31M 4:05:04
11726 Bernard, G, 34M 4:05:04
11727 Nielsen, S, 33M 4:05:04
11728 Dessus, D, 38M 4:05:05
11729 Chesrow, R, 49M 4:05:05
11730 Wateridge, J, 24M 4:05:05
11731 Sauniers, P, 33M 4:05:05
11732 Dubreuil, K, 40M 4:05:06
11733 Morales, A, 39M 4:05:06
11734 Keislair, J, 37M 4:05:07
11735 Briffaud, B, 34M 4:05:07
11736 Schmitt, J, 32M 4:05:07
11737 Summers, S, 50M 4:05:08
11738 Butson, J, 28M 4:05:08
11739 Jacobsen, R, 22M 4:05:08
11740 Jordana, F, 21M 4:05:08
11741 Nistler Jr, W, 48M 4:05:09
11742 Gleeson, J, 30M 4:05:09
11743 Stuurman, P, 46F 4:05:10
11744 Retcho, C, 24M 4:05:10
11745 Girod, J, 46M 4:05:10
11746 Vernoia, F, 40M 4:05:10
11747 Crowley, S, 32F 4:05:10
11748 Sanchez, G, 41M 4:05:10
11749 Hordyk, G, 49M 4:05:11
11750 Archer, S, 48F 4:05:11
11751 Salenbier, E, 40F 4:05:12
11752Soerensen, J, 34M 4:05:13
11753 Parento, D, 25M 4:05:13
11754 Chai, E, 25M 4:05:13
11755 Sigler, J, 43M 4:05:14
11756 Podevin, J, 36M 4:05:15
11757 Provenzani, M, 42M 4:05:16
11758 Snider, G, 39M 4:05:16
11759 Silva, A, 53M 4:05:16
11760 Brown, D, 51M 4:05:17
11761 Treghier, B, 45M 4:05:17
11762 Oreilly, M, 38M 4:05:17
11763 Van Den Boogaard, J, 43M 4:05:17
11764 Kondo, J, 58M 4:05:17
11765 Skyzinski, R, 38M 4:05:18
11766 James, D, 39M 4:05:18
11767 Garai, J, 43M 4:05:18
11768 Long, C, 27M 4:05:18
11769 Robles, W, 49M 4:05:18
11770 Blitzer, M, 41F 4:05:18
11771 Pacheco, J, 50M 4:05:18
11772 Gonzalez Torre, L, 39M 4:05:19
11773 Chen, C, 22M 4:05:19
11774 Denoyelle, F, 40M 4:05:19
11775 Vd Voort Vd Kley, R, 18M 4:05:20
11776 Walker, J, 44M 4:05:20
11777 Zwerver, F, 37M 4:05:20
11778 Lira, E, 47M 4:05:20
11779 Le Mellinaidre, J, 38M 4:05:21
11780 Hardy, C, 40M 4:05:21
11781 Shay, S, 29F 4:05:21
11782 McGannon, T, 38M 4:05:21
11783 Grancaric, D, 35M 4:05:21
11784 Harris, K, 27M 4:05:22
11785 Brenner, E, 37F 4:05:22
11786 Nouvel, J, 35M 4:05:22
11787 Grancaric, P, 35M 4:05:22
11788 Jones, E, 55F 4:05:22
11789 Silvester, D, 34M 4:05:23
11790 Ertel, C, 47M 4:05:23
11791 Hadfield, J, 27F 4:05:23
11792 Casey, P, 33M 4:05:23
11793 Dupont, Y, 45F 4:05:23
11794 Soubranne, B, 48M 4:05:24
11795 Frommer, S, 23M 4:05:24
11796 Eismayr, M, 55M 4:05:24
11797 Whellams, R, 49M 4:05:24
11798 Warren, D, 23F 4:05:25
11799 Kreisberg, B, 55M 4:05:25
11800 Potvin, D, 39F 4:05:25
11801 Leduc, C, 36M 4:05:25
11802 Hayes, T, 40M 4:05:26
11803 Cassin, D, 46F 4:05:26
11804 Eriksson, B, 48M 4:05:26
11805 Valentin, A, 38M 4:05:26
11806 Le Boutillier, S, 35F 4:05:27
11807 Ledborg Hansen, R, 35M 4:05:27
11808 Smithson, J, 49M 4:05:27
11809 Moelich, J, 34F 4:05:27
11810 McDermott, S, 30F 4:05:28
11811 Bauduy, L, 40F 4:05:28
11812 Wahl, D, 45M 4:05:28
11813 Schaffel, J, 26M 4:05:28
11814 Silvers, C, 32F 4:05:28
11815 Slater, M, 30F 4:05:28
11816 Diaz, A, 58M 4:05:29
11817 Salzman, E, 30M 4:05:29
11818 Cvitkovich, K, 51M 4:05:29
11819 Wong, J, 35M 4:05:29
11820 Van Vlodrop, A, 39F 4:05:29
11821 Kreukels, F, 38M 4:05:30
11822 Hof, J, 43M 4:05:30
11823 Cervantes De La Cuesta, J, 56M 4:05:30
11824 Matsson, M, 49M 4:05:30
11825 Colon, L, 40M 4:05:31
11826 Guevara, L, 35M 4:05:32
11827 Tantao, F, 41M 4:05:32
11828 Pantazis, J, 35M 4:05:32
11829 Servien, C, 42M 4:05:33
11830 Moretto, W, 32M 4:05:33
11831 Servien, C, 35F 4:05:34
11832 Rosenthal, E, 28M 4:05:34
11833 Mortimer, S, 38F 4:05:34
11834 Brown, D, 46M 4:05:34
11835 Candelaria, C, 49M 4:05:34
11836 Chambers, H, 37M 4:05:35
11837 Guirau, F, 46M 4:05:35
11838 Vergara, B, 40M 4:05:36
11839 Peacock, T, 43M 4:05:36
11840 Cooper, J, 37M 4:05:37
11841 Mertens, J, 40M 4:05:37
11842 Kater, C, 41M 4:05:38
11843 Burke, T, 43M 4:05:38
11844 Dennis, M, 32F 4:05:38
11845 Ellefson, L, 39M 4:05:39
11846 Boden, K, 28F 4:05:40
11847 Miller, M, 29F 4:05:40
11848 Bryceland, R, 42F4:05:41
11849 Kraemer, H, 41M 4:05:41
11850 O'Connell, L, 40M 4:05:41
11851 McNally, T, 33M 4:05:42
11852 Hardt, L, 45M 4:05:42
11853 Reddel, S, 39M 4:05:43
11854 Zoellner, P, 50M 4:05:43
11855 Tausek, G, 45M 4:05:43
11856 Walls, T, 36M 4:05:44
11857 Johns, L, 34F 4:05:44
11858 Basile, R, 36M 4:05:44
11859 Boubila, M, 38M 4:05:44
11860 Verbout, A, 48M 4:05:45
11861 Driemeyer, F, 27M 4:05:45
11862 Brieden, K, 34F 4:05:46
11863 Nielsen, L, 38M 4:05:46
11864 Harvey, D, 41F 4:05:46
11865 Madiol, P, 51M 4:05:46
11866 Goto, S, 29M 4:05:46
11867 Litsky, T, 33M 4:05:46
11868 Macias Lopez, S, 44M 4:05:46
11869 Perez Muro, M, 34M 4:05:46
11870 Kuesel, S, 27F 4:05:46
11871 Moody, T, 56M 4:05:47
11872 Ozuner, G, 34M 4:05:47
11873 Lunde, P, 50M 4:05:47
11874 Quiroga Quiroga, J, 46M 4:05:48
11875 DuFourmantelle, H, 48M 4:05:48
11876 Lubansky, S, 41F 4:05:48
11877 Krech Jr, E, 62M 4:05:48
11878 Weber, K, 35M 4:05:48
11879 McDevitt, C, 31F 4:05:48
11880 Benami, J, 32M 4:05:48
11881 Grob, M, 35M 4:05:48
11882 Crispin, D, 30M 4:05:49
11883 Nacci, R, 33M 4:05:49
11884 Boeck, H, 49M 4:05:49
11885 Maugeais, B, 35M 4:05:50
11886 Domas, M, 25M 4:05:51
11887 Ziersen, N, 34M 4:05:51
11888 Marin, C, 58M 4:05:51
11889 McHugh, P, 31M 4:05:52
11890 Powell Tuck, J, 51M 4:05:52
11891 Abarca, J, 44M 4:05:53
11892 Yedinak, J, 42M 4:05:53
11893 Kloppenborg, B, 39F 4:05:53
11894 Hession, E, 45F 4:05:54
11895 Le Bellour, M, 62M 4:05:54
11896 Mauxion, J, 51M 4:05:54
11897 Chazen, D, 33M 4:05:54
11898 Slobodin, D, 55M 4:05:54
11899 Minet, T, 37M 4:05:54
11900 Nilsson, A, 35M 4:05:55
11901 Morvan, C, 36F 4:05:55
11902 Ruiz-Herrera, M, 45M 4:05:55
11903 Lent, M, 40M 4:05:55
11904 Horn, D, 43M 4:05:56
11905 Gross, B, 32M 4:05:56
11906 Jones, R, 47M 4:05:56
11907 Aguilar, J, 37M 4:05:56
11908 Cortez, A, 35M 4:05:57
11909 Lamse, C, 46F 4:05:57
11910 Muci Mendoza, R, 56M 4:05:57
11911 Taylor, C, 26M 4:05:58
11912 Arrighi, R, 34M 4:05:58
11913 Sessa, C, 30F 4:05:58
11914 Gilpen, H, 35M 4:05:58
11915 Vidal-Marcenac, B, 36F 4:05:58
11916 Dougherty, D, 35M 4:05:58
11917 Wallman, B, 42M 4:05:58
11918 Faulk, W, 33M 4:05:59
11919 Hamilton, C, 45F 4:05:59
11920 Rose, M, 43F 4:05:59
11921 Pagano, J, 48F 4:05:59
11922 Doerig, F, 46M 4:05:59
11923 Page, M, 34F 4:05:59
11924 Fullerton, D, 32M 4:06:00
11925 Quemard, J, 48M 4:06:00
11926 Linker, M, 42F 4:06:00
11927 Follesoe, S, 42M 4:06:01
11928 Kraus, E, 53M 4:06:01
11929 Waltenbauer, D, 53M 4:06:01
11930 Galeano, R, 52M 4:06:01
11931 Stein, N, 53M 4:06:02
11932 Cuccuru, J, 38M 4:06:02
11933 Zessner, G, 56M 4:06:02
11934 Kokaras, K, 52M 4:06:03
11935Hofmeister, N, 26M 4:06:03
11936 Zitti, R, 49M 4:06:03
11937 Scarborough, E, 34F 4:06:04
11938 Guerard, A, 51M 4:06:04
11939 Jacobssen, S, 41F 4:06:04
11940 Robertson, J, 41M 4:06:05
11941 Layton, J, 45M 4:06:05
11942 Giffard, C, 51M 4:06:05
11943 Hewitt, C, 34M4:06:06
11944 Torres Gomez, M, 39M 4:06:06
11945 Pham, L, 30F 4:06:06
11946 Milner, J, 40M 4:06:06
11947 Pulliero, E, 61M 4:06:07
11948 Beatty, G, 40M 4:06:07
11949 Arevalo, E, 35M 4:06:07
11950 Harris, R, 37F 4:06:07
11951 Wichler, R, 35M 4:06:07
11952 Reed, K, 38F 4:06:08
11953 Kail, D, 27F 4:06:08
11954 Croce, V, 51M 4:06:08
11955 Onativia, J, 49M 4:06:08
11956 Katz, L, 45M 4:06:08
11957 Vieli, P, 42M 4:06:09
11958 Ackerman, J, 29M 4:06:09
11959 Palacios, R, 55M 4:06:10
11960 Carlin, T, 44M 4:06:10
11961 Roberts, P, 38M 4:06:10
11962 Hibiya, Y, 46M 4:06:10
11963 Aitken, J, 33M 4:06:10
11964 Wehn, R, 51M 4:06:10
11965 Havens, R, 39M 4:06:11
11966 Reader, R, 48M 4:06:11
11967 Offen, H, 45M 4:06:11
11968 Czeizinger, D, 38M 4:06:11
11969 Hartman, P, 53M 4:06:11
11970 Girard, A, 53F 4:06:11
11971 Schwartz, S, 23F 4:06:12
11972 Morlacco, S, 23F 4:06:12
11973 Cipollaro, L, 46M 4:06:12
11974 Durstewitz, S, 33M 4:06:13
11975 Berry, E, 30M 4:06:13
11976 Harsch, L, 41M 4:06:13
11977 Bronowski, B, 40M 4:06:13
11978 Ayala, F, 34M 4:06:13
11979 Moin, D, 40M 4:06:14
11980 Perusini, M, 28M 4:06:14
11981 Morel, P, 42M 4:06:14
11982 Guidobaldi, M, 35M 4:06:14
11983 Beinlich, S, 35F 4:06:14
11984 Heiser, J, 39M 4:06:14
11985 Sarka, S, 28F 4:06:14
11986 Bichko, T, 39F 4:06:15
11987 Aloe, P, 37M 4:06:16
11988 Matter, K, 42M 4:06:16
11989 Neubauer, J, 41M 4:06:16
11990 Pereira, R, 40M 4:06:17
11991 Riley, L, 34M 4:06:17
11992 Lipp, R, 41M 4:06:17
11993 Maccormack, W, 51M 4:06:17
11994 Batlle, J, 37M 4:06:17
11995 Struthers, T, 27M 4:06:18
11996 Veldhuis, P, 42M 4:06:18
11997 Vilchis, D, 49M 4:06:18
11998 Roger, H, 38M 4:06:18
11999 Gomez, P, 48M 4:06:18
12000 Alper, J, 39F 4:06:18


Burstein and Vacco Battle for Voter Support
In a year when most New Yorkers seem to be focusing primarily on the race for governor, the two candidates for state attorney general have been waging distinctly different old-style campaigns as they struggle to raise money and emblazon their names on people's minds.
Karen S. Burstein, the Democratic candidate, has been rising before the sun and fighting rush-hour afternoon traffic to greet commuters at subway stops and train stations.
Yesterday, she attended church services around the city.
Her opponent, Dennis C. Vacco, the Republican candidate, has been delivering his stump speech before relatively small audiences, describing how his Italian immigrant grandparents found their American dream in Buffalo.


Kings, Queens and Commoners: A Tasting of the Windsor Stew
You'll have to wait until next week for the gossip about Di, Fergie, Anne and Camilla, but don't do any fast- forwarding.
The early episodes of "The Windsors: A Royal Family" lend surprising poignancy to the embarrassments of recent years.
The four-hour history begins with King George V, a grandson of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert (Germanic both), who took the throne in 1910.
In deference to World War I anti-Germanism, the family name was changed from Saxe Coburg Gotha or Guelph or Wettin or Whipper (nobody seems sure what it was) to the impeccably English Windsor.


Deadly Storms Hit Texas
Storms that rolled across texas late Friday and Saturday injured at least 18 people, 10 of them at a high school football game here, and killed a 3-week-old boy in another town, the authorities said today.


Medaphis Corp.(MEDA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Top 20 Men


Morningstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ndera Journal; Minds in Retreat From the Madness of Rwanda
The psychiatric hospital here, the only one in the country, is a window onto Rwanda's pain.
Before the civil war, there were two psychiatrists at Ndera Hospital and about 400 patients.
Now, one doctor has been killed and the other is a refugee in Zaire.
Many of the patients were massacred in April and buried in a mass grave behind the compound.
At the end of October there were about 45 patients here, most of them women and children, with more coming every day.


Bam! Sock! Thump! These Jets Are Now a Hit
You probably didn't believe it when the Jets upset the Buffalo Bills in their season opener.
Well, you probably won't believe this, either, but the Jets did it again today, and with style and fervor and outright toughness.
The Jets' 22-17 victory came in a slam-bang game in which they outhit the Bills time after time.
For the defense, it was almost a feeding frenzy, as if one Jet was saying to another, "Look at the hit I made. Can you top this?"


CHRONICLE
HADDA BROOKS always played the same role in movies of the 1940's and 50's: the sultry singer at the piano in nightclubs frequented by Humphrey Bogart, Kirk Douglas or George Brent.
But she has not done that part since "The Bad and the Beautiful," in 1952.
Till now.
At the age of 78, she's back in her old role in the forthcoming movie "The Crossing Guard," which was written and directed by SEAN PENN .
It stars JACK NICHOLSON and ANJELICA HUSTON .


Wisconsin Energy Corp.(WEC,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raymond Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Philadelphia Story: Eagles Stifle Cardinals
Buddy Ryan, the gnome-like Cardinal coach who looks as if he stepped out of a Grimm's fairy tale, was hoping his return to Philadelphia would provide the kind of scary stuff that keeps players up at night.
But instead of coming in and being the worst nightmare for the Eagles, Ryan found himself on the other side of a bad dream.


U.S. Rep. Dean A. Gallo, 58, New Jersey Republican, Dies
United States Representative Dean A. Gallo, a Republican from Parsippany in Morris County, N.J., who was not running for re-election, died yesterday at St.
Clare's-Riverside Hospital in Denville, N.J.
He was 58.
He had been undergoing treatment for prostate cancer, his spokesman, Robert LeGrand, said.


They Come From Afar Just to Feel at Home
They came to run but they stayed to shop, to go to museums, to eat bagels, to see shows and to party.
For about 11,700 foreigners who made up more than 40 percent of the runners in the New York City Marathon, yesterday's race was only one part of what amounted to a mini-Olympic festival and an adventure vacation.


Press
FOR years, virtually every move at Newsday or Times Mirror, the corporate parent of the big Long Island newspaper, has brought predictions of the end of the company's expensive efforts to build a New York City paper.
That skepticism was widespread again last week when Robert M. Johnson, Newsday's publisher and an aggressive champion of New York Newsday, departed with a vague explanation about differences in "business philosophy." But instead of signaling the end of New York Newsday, last week's events may simply mark the beginning of more modest expectations for the separate edition of the Long Island paper.


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.(MHO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Selective Insurance Group Inc.(SIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where To Listen For Sounds Of Summer
In a cramped Manhattan conference room, the baseball owners plan their season.
They are not the Steinbrenners, Wilpons, O'Malleys, Turners or Huizengas, strike-afflicted major league owners who cannot plan optimistically for 1995.
But the Kunions, Handlers, Sullivans and Barasches can.


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westcoast Energy (WE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Y.&amp; R. Gets Disney Cruise Account
Disney Cruise Lines, a new division of the Walt Disney Company that expects to begin operating passenger ships in 1997, has named Young &amp; Rubicam New York as the first agency to handle its account.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek reported last month that advertising spending could total $10 million to $15 million.


In Brazilian Comic Books, Reality Plays a Leading Role
When Mauricio de Sousa, Brazil's master comic-book artist, created Monica, the main character in Brazil's best-selling comic-book series, he found some inspiration in his mischievous 2-year-old daughter.
Thirty years and 200 characters later, Mr.
Sousa looked again to real life to create one of his most recent characters, a wealthy man who wanted to buy an entire city.
Any similarity in the character to a legislator who left from the Brazilian Congress after accusations of corruption "is no mere coincidence," Mr.
Sousa said.


Using Fun to Show Blacks to Whites
A couple of genial Ivy Leaguers from "the blackest city in America," Warrington and Reginald Hudlin, have a singular reputation in Hollywood: they are the black film makers who attract all sorts of people into movie theaters by folding minority culture and politics into light entertainment.
The Hudlin brothers' films -- "House Party" in 1990 and the 1993 Eddie Murphy vehicle "Boomerang" are their best known -- contain little overt preaching and usually include a generous leavening of humor or fantasy or both.
But when the lights come up, chances are that white audience members have been to neighborhoods they might not otherwise have visited.


Guide to New York Elections for Congressional and State Offices
Candidatess are listed in the order they appear on the ballot. GOVERNOR  CANDIDATES
MARIO M. CUOMO , 62, Democrat, Governor since 1983.
A native of Queens who ran for lieutenant governor in 1978 and has not lost an election since.
During his three terms as Governor became a major figure in national Democratic politics but turned down opportunities to run for President and to sit on the Supreme Court.
If he wins, he has said, his fourth term will be his last.


Doublespeak on the Abortion Gag Rule
To the Editor:
Representative Dick Armey's letter ("Gag Rule Isn't Part of G.O.P. 'Contract,' " Nov. 1) is a fine example of political doublespeak.


Foreman Reigns as Boxing's Father Time
The oldest heavyweight champion, boxing's Father Time, had stayed in the ring preaching to the HBO cameras like the evangelical minister he is.
Eventually, surrounded by cheers, he was convoyed to his dressing room and now 45-year-old George Foreman, in the same red velour trunks he had worn when knocked out by Muhammad Ali in Zaire in 1974, was sitting on a rubbing table.
The red trunks were faded, but the oldest heavyweight champion was glowing as never before.
"He got closer," he was saying of Michael Moorer, "and I hit him on the tip of the nose."


It's Time for Bengals to Celebrate: Their Winning Streak Is Up to One
Bengals 20, Seahawks 17
It may have taken September, October and part of November, but the Cincinnati Bengals finally won a game.
After eight consecutive losses and approaching last season's mark of futility, the Bengals (1-8) beat the host Seattle Seahawks, 20-17 in overtime, yesterday.


Essay; '94 Concession Speech
For challengers who lose tomorrow, a simple thank-you to a tearful roomful of supporters will suffice, along with a graceful recollection of Lincoln's story about a little boy who stubbed his toe and said he was too old to cry and it hurt too much to laugh.
But for incumbents about to lose longtime access to the public trough, a more sweetly embittered last hurrah on TV is permissible.
Herewith the all-purpose concession speech for ousted officeholders in 1994:


Scientology and Its German Foes: A Bitter Conflict
It would take something like an invasion of space aliens -- maybe something out of an L. Ron Hubbard science fiction novel -- to match the climate of fear and mutual suspicion that prevails between the Church of Scientology that Mr.
Hubbard created and its frightened opponents in Germany.
"Fear is part of their system -- it's a totalitarian organization that seeks to control everybody else, a dictatorship," said Ursula Caberta y Diaz, who heads the four-member working group that was set up four years ago by the Hamburg government to combat the Scientology movement and that has tried to get the courts to declare it a criminal conspiracy.


Oglebay Norton (OGLE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pegasus Gold (PGU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Top 20 Women


MARATHON
A special Part 2 of SportsMonday today: Seven pages of news and pictures, plus a full list of runners who finished by 7 P.M., starting on page D1.
Business Day begins today on page B13.


Abroad at Home; On Madison's Grave
The 30-second television spot advertisement, basic weapon of the modern American political campaign, is incompatible with the republican form of government that James Madison and his colleagues designed for this country in 1787.
So the 1994 campaign has shown us.
The Framers of the Constitution wanted a deliberative system of government.
They rejected a populist democracy, in which the public would directly decide every issue, because they thought it would risk majority tyranny and demagoguery.


Illegal-Livery Driver Testifies That Officers Broke His Back
It started out as one more encounter in what has become routine skirmishing between police officers and illegal-van operators who provide popular but illicit transportation in many neighborhoods of New York City.
It ended with a van operator's spinal cord crushed, reducing him to life as a virtual quadriplegic.


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
Sept.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  U.S.
Productivity . . . 3d Qtr.
Thursday  Producer Price Index . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Italy's Big Banks on a Merger Spree
For decades, Italy's sclerotic banking system was the ward of politicians, with overstaffed and grossly inefficient banks providing jobs and patronage and successive governments providing the money to keep the system oiled.
Now, with the Government trying to get out of the business of running the economy, and some of the biggest banks formerly owned by the state sold to private shareholders, the banks are loosening their limbs.


Silva: Detour, Stop, Reverse, Victory
The standard marathon distance is 26 miles 385 yards, unless you happen to be German Silva of Mexico, who took an alarming detour into Central Park yesterday only to slam on the brakes, retrace his steps and rescue a stirring victory from heartbreaking disaster in the strangest, closest finish ever run in the New York City Marathon.
From the 23-mile mark, Silva ran shoulder to shoulder with his countryman and training partner, Benjamin Paredes, dropping a pack of runners on a hot, humid day that claimed the life of a 27-year-old runner who went into cardiac arrest at the finish line.
Another runner, an unidentified man said to be 45 years old, also died.
These were the second and third deaths recorded in the 25 years of the New York City Marathon.


Debate on Whose Voice Is Heard in Initiatives
In a new wave of direct democracy, voters across the country will vote on Tuesday on a wide variety of ballot measures to limit taxes, permit gambling, increase punishment for crime and limit the tenure of elected officials.
Californians will vote on proposals to establish uniform statewide regulation of smoking, to deny state services to illegal immigrants and to establish a publicly financed program of health insurance for legal residents of the state.


N.F.L. Nice Guys Finish Last; Nasty Guys Go to the Playoffs
Nearly a month ago, when the Jets were reeling after three straight losses, defensive tackle Donald Evans, in a team meeting, challenged his new teammates to take a strong glance in the mirror and to decide just what they would become.
Pushovers or the aggressor.


Syratech Corp.(SYR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moon Does Job With 5 Seconds to Spare
Vikings 21, Saints 20
In the huddle, there was just one voice, Warren Moon's, and 10 players who had no doubt he would save them again.
And he did.
Moon led Minnesota on an 84-yard drive in the final 2 minutes 44 seconds yesterday, covering the final 11 yards on a pass to Qadry Ismail with five seconds remaining as the Vikings beat New Orleans, 21-20, in Minneapolis.


Tootsie Roll Industries(TR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reagan Friends Reflect on the Fading of a Giant
For a decade, Ronald Reagan was the hottest star in American politics: ever commanding, vital even in advancing age, stronger than an assassin, cancer or scandal.
And now that he has disclosed that at the age of 83 he is in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease, friends and associates say, he is adjusting to his fate with a stoic and characteristic optimism.
It is they who are most distressed.
"I have observed over the last couple of years that he was fading slowly," the biographer Edmund Morris said today of his latest subject.
"And I have been tempted to compare him to the moon, which receives its light from earth. And once the light from earth diminishes, the moon grows cold."


G.O.P. APPEARS SET TO MAKE BIG GAINS IN RACE FOR HOUSE
Republicans are poised to win more seats in the House of Representatives than they have held since Dwight D. Eisenhower was President.
Indeed, after a strong campaign they could end 40 years of Democratic control in the House, history's longest period of one-party dominance there.
Democratic leaders, who worked hard this weekend to stir interest among their core voters, said they expected Republicans to gain at least 25 House seats in Tuesday's elections.
That would take the minority from the 178 seats it now holds to 203.


Top 20 Women


Western Waste Industries (WW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Close Races in the Region
The four-way race for governor of Connecticut is getting closer, the latest poll shows.
In New Jersey, the undecided will likely determine who wins the Senate race.
Page B7.


UAP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Madison Gas &amp; Electric (MDSN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sherritt reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


So Strong, So Vulnerable
Under the harsh stadium lights and in front of an assemblage of ill-tempered men who are intent on knocking him down or knocking him out, Troy Aikman, peering across the green field and about to take the snap, must block out the possibilities of catastrophe.
Monday night in Texas Stadium, the Cowboys' quarterback must look at the 11 Giants across the line and think only of X's and O's and not of X-rays or optical and cerebral damage.


Familiar Names Top List of Those Contributing to Both Cuomo and Pataki Campaigns
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki are both receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars from the same contributors -- real-estate developers, financiers, law firms, state contractors and unions -- that have long dominated campaign contribution reports.
A computer study by The New York Times identified 181 contributors who gave a total of $1.2 million to both candidates for governor, including nearly one of every six dollars raised by Mr.
Cuomo in the last four years.


IPL Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shared Medical Systems Corp.(SMED,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Germany's Workers
To the Editor:
In "G.M. Success in an Unlikely Place" (Business Day, Oct. 31) you find it perplexing that General Motors has discovered a motivated and efficient work force at its auto plant in formerly Communist East Germany.
While you offer interesting reasons for this phenomenon, your comparison of the labor force in Eisenach with that of American green-field sites is far-fetched.


Chiron Corp.(CHIR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PWA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Political Mind-Set Shows Inconsistencies
The problem with the resolution of a major college football season is not the absence of a playoff or the existence of an unwieldy bowl structure that can prevent an obvious championship matchup from taking place.
There is a much deeper flaw, a mind-set unlike that of any other sport, one that demands both perfection and punishment and penalizes those who fail to deliver both.
If a top-ranked college basketball team can overcome the obstacles of injuries and environment to defeat an inferior team, its survival is considered a sign of resilience.
But when Penn State allowed the already defeated Indiana Hoosiers to score on a deflected 40-yard touchdown pass and a feel-good 2-point conversion pass in the Nittany Lions' 35-29 victory here Saturday, its championship possibilities may have absorbed a pivotal and unjust blow.


Writers Fight for Electronic Rights
The question of who owns the rights to reproduce articles in new electronic media has plunged the magazine industry into its most bitter battle in years.
It is pitting writers against publishers and causing much of the industry to rewrite contracts for freelancers.
The heart of the matter is whether writers should get a share of the proceeds if their work is reproduced on CD-ROM's, data bases, on-line services or in other new electronic media outlets.
A similar fight is being waged in the book industry between publishers and their authors.


Top 20 Women


Montana Power (MTP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Prayers and Tears for 2 Carolina Boys
Anybody who was anybody in Union County was there, grieving beside people who were nobody in particular.
Men who do not even own a tie sat in pews with judges, and doctors and millworkers stared with wet eyes at a single tiny coffin shared by two little boys.
Their anguished father, David Smith, wept on the shoulders of family and friends as 3-year-old Michael and 14-month-old Alexander were prayed over at the Buffalo United Methodist Church and then laid to rest in a little mill town cemetery, and more than 1,000 mourners cried and suffered with him.


Sports of The Times By HARVEY ARATON; Painfully, That Sneak Boomer Is a Hero Again
THIS time, with fourth-and-inches, with the game on the line, with a bunch of jobs likely at stake, Pete Carroll went with Boomer Esiason's bum ankle instead of his suspect left arm.
The point is that he went with him, period, when half of Giants Stadium might have preferred a Brian Hansen punt, with the hope of a Buffalo fumble 40 yards down field.


CHRONICLE
NEIL SIMON is being honored by Lenox Hill Hospital at its annual Autumn Ball on Wednesday.
And for what?
The way he makes people feel better.
The theme of the evening is Laughter Is the Best Medicine.
At the benefit, to be held at the Waldorf, Mr.
Simon will receive the hospital's Medal of Distinction from ALAN ALDA , a friend and star of his play "Jake's Women."


At Church, the Sermon Is Often How You Vote
He hammered the pulpit with both fists, speaking so forcefully that no worshiper here today could miss his point.
Just in case, O. C. Collins Jr., pastor of the Bethlehem Missionary Baptist Church, stared down his parishioners and delivered a message that sounded more like a warning than a sermon:
"I want everybody here to understand that you give not one Republican a vote out of Bethlehem," Dr.
Collins implored, bringing hundreds in this all-black congregation on the north side of town to their feet.
"Don't shame your forefathers. Don't shame your children."


Solos to 'Blue Moon' by Elvis And Sounds of a Farmyard
Wendy Perron is a performer with a haunting, fugitive eloquence.
She seems both present and absent onstage.
That quality permeated "Solos With Memories," one of three new dances Ms.
Perron presented on Thursday night at the Danspace at St.
Mark's Church in the East Village.
The triptych of solos was performed to Elvis Presley's singing of "Blue Moon" over a muted background of farmyard clip-clop, rooster-crowing sounds.
Each dance alluded to character and situation, but only obliquely.
Each character seemed to be living in the private world of the imagination.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's handling of a 1991 murder case on Staten Island referred incorrectly to the victim.
Leslie Holtz was a man.


Mentor Graphics Corp.(MENT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Foes, Fearing '93, Try to Woo Undecideds
Frank R. Lautenberg and Chuck Haytaian spent the weekend pleading for votes from flea market shoppers and churchgoers, trying to sway the undecided vote that is likely to decide their Senate race.
The camps of both Mr.
Lautenberg, the Democratic incumbent, and Mr.
Haytaian, the Republican challenger, claimed to be gaining support.
But the last independent polls before Tuesday's vote showed that perhaps a third of New Jersey's notoriously volatile electorate could yet shift allegiance.


Sounds to Blend Into the Woodwork
Ambient music, the main event over the weekend at the Kitchen's new Electronic Cafe, has a longer history than one might think.
Brian Eno first codified a philosophy of sound as atmosphere in the 1970's; long before him, though, Erik Satie introduced the notion of musique d'ameublement, a furniture music that the audience was supposed to hear with comfortable inattention.
And in a sense, much music written before Haydn and Mozart was ambient: the Baroque genre of Tafel musik, or table music, was intended as background for aristocratic dinner conversation.
Modern ambient music, however, makes more complex demands.
It does not serve as the background for unrelated events; rather, like certain modes of Minimalism, it aims to wrap the audience in its sensuous embrace, excluding more conscious forms of activity.
Rather than sitting composedly in chairs, listeners lie on the floor, or maybe dance.
Ambient music overlaps heavily with the dense, overwhelming dance sound of techno and rave.


U.S. Oil and Gas Companies Test Waters in Brazil, Again
Oil and gas companies from the United States are returning to Brazil, their first major effort since 1953, after being effectively excluded for four decades by the country's old nationalist and protectionist policies.
American oil-service companies, sometimes called the pilot fish of the big international producers, turned out in force last month at the Brazilian Petroleum Congress.
Competing for an annual market estimated at $1 billion in sales and contracts, 47 American oil-service companies mounted stands here.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 3 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
6001 Deshaires, J, 36M 3:42:27
6002 De Raad, T, 40M 3:42:28
6003 Steffens, B, 50M 3:42:28
6004 Genrich, T, 24M 3:42:29
6005 Eduard, D, 50M 3:42:29
6006 Mitchell, N, 36M 3:42:30
6007 Mattheyssen, A, 33M 3:42:30
6008 Dannoux, G, 37M 3:42:30
6009 Kincaid Jr, J, 25M 3:42:31
6010 Bunting, G, 29M 3:42:31
6011 Tore, B, 42M 3:42:32
6012 Moriber, P, 38M 3:42:32
6013 Clayton, D, 40M 3:42:32
6014 Kushner, A, 31M 3:42:33
6015 Horowitz, J, 30M 3:42:33
6016 Fryestam, H, 43M3:42:34
6017 Folsom, J, 46M 3:42:34
6018 Moffitt, S, 29M 3:42:34
6019 Piazzoli, G, 30M 3:42:35
6020 Smith, S, 46M 3:42:35
6021 Wieckhorst, U, 41M 3:42:35
6022 Matjacic, Z, 34M 3:42:36
6023 Gravenese, C, 29F 3:42:37
6024 Murphy, E, 40F 3:42:37
6025 Lawrenz, H, 40M 3:42:39
6026 Vogler, V, 40F 3:42:39
6027 Kruidering, M, 27F 3:42:40
6028 Adams, S, 30M 3:42:40
6029 Stevenson, R, 42M 3:42:40
6030 Westermann, W, 58M 3:42:41
6031 Shelden, J, 39M 3:42:42
6032 Hindsjo, W, 52M 3:42:42
6033 Olsen, E, 38M 3:42:43
6034 Hughes, N, 19M 3:42:43
6035 Blank, H, 46M 3:42:43
6036 Suarez, L, 32M 3:42:43
6037 Lopez, M, 52M 3:42:43
6038 Causse, J, 44M 3:42:44
6039 Bushnell, P, 28F 3:42:44
6040 Fraceschini, G, 48M 3:42:45
6041 Hagelquist Petersen, K, 33M 3:42:45
6042 Meehan, E, 36M 3:42:45
6043 Martel, S, 26F 3:42:45
6044 Neuhaus, R, 36M 3:42:45
6045 Ziehfreund, J, 40M 3:42:46
6046 Schruijer, M, 36F 3:42:46
6047 Magee, B, 56F 3:42:46
6048 Falkner, H, 31M 3:42:46
6049 Biliski, D, 28F 3:42:46
6050 Fritz, T, 27M 3:42:47
6051 Jertila, H, 51M 3:42:47
6052 Capdevielle, G, 51M 3:42:48
6053 Gorman, R, 38M 3:42:48
6054 Moore, P, 36M 3:42:48
6055 Jones, C, 40M 3:42:49
6056 Peters, P, 42M 3:42:49
6057 Whitear, R, 43M 3:42:49
6058 Chia, S, 34M 3:42:49
6059 Menut, B, 40M 3:42:49
6060 Dunham, B, 29M 3:42:49
6061 Monnard, C, 47M 3:42:49
6062 Kiernan, T, 24M 3:42:50
6063 Pinelli, A, 52M 3:42:50
6064 Reilly, M, 41M 3:42:50
6065 Gutierrez, M, 36M 3:42:50
6066 Chalfin, M, 37M 3:42:50
6067 Elman, M, 34M 3:42:50
6068 Schilling, M, 28M 3:42:50
6069 Gertler, A, 34M 3:42:51
6070 Hugosson, I, 46F 3:42:51
6071 Santiago, H, 37M 3:42:51
6072 Maarse, W, 28M 3:42:51
6073 Wittebroek, P, 33M 3:42:51
6074 Fazio, J, 29M 3:42:51
6075 Terrell, A, 45M 3:42:51
6076 Paul, S, 27M 3:42:51
6077 Majerus, K, 37M 3:42:52
6078 Baughman, J, 31M3:42:52
6079 Guerit, C, 30M 3:42:52
6080 Mierlo Van, J, 45M 3:42:52
6081 Newman, L, 25F 3:42:53
6082 Rivera, R, 40M 3:42:53
6083 Schwencke, J, 40M 3:42:53
6084 Meehan, D, 37F 3:42:54
6085 Traina, J, 43M 3:42:54
6086 Floyd, E, 39M 3:42:54
6087 Smith, A, 27M3:42:54
6088 Jean, R, 27M 3:42:54
6089 Kullmann, R, 50M 3:42:54
6090 Dahlem, J, 29M 3:42:55
6091 Trousselier, L, 32M 3:42:55
6092 Burgess, M, 57M 3:42:55
6093 Palmer, T, 36M 3:42:56
6094 Smrekar, E, 53M 3:42:56
6095 Ostendorff, E, 33M 3:42:57
6096 McAndrew, J, 55M 3:42:57
6097 Hill, W, 42M 3:42:57
6098 Petrea, J, 28M 3:42:57
6099 Casey, J, 45M 3:42:58
6100 Armin, A, 38M 3:42:58
6101 Ross, B, 38M 3:42:59
6102 Garratt, W, 32M 3:43:00
6103 Borg, G, 39M 3:43:00
6104 Koarashi, M, 48M 3:43:01
6105 Brown, J, 40F 3:43:01
6106 Mussali, S, 33M 3:43:01
6107 Valenca, A, 39M 3:43:01
6108 Poissonneau, R, 43F 3:43:02
6109 Murphy, R, 35M 3:43:02
6110 Bassett, W, 24F 3:43:02
6111 Duffy, K, 28M 3:43:02
6112 Gatard, A, 39M 3:43:02
6113 Stroude, R, 50M 3:43:02
6114 Ortiz, T, 47M 3:43:03
6115 Holly, D, 39M 3:43:03
6116 Kotler, L, 32F 3:43:03
6117 Fernandez, R, 45M 3:43:03
6118 Van Vliet, P, 40M 3:43:03
6119 Fernandez, M, 48M 3:43:03
6120 Comstock, M, 31M 3:43:03
6121 Hollenstein, A, 34M 3:43:04
6122 Tamburini, L, 44M 3:43:04
6123 Grimaldi, L, 23F 3:43:04
6124 Donlon, E, 27M 3:43:04
6125 Stemmel, P, 39M 3:43:04
6126 Vervant, D, 50F 3:43:04
6127 Santin, E, 41M 3:43:05
6128 Delfgaauw, A, 32M 3:43:05
6129 Munizaga, H, 45M 3:43:05
6130 McGuinness, J, 30M 3:43:05
6131 Hernandez, M, 34M 3:43:05
6132 Sierra Rodriges, S, 25M 3:43:06
6133 Spray, S, 37F 3:43:06
6134 Powell, S, 40M 3:43:06
6135 Lantosh, M, 44M 3:43:06
6136 Ribalta Ferrer, E, 20F 3:43:06
6137 Moorehouse, J, 48M 3:43:06
6138 Boticario, S, 37M 3:43:07
6139 Abrahamsen, K, 32M 3:43:07
6140 Pirek, U, 35M 3:43:07
6141 Davis, R, 49M 3:43:07
6142 Vaneck, B, 35M 3:43:07
6143 Kiefer, J, 28M 3:43:08
6144 Stensrud, B, 48M 3:43:08
6145 Dominguez, F, 46M 3:43:08
6146 Smith, B, 40F 3:43:08
6147 Drum, W, 47M 3:43:09
6148 MacDonald, P, 31M 3:43:09
6149 Colarusso, R, 33M 3:43:10
6150 Azzolini, R, 45F 3:43:10
6151 Druckman, S, 25M 3:43:11
6152 Klauck, D, 40M 3:43:11
6153 Wilson, R, 45M 3:43:11
6154 Daniels, S, 28M 3:43:11
6155 Mulligan, C, 31M 3:43:11
6156 Taboulot, Y, 46M 3:43:11
6157 Ortiz, J, 50M 3:43:12
6158 Stella, D, 38M 3:43:12
6159 Bosma, J, 48M 3:43:12
6160 De La Varga, R, 47M 3:43:12
6161 Lester, S, 39M 3:43:13
6162 Creamer, S, 35F3:43:14
6163 Mayer, W, 53M 3:43:14
6164 Kohler, J, 33M 3:43:14
6165 Yee, J, 35M 3:43:14
6166 Sainson, D, 44M 3:43:14
6167 Schoepperle, R, 30M 3:43:14
6168 Herlihy, T, 40M 3:43:15
6169 Effkemann, B, 60M 3:43:15
6170 Jensen, U, 44M 3:43:15
6171 Kutsam, H, 54M 3:43:16
6172 Murphy, J, 29M 3:43:16
6173 Wright, J, 36M 3:43:16
6174 Moll, J, 52M 3:43:17
6175 Bowman, J, 55M 3:43:17
6176 Lavigne, T, 24M 3:43:17
6177 Kelly, K, 47M 3:43:18
6178 Appert, C, 24M 3:43:18
6179 Chouvet, D, 38M 3:43:18
6180 Krueger, M, 45M 3:43:18
6181 Kuchinskas, J, 37M 3:43:18
6182 Lan, M, 39M 3:43:19
6183 Freeswick, S, 32M 3:43:19
6184 Hoepfner, G, 44M 3:43:19
6185 McCarthy, T, 38M 3:43:19
6186 Rumschitzki, D, 36M 3:43:19
6187 Golino, T, 41M 3:43:19
6188 Nielsen, T, 35F 3:43:20
6189 Conlon, B, 37M 3:43:20
6190 Martin, B, 29M 3:43:21
6191 Lepage, D, 27M 3:43:21
6192 Kim, M, 28M 3:43:21
6193 Blehaut, B, 25M 3:43:21
6194 Guinet, B, 30M 3:43:22
6195 Booth, P, 35M 3:43:22
6196 Nicolaisen, V, 39F 3:43:22
6197 Silva, I, 40M 3:43:22
6198 Meric, J, 42M 3:43:23
6199 Cunningham, T, 26M 3:43:23
6200 Leisner, P, 30M 3:43:23
6201 Camara, L, 47M 3:43:24
6202 Heilbock, V, 50M 3:43:25
6203 Georgeson, U, 42M 3:43:25
6204 Araszkiewirz, G, 41M 3:43:25
6205 Hackenberg, P, 34M 3:43:26
6206 Havard, C, 45M 3:43:26
6207 Berr, M, 29F 3:43:26
6208 Ostberg, L, 42M 3:43:27
6209 Mendes, F, 21F 3:43:27
6210 Pasch, H, 40M 3:43:28
6211 Riedel, M, 26M 3:43:28
6212 Senaillet, E, 33M 3:43:28
6213 Arentz, G, 47M 3:43:28
6214 Brandt, K, 41F 3:43:29
6215 Ajer, S, 42M 3:43:29
6216 Barruel, P, 41M 3:43:30
6217 Kressler, H, 50M 3:43:30
6218 Pflug, M, 52M3:43:30
6219 Grindu, L, 47M 3:43:30
6220 Kunz, S, 32M 3:43:31
6221 Bensoussan, J, 40M 3:43:31
6222 Meindl, J, 31M 3:43:31
6223 Haesloop, M, 44M 3:43:31
6224 Moisse, M, 32M 3:43:32
6225 Glaizol, P, 39M 3:43:32
6226 Caudwell, C, 36M 3:43:32
6227 Basuk, P, 40M 3:43:33
6228 Skinnemoen, O, 40M 3:43:33
6229 Li, S, 28M 3:43:33
6230 Dennis, J, 43M 3:43:33
6231 Wright Colopy, A, 37F 3:43:33
6232 Moore, R, 46M 3:43:34
6233 Mendez Molina, E, 38M 3:43:34
6234 Shechter, S, 61M 3:43:35
6235 Pantoja, R, 38M 3:43:35
6236 Iribar, J, 35M 3:43:35
6237 Musterd, R, 29M 3:43:35
6238 De Haan, W, 60M 3:43:35
6239 Buergermeister, D, 35M 3:43:36
6240 Orobitch, J, 47M 3:43:37
6241 Barbon, A, 44M 3:43:37
6242 Hebert, P, 38M 3:43:37
6243 Marsh, C, 31M 3:43:37
6244 Devuyst, C, 39M 3:43:37
6245 Olson, J, 54M 3:43:38
6246 Burch, A, 35F 3:43:38
6247 Horlick, L, 38M 3:43:38
6248 Guardiola, L, 45M 3:43:38
6249 Andrew, B, 29F 3:43:39
6250 Collins, S, 34F 3:43:39
6251 Lienhard, M, 32M 3:43:39
6252 Caille, J, 27M 3:43:40
6253 Sideris, J, 31M 3:43:40
6254 Brody, A, 43M 3:43:41
6255 Ciattoni, J, 42M 3:43:41
6256 Guhl, K, 56M 3:43:41
6257 Tierney, R, 35M 3:43:41
6258 Dall'ora, S, 49M 3:43:42
6259 Briand, J, 31M 3:43:42
6260 Jordan, K, 32M 3:43:42
6261 Bressler, E, 44M 3:43:42
6262 Aguayo, F, 29M 3:43:42
6263 Shehan, M, 45M 3:43:43
6264 Otero, J, 42M 3:43:43
6265 Tantot, D, 47M 3:43:43
6266 Tully, M, 18M 3:43:43
6267 Holierook, P, 42M3:43:43
6268 Loogman, G, 34M 3:43:44
6269 Hernandez, P, 54M 3:43:44
6270 Berlot, J, 42M 3:43:44
6271 Spada, A, 34M 3:43:45
6272 Chuslo, D, 29M 3:43:45
6273 Borlinghaus, A, 51M 3:43:45
6274 Glahn, L, 27M 3:43:45
6275 Pinero Exposito, P, 43M 3:43:45
6276 Jimenez, J, 40M 3:43:46
6277 Bahrt, A, 43F 3:43:46
6278 Marie, J, 40M3:43:46
6279 Oliveras, J, 43M 3:43:47
6280 Barborik, I, 36M 3:43:47
6281 Mammolito, J, 43M 3:43:47
6282 Dodd, C, 40F 3:43:47
6283 Sowlles, P, 46M 3:43:48
6284 Beracha, F, 37M 3:43:48
6285 Solenne, J, 50M 3:43:48
6286 Wiese, F, 45M 3:43:48
6287 Daehler, F, 43M 3:43:48
6288 Williams, J, 50M 3:43:48
6289 Teboul, J, 40M 3:43:49
6290 Sanchez Escalante, F, 42M 3:43:49
6291 Stolzar, M, 46M 3:43:49
6292 Peterson, B, 34M 3:43:49
6293 Maltat, R, 46M 3:43:50
6294 Carvajal, A, 32M 3:43:50
6295 Falk, R, 51M 3:43:50
6296 Kawasaki, Y, 32F 3:43:51
6297 Mullins, D, 41M 3:43:51
6298 Layton, R, 52M 3:43:51
6299 Blaeser, K, 52M 3:43:51
6300 Bermo, R, 27M 3:43:51
6301 Munoz, M, 39M 3:43:52
6302 Renner, B, 28M 3:43:52
6303 Ishii, K, 45M 3:43:52
6304 Rodriguez Lerma, J, 40M 3:43:52
6305 DiStefano, D, 46M 3:43:52
6306 Mele, S, 40M 3:43:52
6307 Martin, J, 49M 3:43:53
6308 Marguet, P, 37M 3:43:53
6309 Bulgheroni, M, 43M 3:43:54
6310 Amador Blanco, J, 33M 3:43:54
6311 Vazquez Solorzano, E, 37M 3:43:55
6312 Magos, J, 38M 3:43:55
6313 Lettiere, J, 33M 3:43:55
6314 Kantor, M, 44M 3:43:55
6315 Gast, A, 30M 3:43:55
6316 Ashton, R, 31M 3:43:56
6317 O'Connor, F, 34M 3:43:56
6318 Jennings, A, 28F 3:43:56
6319 Dirr, M, 29M 3:43:56
6320 Reynoso Cruz, R, 42M 3:43:56
6321 Segura, V, 51M 3:43:57
6322 Logereau, B, 36M 3:43:57
6323 Theodoracopulos, J, 29M 3:43:57
6324 Moyses, M, 40M 3:43:57
6325 Bourgin, C, 26M 3:43:58
6326 Jacobson, E, 27M 3:43:58
6327 Sierens, F, 33M 3:43:58
6328 Torstad, E, 31M 3:43:58
6329 Cassotis, P, 26M 3:43:59
6330 Montanari, A, 41M 3:43:59
6331 Parpart, M, 28M 3:43:59
6332 Cook, K, 35F 3:43:59
6333 Rustenburg, P, 51M 3:43:59
6334 Fett, R, 41M 3:44:00
6335 Halversen, J, 28M 3:44:00
6336 Appolinaire, J, 43M 3:44:00
6337 Scholer, R, 45M 3:44:00
6338 Schmidt, M, 31F 3:44:00
6339 Bryner, H, 44M 3:44:00
6340 Weber, J, 19M 3:44:00
6341 Grimshaw, T, 44M 3:44:01
6342 Spinelli, E, 28M 3:44:01
6343 Blassiau, M, 48M 3:44:02
6344 Brady, T, 38F 3:44:02
6345 Maggio, A, 37M 3:44:02
6346 Arena, U, 30M3:44:02
6347 Bader, E, 27M 3:44:02
6348 Lemarignier, N, 20M 3:44:02
6349 Willard, L, 29M 3:44:02
6350 Showalter, M, 27F 3:44:03
6351 Bradt, R, 33M 3:44:03
6352 Fahlgren, K, 38M 3:44:03
6353 Valdenassi, O, 38F 3:44:03
6354 Tsuburaya, A, 36M 3:44:04
6355 De Monte, F, 47M 3:44:04
6356 Schuster, C, 50M 3:44:04
6357 Rutting, M, 35M 3:44:04
6358 Naranjo, M, 42M 3:44:05
6359 Otte, G, 41M 3:44:05
6360 Dulac, H, 27M 3:44:05
6361 Agbonon, A, 37M 3:44:05
6362 Newport, S, 26F 3:44:05
6363 Holl, B, 33M 3:44:05
6364 Jenkins, M, 21M 3:44:06
6365 Gounot, P, 64M 3:44:06
6366 Pils, K, 31M 3:44:06
6367 Montemagni, M, 40M 3:44:06
6368 Ross, B, 34M 3:44:06
6369 Razdrih, A, 42M 3:44:06
6370 Done, F, 51M 3:44:06
6371 Zielasko, J, 43F 3:44:06
6372 Meling, D, 49M 3:44:07
6373 Monesi, A, 40M 3:44:07
6374 Holmes*, D, 26M 3:44:07
6375 Santoni, F, 34M 3:44:07
6376 Garlick, P, 37M 3:44:07
6377 Zwart, Y, 30F 3:44:08
6378 Ferrari, G, 45M 3:44:08
6379 Weil, B, 49M 3:44:08
6380 Ehlers, D, 35M 3:44:08
6381 Schmid, D, 36M 3:44:08
6382 Milonovich, G, 24M 3:44:09
6383 Rollfing, G, 51M 3:44:09
6384 Teuber, J, 47M 3:44:10
6385 Etienne, L, 37M 3:44:10
6386 Goumet, J, 52M 3:44:11
6387 Encausse, M, 28M 3:44:11
6388 Lindbloom, M, 38M 3:44:11
6389 Verbunt, A, 47M 3:44:11
6390 Sauvanet, T, 33M 3:44:11
6391 Jung, K, 36F 3:44:11
6392 Pearman, R, 39M 3:44:12
6393 Jacob, N, 43M3:44:12
6394 Howell, D, 41M 3:44:12
6395 Hacene, L, 39M 3:44:12
6396 Frark, R, 42M 3:44:13
6397 Arthaut, R, 39M 3:44:13
6398 Perez, R, 52M 3:44:13
6399 Maniassi, G, 33M 3:44:13
6400 Mahe, G, 34M 3:44:14
6401 Siracusa, R, 51M 3:44:14
6402 Waldock, J, 50M 3:44:14
6403 Corcoran, J, 32M 3:44:14
6404 Oshima, Y, 57M 3:44:14
6405 McCann, D, 29M 3:44:14
6406 Duindam, R, 36M 3:44:14
6407 Allen, T, 37M 3:44:14
6408 Myers, R, 37M 3:44:14
6409 Keukelaar, J, 43M 3:44:14
6410 Gimenez, G, 50M 3:44:15
6411 Wells, G, 45M 3:44:15
6412 Warren, G, 38M 3:44:15
6413 Mannkopf, K, 38F 3:44:15
6414 Abramczyk, A, 46M 3:44:15
6415 Nullans, P, 29M 3:44:16
6416 Lewis, M, 44M 3:44:16
6417 Gases, H, 37M 3:44:16
6418 Willis, F, 50M 3:44:16
6419 Tamburrini, M, 29M 3:44:17
6420 Catalano, M, 38M 3:44:18
6421 Di Blasio, A, 22F 3:44:18
6422 Herrell, G, 25M 3:44:19
6423 Ayala, J, 39F 3:44:19
6424 Stephens, J, 31M 3:44:19
6425 Mangione, P, 34M 3:44:20
6426 Blakkisrud, O, 19M 3:44:20
6427 Veloz, R, 53M 3:44:20
6428 Brun, J, 20M 3:44:20
6429 Oremek, G, 60M 3:44:21
6430 White, B, 51M 3:44:21
6431 Maas, O, 35M 3:44:21
6432 Lazurtegui, I, 32F 3:44:21
6433 Karpenman, B, 47M 3:44:21
6434 Pommerat, B, 36M 3:44:22
6435 Fernandez, J, 44M 3:44:22
6436 Howard, D, 37M 3:44:22
6437 Santasieri, P, 38M 3:44:22
6438 Hill, P, 41M 3:44:23
6439 Kern, E, 23M 3:44:23
6440 Dumas-Vorzet, F, 43M 3:44:23
6441 Melendez, J, 41M 3:44:23
6442 Cascino, F, 34M 3:44:23
6443 Keenan, J, 39M 3:44:24
6444 Finnigan, J, 34M 3:44:24
6445 Czerniawski, J, 36M 3:44:25
6446 Gostev, M, 28M 3:44:25
6447 Mazurier, J, 37M 3:44:25
6448 Fletcher, C, 43M 3:44:26
6449 Montes, R, 34M 3:44:26
6450 Beke, L, 49M 3:44:27
6451 Yann, R, 45M 3:44:27
6452 Skjodt, P, 36M 3:44:27
6453 Grove, D, 37M 3:44:27
6454 Werle, M, 37F 3:44:28
6455 Bowden, M, 35M 3:44:28
6456 Maurer, M, 30M 3:44:29
6457 Brand, J, 28M 3:44:29
6458 Limousin, G, 49M 3:44:29
6459 Mol Van Otterloo, T, 52M 3:44:29
6460 Miller, T, 35M 3:44:29
6461 Witz, E, 50M 3:44:30
6462 DeJonge, B, 35M 3:44:30
6463 Nakai, A, 35M 3:44:30
6464 Killick, Y, 31F 3:44:30
6465 Decker, M, 39M 3:44:31
6466 Romer, R, 63M 3:44:31
6467 Krau, J, 38M 3:44:32
6468 Jandreau-Smith, P, 38M 3:44:32
6469 McNeill, D, 46M 3:44:32
6470 Klefisch, D, 32M 3:44:32
6471 Train, J, 31M 3:44:32
6472 Romero Sanchez, L, 43M 3:44:33
6473 Lorenz, L, 53M 3:44:33
6474 Davoglio, A, 45M 3:44:33
6475 Korsen, O, 48M 3:44:33
6476 Bonifazi, R, 50M 3:44:34
6477 De Kruyff, N, 38M 3:44:34
6478 Leroux, C, 19M 3:44:34
6479 Samson, D, 32M 3:44:34
6480 Gall, A, 38M 3:44:34
6481 Baldacchino, E, 29M 3:44:34
6482 Battaglia, J, 45M3:44:35
6483 Ryan, C, 35M 3:44:35
6484 Atri Chueque, T, 34F 3:44:35
6485 Oehlerking, U, 50M 3:44:35
6486 Ambrosio, M, 36M 3:44:36
6487 Caizergues, J, 53M 3:44:36
6488 Sannier, D, 46M 3:44:37
6489 Rifkin, K, 29F 3:44:38
6490 Debiard, J, 36M 3:44:38
6491 Ryndal, S, 56M 3:44:38
6492 Koenig, A, 22F 3:44:39
6493 Brezsnyak, A, 47M 3:44:39
6494 Coates, B, 36M 3:44:39
6495 Koppert, R, 47M 3:44:39
6496 Lepretre, F, 45M 3:44:39
6497 Crosby, C, 23M 3:44:40
6498 Lamrani, H, 51M 3:44:40
6499 Dean, M, 51M 3:44:40
6500 Thodesen, O, 35M 3:44:40
6501 Gellei, I, 40M 3:44:40
6502 Lee, M, 35M3:44:40
6503 Chamberlain, C, 32F 3:44:40
6504 Sannen, L, 36F 3:44:40
6505 Rietmeijer, K, 43M 3:44:41
6506 Acaron, A, 26F 3:44:41
6507 Del Prete, D, 41M 3:44:42
6508 Cortes, J, 47M 3:44:42
6509 Hinteregger, F, 39M 3:44:42
6510 De Rosa, F, 45M 3:44:42
6511 Gabig-Dragelin, L, 27F 3:44:42
6512 Van Haaster-V/D Ploeg, G, 40F 3:44:42
6513 Van Haaster, H, 42M 3:44:43
6514 Gregory, T, 27M 3:44:43
6515 Marschall, T, 31M 3:44:43
6516 Vera Vivanco, J, 50M 3:44:43
6517 Christensen, G, 49M 3:44:43
6518 Larsson, K, 43M 3:44:44
6519 Lehmbeck, R, 48M 3:44:44
6520 Crangle, A, 26M 3:44:44
6521 Van Norman, M, 31M 3:44:44
6522 Werner, P, 47M 3:44:44
6523 Krivoruk, B, 35M 3:44:44
6524 Murray, J, 23F 3:44:44
6525 Waage, J, 37M 3:44:45
6526 Oosterkamp, R, 49M 3:44:45
6527 Bommarito, G, 42M 3:44:45
6528 Corrieri, J, 35M 3:44:46
6529 Renusson, P, 25M 3:44:46
6530 Jones, S, 42F 3:44:46
6531 Goudier, P, 29M 3:44:46
6532 Wright, D, 33M 3:44:47
6533 Mery, P, 53M 3:44:47
6534 Brenner, J, 38M3:44:47
6535 Dubeuf, F, 43M 3:44:47
6536 Martinez, J, 47M 3:44:47
6537 Roth, H, 55M 3:44:48
6538 Bachir, A, 42M 3:44:48
6539 Besson, C, 36M 3:44:48
6540 Bezzola, M, 40M 3:44:49
6541 Krol, D, 40M 3:44:49
6542 Sieber, E, 50M 3:44:49
6543 Tilton, D, 26M 3:44:49
6544 Bouman, L, 49M 3:44:50
6545 Kuhn, S, 28M 3:44:50
6546 Stoll, G, 50M 3:44:50
6547 Tajnsek, M, 30M 3:44:50
6548 Stephens, R, 41M 3:44:50
6549 Papa, C, 48M 3:44:50
6550 Furey, T, 29M 3:44:50
6551 Marosi, T, 42M 3:44:51
6552 Murphy, D, 36M 3:44:51
6553 Wilson, B, 30M 3:44:52
6554 Port, M, 37M 3:44:52
6555 Aiach Neto, S, 33M 3:44:52
6556 Summerlin, B, 50M 3:44:52
6557 Ettori, L, 41M 3:44:52
6558 Wilson, T, 63F 3:44:53
6559 Miller, J, 40M 3:44:53
6560 Marner, L, 42M 3:44:53
6561 McGuire, J, 40M 3:44:53
6562 McViney, J, 44F 3:44:53
6563 Steuer, W, 26M 3:44:54
6564 Colon, I, 33M 3:44:54
6565 Boigne, T, 34M 3:44:54
6566 Clifford, S, 45M 3:44:54
6567 Neffe, A, 48M 3:44:54
6568 Fredrikson, E, 32M 3:44:55
6569 Yildirim, I, 35M 3:44:55
6570 Kirchmaier, R, 54F 3:44:55
6571 Maron, C, 30M 3:44:56
6572 Pariante, J, 25F 3:44:56
6573 Bartelmeus, R, 45M 3:44:56
6574 Pollack, G, 39M 3:44:56
6575 Roth, G, 35M 3:44:57
6576 Saulich, G, 51M 3:44:57
6577 Rolff, G, 34M 3:44:58
6578 McCarroll, G, 37M 3:44:58
6579 Villani, M, 32F 3:44:58
6580 Yablonsky, P, 44M 3:44:58
6581 Crevier, C, 25M 3:44:59
6582 Holleman, B, 44M 3:44:59
6583 Thandiwe, I, 39M 3:45:00
6584 Koning, R, 28M 3:45:00
6585 Else, K, 33F 3:45:00
6586 Heinert, G, 41M 3:45:01
6587 De Santos, R, 31M 3:45:01
6588 Cizewski, S, 37M 3:45:01
6589 Slatthed, S, 63M 3:45:02
6590 Chicarilli, Z, 44M 3:45:02
6591 Kirchner, A, 35M 3:45:03
6592 Hebert, J, 43M 3:45:03
6593 Seelandt, F, 39M 3:45:03
6594 Clement, W, 53M 3:45:03
6595 Nocka, J, 32F 3:45:04
6596 Edwards, J, 57M 3:45:04
6597 Gerhart, J, 42M 3:45:05
6598 Ortiz Rodriguez, A, 38M 3:45:05
6599 Rubin, L, 38F 3:45:05
6600 Ball, J, 31M 3:45:05
6601 Haley, C, 31M 3:45:06
6602 Voir, J, 34M 3:45:06
6603 Eckhardt, C, 34F 3:45:07
6604 Lindsay, F, 37M 3:45:07
6605 Zanetti, F, 36M 3:45:07
6606 Pinies, M, 40F 3:45:07
6607 Scholten, J, 48M 3:45:08
6608 Kane, R, 32M 3:45:08
6609 Ralston, J, 45M 3:45:08
6610 Conner, J, 28M 3:45:08
6611 Lopez, E, 62M 3:45:09
6612 Vandeperre, J, 42M 3:45:09
6613 Conners, J, 30M 3:45:09
6614 Barbera, A, 32M 3:45:10
6615 Rorandelli, L, 30M 3:45:10
6616 Dillon, E, 37F 3:45:10
6617 Ghastin, J, 33M 3:45:10
6618 Millhouse, M, 39M 3:45:10
6619 Delorenzo, E, 31M 3:45:11
6620 Baltierrez, J, 45M 3:45:11
6621 Osullivan, P, 36M 3:45:11
6622 Santoni, E, 71M 3:45:12
6623 Morssinkhof, H, 49M 3:45:12
6624 Lyons, C, 32M 3:45:12
6625 Waligory, R, 34M 3:45:12
6626 Zimmerman, K, 51M 3:45:13
6627 Riedl, J, 41M 3:45:14
6628 Johannsen, H, 54M 3:45:14
6629 Zirpoli, G, 44M 3:45:14
6630 McVeigh, J, 36M 3:45:14
6631 Hyams, K, 28F 3:45:14
6632 Richini, A, 52M3:45:14
6633 Gennari, P, 43M 3:45:14
6634 Schechter, D, 53M 3:45:14
6635 Becker, M, 50M 3:45:14
6636 Pollul, T, 27M 3:45:14
6637 Ehlen, A, 39F 3:45:14
6638 Harkins, J, 27M 3:45:14
6639 Sprague, E, 25F 3:45:14
6640 Whitehead, J, 35M 3:45:14
6641 Lacroix, F, 40F 3:45:14
6642 Garcia, A, 32M 3:45:14
6643 Monahan, S, 37M 3:45:14
6644 Weston, A, 39F 3:45:14
6645 Mendoza, L, 44M 3:45:14
6646 Martin Mora, F, 46M 3:45:15
6647 Marra, M, 24M 3:45:15
6648 Lucas, J, 56M 3:45:15
6649 Klekamp, P, 25M 3:45:16
6650 Lahbabi, M, 40M 3:45:16
6651 Bartushintz, T, 46M 3:45:16
6652 Gemmiti, R, 41M 3:45:16
6653 Mathiesen, M, 35M 3:45:16
6654 Vannoy, K, 29M 3:45:16
6655 Goldblatt-Schrier, B, 35F 3:45:17
6656 Schlaefli, M, 44M 3:45:17
6657 Grossi, F, 27M 3:45:17
6658 Chaves, L, 29M 3:45:17
6659 Lacroix, J, 43M 3:45:17
6660 Quinn, P, 47M 3:45:18
6661 Pannuti, P, 27M 3:45:18
6662 Greenberg, R, 37M 3:45:18
6663 Deppierraz, A, 37M 3:45:19
6664 Albino, T, 38M 3:45:19
6665 Conway, J, 44F 3:45:19
6666 Hart, T, 48M 3:45:19
6667 Makowski, R, 37M 3:45:20
6668 Pyne, J, 27F 3:45:21
6669 Pourret, D, 35M 3:45:21
6670Boecksteiner, W, 44M 3:45:21
6671 Melo, R, 31M 3:45:21
6672 Cole, A, 55M 3:45:22
6673 Goldstein, R, 54M 3:45:22
6674 Blenkinsop, A, 42M 3:45:22
6675 Handaly, D, 33M 3:45:22
6676 McDonagh, M, 54M 3:45:23
6677 Blumberg, M, 34M 3:45:24
6678 Canalicchio, A, 37M 3:45:24
6679 Flores, M, 41M 3:45:24
6680 Augensen, F, 37M 3:45:24
6681 Rivas Amaro, E, 44M 3:45:24
6682 Luttier, M, 39M 3:45:24
6683 Spocker, W, 41M 3:45:25
6684 Scherer, R, 44M 3:45:25
6685 Barnhill, B, 47M 3:45:25
6686 Hormes, R, 39M 3:45:26
6687 Rojas, J, 37M 3:45:26
6688 Jimenez, L, 42M 3:45:27
6689 Weigel, J, 48M 3:45:27
6690 Hofer, G, 47M 3:45:28
6691 Miller, J, 38M 3:45:28
6692Biwersi, G, 35M 3:45:29
6693 Brottrager, K, 39M 3:45:29
6694 Pronk-Winkel, I, 39F 3:45:29
6695 Gitterman, B, 43M 3:45:30
6696 Vangronsveld, G, 43M 3:45:30
6697 Alonso, A, 40F 3:45:30
6698 Cadrette, K, 56M 3:45:30
6699 Bernardo, J, 24M 3:45:30
6700 Grant, M, 46M 3:45:30
6701 Virgilio, L, 31M 3:45:30
6702 Newcomb, L, 33F 3:45:31
6703 Zamora, R, 48M 3:45:31
6704 Pfleger, Y, 26M 3:45:31
6705 Oliver Roca, G, 52M 3:45:31
6706 Cole, R, 25M 3:45:31
6707 Packschies, R, 27M 3:45:32
6708 Herrera, C, 26F 3:45:32
6709 Moslow, J, 44M 3:45:32
6710 Princay, J, 57M 3:45:34
6711 Galand, S, 33M 3:45:34
6712 Abreu, C, 51M 3:45:34
6713 Haire, D, 37M 3:45:35
6714 Golding, K, 38M 3:45:35
6715 Hou, J, 34M 3:45:35
6716 Wirtz, P, 27M 3:45:35
6717 Schmidt, E, 40M 3:45:36
6718 Glusing, T, 34M 3:45:36
6719 Schlecker, W, 46M 3:45:36
6720 Rodewijk, J, 36M 3:45:37
6721 Suyten, H, 33M 3:45:37
6722 Silveira, J, 50M 3:45:37
6723 Campos Lopez, A, 46M 3:45:37
6724 Rein, D, 34M 3:45:37
6725 Gardella, T, 43M 3:45:37
6726 Bailleux, J, 44M 3:45:37
6727 Djelil, A, 45M 3:45:37
6728 Doloire, M, 44M 3:45:37
6729 Greico, P, 29M3:45:37
6730 Van De Wouw, D, 43M 3:45:37
6731 Minana, J, 23M 3:45:38
6732 Montay, H, 45M 3:45:38
6733 Rutzen, H, 53M 3:45:38
6734 Ocampo, A, 54M 3:45:39
6735 Nordgerling, M, 37M 3:45:39
6736 Loo, J, 28M 3:45:39
6737 Macchiavelli, F, 31M 3:45:39
6738 Haynes, P, 45M 3:45:39
6739 Alicea, T, 44M 3:45:40
6740 Lardy, B, 48F 3:45:40
6741 Tuson, K, 58M 3:45:40
6742 Prestom, J, 55M 3:45:40
6743 Janholm, I, 48M 3:45:40
6744 Deuve, M, 42M 3:45:41
6745 King, D, 34F 3:45:41
6746 Marchi, G, 47M 3:45:41
6747 Rom Paradis, M, 49M 3:45:41
6748 Favie, M, 40M 3:45:41
6749 Radakovich, M, 41M 3:45:42
6750 Monckeberg, H, 41M 3:45:43
6751 Te Breuil Dr., W, 49M 3:45:43
6752 Ducrocq, C, 34F 3:45:43
6753 Lerenard, A, 32M 3:45:43
6754 Reid, G, 37M 3:45:43
6755 Van Lugtenburg, C, 44M 3:45:43
6756 Truffer, C, 40M 3:45:43
6757 Undheim, T, 53M 3:45:44
6758 Lansard, M, 56M 3:45:45
6759 Janssen, A, 25M 3:45:45
6760 Newton, K, 47M 3:45:45
6761 Perlman, R, 47M 3:45:46
6762 Bernard, R, 56M 3:45:46
6763 Buchsbaum, K, 26F 3:45:47
6764 Guissanie Jr, R, 26M 3:45:47
6765 Pasquier, M, 38M 3:45:47
6766 Walter, D, 30M 3:45:47
6767 Landau, R, 35M 3:45:47
6768 Roemer, M, 46M 3:45:48
6769 McMullan, B, 32M 3:45:48
6770 Vesterinen, T, 41M 3:45:48
6771 Childs, P, 49M 3:45:49
6772 Buechler, H, 66M 3:45:49
6773 Romero, A, 32M 3:45:49
6774 Mahon, M, 42M 3:45:49
6775 Smith, D, 35M 3:45:50
6776 Issing, F, 29M 3:45:50
6777 Doerwald, D, 37M 3:45:50
6778 Corrente, V, 38M 3:45:50
6779 Arnaudo, A, 30M 3:45:51
6780 Hoelzle, W, 41M 3:45:51
6781 Santiago, E, 42M 3:45:51
6782 Carter, T, 38M 3:45:52
6783 Rocha Sanchez, J, 40M 3:45:52
6784 Oestreich, B, 44F 3:45:52
6785 Perry, D, 24F 3:45:53
6786 Hobeika, H, 31M 3:45:53
6787 Arnold, G, 52M 3:45:53
6788 Berwick, K, 66M 3:45:53
6789 Verhille, F, 27M 3:45:54
6790 Duvall, S, 31F 3:45:54
6791 Sieval, P, 58M 3:45:54
6792 Nelson, R, 40M 3:45:54
6793 Fiedler, J, 50M 3:45:55
6794 Vautrin, C, 39M 3:45:55
6795 Mason, J, 37M 3:45:55
6796 McIntyre, S, 39M 3:45:56
6797 Mellor, J, 38M 3:45:56
6798 Moli, A, 31M 3:45:56
6799 Pellizzardi, M, 36M 3:45:56
6800 McCann, J, 44M 3:45:56
6801 Plass, C, 32M 3:45:56
6802 Meyer, U, 52M 3:45:56
6803 Taranto, J, 32M 3:45:56
6804 Howley, P, 36M 3:45:57
6805 Street, N, 28M 3:45:57
6806 Chavarria, L, 34M 3:45:57
6807 Fachler, F, 35M 3:45:58
6808 Valland, H, 46M 3:45:58
6809 Daviou, A, 45M 3:45:58
6810 Amlo, T, 53M 3:45:58
6811 Eichenberger, A, 27M 3:45:58
6812 Killingmo, E, 32M 3:45:59
6813 Watumull, T, 31F 3:46:00
6814 Snyder, J, 39M 3:46:01
6815 Kurr, M, 29M 3:46:01
6816 Namba, T, 32M 3:46:01
6817 Vingerhoed, T, 27M 3:46:02
6818 Lebrija, A, 42M 3:46:02
6819 Meystre, P, 36M 3:46:02
6820 Lysen, M, 45M 3:46:02
6821 Feder, R, 36M 3:46:03
6822 Gourle, M, 60M 3:46:03
6823 Watumull, V, 36M 3:46:03
6824 Mathes, C, 31M 3:46:03
6825 Willems, R, 37M 3:46:03
6826 Maecker, K, 55M 3:46:05
6827Scheller, K, 51M 3:46:07
6828 Weigt, T, 43M 3:46:08
6829 Connor, M, 33M 3:46:08
6830 Desplanches, F, 26M 3:46:08
6831 De La Torre, A, 35M 3:46:09
6832 Detrolio, R, 51M 3:46:09
6833 Cushing, M, 33M3:46:09
6834 Maluf, J, 48M 3:46:09
6835 Haetzman, A, 47M 3:46:09
6836 Cheung, W, 32M 3:46:10
6837 Spinner, E, 29F 3:46:10
6838 Billod, C, 37M 3:46:10
6839 Ruschmeyer, F, 30M 3:46:11
6840 Hermann, A, 23M 3:46:11
6841 Jiranek, A, 33M 3:46:11
6842 Monahan, M, 33F 3:46:11
6843 Strub, E, 45M 3:46:11
6844 McElroy, A, 33M 3:46:11
6845 Granito, S, 54M 3:46:12
6846 Lhomme, D, 40M 3:46:12
6847 Ramos, C, 35M 3:46:12
6848 Woldert, R, 54M 3:46:12
6849 Osterhus, O, 56M 3:46:12
6850 Garrity, P, 57M 3:46:12
6851 Willems, J, 46M 3:46:12
6852 Hennessy, J, 42F 3:46:13
6853 Roberts, R, 42M 3:46:13
6854 Garot, O, 22M 3:46:13
6855 Conti, P, 24M 3:46:13
6856 Turkewitz, E, 34M 3:46:14
6857 Halpern, K, 24M 3:46:14
6858 Faubert, R, 48M 3:46:14
6859 Stefanchik, J, 39M 3:46:14
6860 Maher, K, 38M 3:46:15
6861 Russo, M, 36M 3:46:16
6862 Granello, C, 31M 3:46:16
6863 Pizzirani, S, 41M 3:46:17
6864 Castro, M, 29M 3:46:17
6865 Baines, J, 32M 3:46:17
6866 Posada, H, 47M 3:46:17
6867 Racine, L, 37M 3:46:18
6868 Lee, J, 25F 3:46:18
6869 Andersson, K, 48M 3:46:18
6870 Griffin Jr., C, 48M 3:46:19
6871 Karnik, M, 27M 3:46:19
6872 Lightcap, K, 24F 3:46:19
6873 Zenk, N, 41M 3:46:19
6874 King, A, 30M 3:46:20
6875 Chemin, J, 45M 3:46:20
6876 McDonald, J, 47M 3:46:20
6877 Basford, J, 51M 3:46:20
6878 Boot, I, 54M 3:46:21
6879 Sainz, D, 40M 3:46:21
6880 Mesman-V/D Ploeg, J, 40F 3:46:21
6881 Fontaine, Y, 44M 3:46:22
6882 Saylor, G, 40M 3:46:22
6883 Karel, H, 39M 3:46:22
6884 Grapentin, C, 47M 3:46:22
6885 Krueger, A, 25M 3:46:23
6886 Cipriani, H, 43M 3:46:23
6887 Dixon, W, 28M 3:46:23
6888 Camargo, L, 38M 3:46:23
6889 Rey, J, 48M 3:46:23
6890 Read, G, 60M 3:46:23
6891 Lowdon, D, 33M 3:46:23
6892 Goodwin, S, 39M 3:46:23
6893 Mazza, G, 37F 3:46:24
6894 Campbell, T, 30M 3:46:24
6895 Bouteloup, G, 39M 3:46:24
6896 Dlugolonski, G, 45M 3:46:25
6897 Eike, M, 46M 3:46:25
6898 Roi, G, 45M 3:46:25
6899 Delhom, R, 47M 3:46:25
6900 Umana, A, 39M 3:46:25
6901 Jorgensen, E, 47F 3:46:26
6902 Karl, G, 28M 3:46:26
6903 RUNNER NO. X7644, 35M 3:46:26
6904 Cosentino, F, 30M 3:46:26
6905 McCaffrey, T, 37M 3:46:26
6906 Mancinelli, L, 53M 3:46:27
6907 Brennan, K, 39F 3:46:27
6908 Roullet Renoleau, A, 45M 3:46:27
6909 Sanders, J, 37M 3:46:27
6910 Sneekes, D, 25M 3:46:27
6911 Feddersen, J, 53M 3:46:28
6912 Behr, J, 47M 3:46:28
6913 Walter, J, 35M 3:46:29
6914 Garrido, A, 32M 3:46:29
6915 George, M, 32M 3:46:29
6916 Selvaggio, R, 37M 3:46:29
6917 Mathes, U, 30M 3:46:29
6918 Vonken, W, 50M 3:46:30
6919 Balderas Castillo, M, 37F 3:46:30
6920 Pezza, L, 62M 3:46:30
6921 Dupont, R, 50M 3:46:31
6922 Brinker, D, 44M 3:46:31
6923 Piron, J, 36M 3:46:32
6924 Ostmeier, W, 44M 3:46:32
6925 Cerini, F, 43M 3:46:32
6926 Roman, P, 24F 3:46:33
6927 Beltrandi, S, 51F 3:46:33
6928 Achleitner, H, 30M 3:46:33
6929 Winter, N, 26F 3:46:33
6930 Weiss, J, 49M 3:46:33
6931 Bouma, B, 49M 3:46:33
6932 Cassart, J, 30M 3:46:33
6933 Spotti, J, 46M 3:46:33
6934 Dahl, H, 52F 3:46:33
6935 Elkin, H, 43M 3:46:33
6936 Taniuchi, I, 41M 3:46:33
6937 Rubio Salazar, E, 35M 3:46:33
6938 Gaiffier, M, 45F 3:46:34
6939 Juan, M, 44M 3:46:34
6940 Pratt, P, 30F 3:46:34
6941 Park, K, 38M 3:46:34
6942 Seroka, P, 37M 3:46:35
6943 Scott, K, 27M 3:46:36
6944 Stepanek, L, 34M 3:46:36
6945 Rallo Verdugo, E, 27M 3:46:36
6946 Mart, J, 46M 3:46:37
6947 Ardila, H, 44M 3:46:37
6948 Barnett, G, 37M 3:46:37
6949 Roulet, G, 46M 3:46:38
6950 Padron, J, 39M 3:46:38
6951 Harrison, J, 46M 3:46:38
6952 Diaz, H, 39M 3:46:38
6953 Smal, P, 36M 3:46:38
6954 Ittah, D, 35M 3:46:38
6955 Micciche, D, 37M 3:46:39
6956 Vignon, J, 45M 3:46:39
6957 Consoli, V, 32M 3:46:40
6958 De Jesus, F, 23M 3:46:40
6959 Lauer, P, 37M 3:46:40
6960 Moreaux, D, 25M 3:46:40
6961 Baffert, M, 42M 3:46:40
6962 Geurts, J, 38M 3:46:41
6963 Perronnes, J, 51M 3:46:41
6964 Soriano, D, 41M 3:46:41
6965Marega, L, 34M 3:46:41
6966 Jungblut, J, 40M 3:46:41
6967 Delafollie, G, 44M 3:46:42
6968 Roy, R, 36M 3:46:42
6969 Burton, L, 36M 3:46:42
6970 Powell, K, 26M 3:46:42
6971 Franzolini, G, 40M 3:46:42
6972 Zubiaurre, J, 37M 3:46:42
6973 Ruiz De Mendoza, A, 37M 3:46:43
6974 Sottile, M, 43M 3:46:43
6975 Piau, B, 46M 3:46:43
6976 Audry, C, 40M 3:46:43
6977 Ribeiro, G, 38M 3:46:43
6978 Demichelis, I, 45M 3:46:43
6979 Ross, R, 35M 3:46:44
6980 Claassen, C, 23M 3:46:44
6981 Leliveld, P, 31M 3:46:44
6982 Calderon Cisneros, R, 36M 3:46:44
6983 Devaney, R, 31M 3:46:44
6984 Barnes, J, 39M 3:46:44
6985 Nombela, M, 39M 3:46:45
6986 Witt De, J, 61M 3:46:45
6987 Endozo, D, 32M 3:46:45
6988 Epstein, E, 44M 3:46:46
6989 Colomo, J, 42M 3:46:46
6990 Irvin, S, 26M 3:46:46
6991 Sharoky, M, 44M 3:46:46
6992 Vanrossem, C, 39M 3:46:46
6993 Voss, C, 45M 3:46:46
6994 Allen, P, 41F 3:46:47
6995 Vayssettes, J, 53M 3:46:47
6996 Dritsas, P, 37M 3:46:47
6997 Bartolini, S, 26M 3:46:48
6998 Walker, E, 26F 3:46:48
6999 Sybesma, J, 46M 3:46:48
7000 Collins, T, 26M 3:46:48
7001 Manfredi, P, 26M 3:46:48
7002 Cremaschi, M, 27M 3:46:49
7003 Feinberg, E, 29F 3:46:49
7004 Earley, T, 49M 3:46:49
7005 Olsen, F, 50M 3:46:50
7006 Fong, D, 44M 3:46:50
7007 Bodini, F, 34M 3:46:51
7008 Clark, S, 42M 3:46:51
7009 Searle, L, 22M 3:46:51
7010 Sacchini, F, 33M 3:46:51
7011 Gnoth, H, 57M 3:46:51
7012 Krueger, M, 56M 3:46:51
7013 Asser, M, 34M 3:46:51
7014 Frost, H, 47M 3:46:52
7015 Honea, S, 39M 3:46:52
7016 Roesch, D, 20M 3:46:52
7017 Dunnery, C, 26F 3:46:53
7018 Bornia, C, 27M 3:46:53
7019 Reinert, K, 57M 3:46:54
7020 Kahn, L, 35M 3:46:54
7021 Merriman, J, 29F 3:46:54
7022 Hull, M, 32F 3:46:54
7023 McCraw, C, 24F 3:46:55
7024 Yagi, A, 28M 3:46:55
7025 Fischer, W, 52M 3:46:55
7026 Mahe, J, 40M 3:46:56
7027 Ronning, E, 55M 3:46:56
7028 Maag, B, 38F 3:46:56
7029 Schaab, P, 36F 3:46:56
7030 Fischer, G, 48M 3:46:56
7031 Schoeps, I, 55M 3:46:56
7032 Espinasa, J, 19M 3:46:56
7033 Uyttewaal, M, 36F 3:46:57
7034 Nocka, K, 33M 3:46:57
7035 Bianchini, F, 55M 3:46:57
7036 Humphrey, H, 40F 3:46:57
7037 Barros, R, 43F 3:46:58
7038 Seidman, M, 40F 3:46:58
7039 Rothwell, A, 39M 3:46:58
7040 Barragan Anaya, J, 47M 3:46:59
7041 Maszczak, D, 28M 3:46:59
7042 Werner, G, 55M 3:46:59
7043 Focht, C, 25F 3:46:59
7044 Gonzalez, C, 28M 3:47:00
7045 Ferniot, J, 45M 3:47:00
7046 Loew, A, 56M 3:47:00
7047 Petit, D, 52M 3:47:00
7048 Voisin, J, 44M 3:47:01
7049 Douma, J, 58M 3:47:01
7050 Juckett, S, 23F 3:47:01
7051 Trottet, J, 37M 3:47:01
7052 Spreer, R, 48M 3:47:03
7053 Attal, A, 34M 3:47:03
7054 Dijkstra, G, 42M 3:47:03
7055 Barnes, J, 33M 3:47:04
7056 Rogers, B, 38M 3:47:04
7057 Margevicius, C, 34F 3:47:04
7058 Eslick, R, 39M 3:47:04
7059 Edo, E, 59M 3:47:05
7060 Farley, L, 34M 3:47:05
7061 Schantz, P, 46M 3:47:06
7062 Findenig, W, 39M 3:47:06
7063 Dowling, S, 36M 3:47:06
7064 Wong, W, 34M 3:47:07
7065 Dijkstra, A, 46M 3:47:07
7066 Laguardia Alonso, F, 28M 3:47:07
7067 Kahmann, N, 32M 3:47:08
7068 Franco, R, 38M 3:47:08
7069 Huber, R, 41M 3:47:08
7070 Krist, L, 27M 3:47:08
7071 Herrmann, F, 38M 3:47:09
7072 Brandt, R, 34M 3:47:09
7073 Mischel, J, 38M 3:47:09
7074 MacKay-Spencer, A, 30F 3:47:09
7075 Royster, K, 45M 3:47:10
7076 Flynn, S, 32M 3:47:10
7077 McGovern, D, 29M 3:47:10
7078 Wyss, E, 39M 3:47:10
7079 Malin, D, 28M 3:47:10
7080 Soffa, J, 53M 3:47:11
7081 Garrigue, Y, 42M 3:47:11
7082 Kloppenborg, T, 41M 3:47:11
7083 Lue, J, 37M 3:47:11
7084 Schroeder, C, 35M 3:47:12
7085 Bennett, A, 54M3:47:12
7086 Achalandabaso, J, 40M 3:47:12
7087 Bleitrach, F, 23M3:47:12
7088 Zuzuarregui, I, 37M 3:47:12
7089 Meertens, S, 52M 3:47:13
7090 Bracaglia, D, 31M 3:47:13
7091 Marangoni, J, 37F 3:47:14
7092 Fusek, J, 34M 3:47:15
7093 Wolf, U, 49M 3:47:15
7094 Shabman, S, 35M 3:47:15
7095 Bohannon, G, 41M 3:47:15
7096 Demirel, B, 18M 3:47:15
7097 Stott, A, 40M 3:47:15
7098 Stewart, R, 35M 3:47:16
7099 Carpenter, J, 48M 3:47:16
7100 Pozuelo, A, 31M 3:47:16
7101 Ishikama, T, 30M 3:47:16
7102 Lowell, E, 47F 3:47:16
7103 Porras, J, 36M 3:47:16
7104 Canfora, P, 57M 3:47:17
7105 Atkinson, R, 44M 3:47:17
7106 Evoniuk, M, 37M 3:47:17
7107 Kley, S, 29M 3:47:18
7108 Porras, M, 43M 3:47:18
7109 Dekkers, E, 40M 3:47:18
7110 Gonzalez, E, 28M 3:47:19
7111 Reback, D, 25M 3:47:19
7112 Bonfait, A, 42M 3:47:19
7113 Gendler, S, 36M 3:47:19
7114 Noria Robles, J, 38M 3:47:19
7115 Schmutzer, O, 58M 3:47:19
7116 Van Cappellen, P, 59M 3:47:19
7117 Schulz, R, 37M 3:47:19
7118 Aidibe, M, 48M 3:47:20
7119 Sikora, D, 41F 3:47:20
7120 Mouritzen, B, 43M 3:47:20
7121 Schmutzer, M, 27M 3:47:20
7122 Goodman, M, 34M 3:47:20
7123 Kuhn, W, 39M 3:47:20
7124 Ong, K, 35M 3:47:20
7125 Bellenoue, J, 30M 3:47:20
7126 Susemiehl, H, 34M 3:47:20
7127 Mealia, J, 38M 3:47:20
7128 Pedreros, O, 39M 3:47:21
7129 Cameron, R, 49M 3:47:21
7130 Perez, J, 36M 3:47:21
7131 Hernandez, E, 41M 3:47:22
7132 Priedemann, F, 42M 3:47:22
7133 Kerherve, C, 42M 3:47:22
7134 Sod, E, 34M 3:47:23
7135 Draxler, J, 41M 3:47:23
7136 Dougherty, C, 39F 3:47:23
7137 Dautrich, K, 39M 3:47:23
7138 Dougherty, D, 40M 3:47:23
7139 Simone, C, 39M 3:47:24
7140 Dugas, S, 28M 3:47:24
7141 Smith, B, 41M 3:47:24
7142 Gile, T, 30M 3:47:24
7143 Pycock, G, 47M 3:47:25
7144 Vandegaar, L, 61M 3:47:25
7145 Adams, E, 32M 3:47:25
7146 Wirz, J, 45M 3:47:26
7147 Arras, M, 36M 3:47:26
7148 Duda, R, 53M 3:47:26
7149 Ruez, P, 36F 3:47:26
7150 Gutierrez, B, 37M 3:47:27
7151 Dickman, A, 44M 3:47:27
7152 Conrado, U, 41M 3:47:27
7153 O'Connor, M, 45M 3:47:28
7154 Litvak, A, 23M 3:47:28
7155 DePalma, S, 36F 3:47:28
7156 Steinberg, A, 47M 3:47:28
7157 Akkersdijk, W, 33M 3:47:28
7158 Stein, D, 43M 3:47:28
7159 Benz, G, 46M 3:47:28
7160 Orlando, A, 40M 3:47:29
7161 Davis, W, 31M 3:47:29
7162 Hocking, M, 44M 3:47:29
7163 Wilson, J, 32M 3:47:29
7164 Adelhardt Dr, W, 43M 3:47:29
7165 Meijer, K, 32F 3:47:29
7166 Trivett, P, 30M 3:47:30
7167 Garcia Rodriguez, J, 46M 3:47:30
7168 Davis, S, 24F 3:47:30
7169 Palmer, G, 29M 3:47:31
7170 Lechner, M, 30M 3:47:31
7171 Van Der Ven, J, 45M 3:47:31
7172 Ayers, L, 37M 3:47:31
7173 Swift, T, 44M 3:47:32
7174 Cardenas Barcenas, F, 46M 3:47:32
7175 Fisher, C, 25M 3:47:32
7176 Harris, A, 33M 3:47:33
7177 Snippe, J, 50M 3:47:33
7178 Kelly, K, 25F 3:47:33
7179 Daidone, B, 36M 3:47:33
7180 Koch, M, 42F 3:47:33
7181 Pitaud, C, 25M 3:47:34
7182 Silva, R, 33M 3:47:34
7183 Haus, M, 29M 3:47:34
7184 Reehill, F, 55M 3:47:35
7185 Reyl, F, 29M 3:47:35
7186 Goldhagen, B, 36M 3:47:35
7187 Moester, P, 47M 3:47:36
7188 Grellet, M, 52M 3:47:36
7189 Den Hoed, W, 46M 3:47:36
7190 Schwall, H, 58M 3:47:36
7191 Peters, B, 39M 3:47:36
7192 Engels, S, 33M 3:47:37
7193 Agudelo, G, 57M 3:47:37
7194 Featherston, J, 47M 3:47:37
7195 Motte, P, 42M 3:47:37
7196 Pollack, J, 33M 3:47:37
7197 Zamora Y Del Valle, H, 51M 3:47:37
7198 Martin, M, 36M 3:47:38
7199 Savarese, J, 26M 3:47:38
7200 Paravicini, G, 38M 3:47:38
7201 Dancher, B, 44M 3:47:38
7202 Giuliano, R, 59M 3:47:39
7203 Brantjes, W, 54M 3:47:39
7204 Delaye, A, 52M 3:47:39
7205 Neis, J, 40M 3:47:39
7206 Fooden, B, 39M 3:47:39
7207 Martens, E, 45M 3:47:40
7208 Nahas, R, 30M 3:47:40
7209 Malanaphy, L, 28M 3:47:40
7210 Domizio, A, 37M 3:47:40
7211 Fjellengen, T, 31M3:47:40
7212 Banning, L, 45F 3:47:40
7213 De Pleignes, R, 32M 3:47:40
7214 Heere, L, 45M 3:47:40
7215 Smith III, W, 36M 3:47:41
7216 Rivera Casiano, M, 44M 3:47:41
7217 Le-Coq, L, 40M 3:47:42
7218 Leertouwer, A, 42M 3:47:42
7219 Van Vliet, P, 47M 3:47:42
7220 Burlinson, P, 33M 3:47:43
7221 Denis, F, 37M 3:47:43
7222 Post, R, 38M 3:47:43
7223 Rodriguez, J, 49M 3:47:43
7224 De Jong, K, 27M 3:47:44
7225 Young, D, 50M 3:47:45
7226 Kofahl, S, 45M 3:47:45
7227 Aimaretti, C, 31M 3:47:45
7228 Garcia, L, 22M 3:47:46
7229 Novoa Yeo, J, 30M 3:47:46
7230 Weisberg, H, 55M 3:47:46
7231 Callaghan, F, 37M 3:47:47
7232 Leal Barrientos, J, 45M 3:47:47
7233Knoebel, C, 34F 3:47:47
7234 Tufeld, C, 36M 3:47:47
7235 McClary, F, 23M 3:47:47
7236 Herceg, M, 33M 3:47:48
7237 Sibiyzeff, P, 34M 3:47:48
7238 Leuchten, W, 29M 3:47:48
7239 Slaunwhite, R, 48M 3:47:49
7240 Besnard, G, 37M 3:47:49
7241 Clark, P, 32F 3:47:49
7242 Souter, G, 47M 3:47:49
7243 Bryson, C, 21M 3:47:49
7244 Simon, J, 28M 3:47:49
7245 Schwab, P, 43M 3:47:50
7246 Van Breene, D, 32M 3:47:50
7247 Taube, D, 32M 3:47:50
7248 Audette, D, 44M 3:47:50
7249 Glendon, W, 48M 3:47:50
7250 Van Kouterik, N, 36M 3:47:51
7251 Ruys, J, 40M 3:47:51
7252 Geesing, J, 37M 3:47:51
7253Sydow, J, 56M 3:47:51
7254 Costella, J, 38M 3:47:51
7255 Garlatti, E, 52M 3:47:51
7256 Matthews, P, 32M 3:47:52
7257 Leuther, J, 45M 3:47:52
7258 Nesgaard, J, 51M 3:47:53
7259 Cherubin, G, 50M 3:47:53
7260 Dalton, M, 24M 3:47:53
7261 King, G, 52M 3:47:54
7262 Aussen, R, 35M 3:47:54
7263 Tempelman, W, 49M 3:47:55
7264 Succoso, G, 40F 3:47:55
7265 Pekala, R, 43M 3:47:55
7266 Gehring, M, 30F 3:47:55
7267 Thomas, R, 46M 3:47:55
7268 Shearon, M, 27F 3:47:55
7269 Vanier, P, 44M 3:47:55
7270 Miller, G, 44F 3:47:56
7271 Jongeneel, J, 35M 3:47:56
7272 Bacchiocchi, R, 39M 3:47:57
7273 Pettersson, S, 43M 3:47:57
7274 Smith, D, 34M 3:47:57
7275 Haukkala, E, 26M 3:47:57
7276 Idrissi, M, 42M 3:47:58
7277 Shields, R, 26M 3:47:58
7278 Karaki, M, 35M 3:47:58
7279 Emanuel, R, 25M 3:47:59
7280 Leber, F, 51M 3:47:59
7281 Souza, P, 45M 3:47:59
7282 Hay, D, 24M 3:47:59
7283 Fernandez, C, 43M 3:48:00
7284 Guillemaud, B, 30F 3:48:00
7285 Armstrong, H, 46M 3:48:00
7286 Lawrence, G, 24M 3:48:00
7287 Nakashima, N, 65M 3:48:00
7288 Galbrecht, B, 66M 3:48:01
7289 Keller, J, 31M 3:48:01
7290 Neyland, L, 47M 3:48:01
7291 Haynes, R, 34M 3:48:01
7292 Fedeli, R, 40M 3:48:01
7293 Olivier, E, 39M 3:48:02
7294 Whyte, P, 40M 3:48:02
7295 Salzmann, L, 42F 3:48:02
7296 Boehler, M, 38F 3:48:02
7297 Baussenwein, H, 40M 3:48:02
7298 Bernet, A, 49M 3:48:03
7299 Twiling, R, 35M 3:48:03
7300 Eisen, G, 33M 3:48:03
7301 Talmont, J, 33M 3:48:03
7302 Minzer, S, 47M 3:48:04
7303 Barth, A, 31M 3:48:04
7304 Rietveld, B, 35M 3:48:04
7305 Sparhawk, J, 30M 3:48:05
7306 Espinasa, J, 49M 3:48:05
7307 Sands, R, 43M 3:48:05
7308 Inouye, G, 32M 3:48:05
7309 Bourjot, J, 37M 3:48:05
7310 Ripke, R, 32M 3:48:06
7311 Hamilton, C, 28M 3:48:06
7312 Parkel, J, 50F 3:48:06
7313 Katzan, H, 59M 3:48:06
7314 Fitzgerald, P, 64M 3:48:06
7315 Saeboe, S, 28M 3:48:07
7316 Bennett, B, 54M 3:48:07
7317 Dubois, A, 45F3:48:07
7318 Manguilli Jr, G, 38M 3:48:07
7319 Diaz, L, 38M 3:48:07
7320 Telinge, L, 31M 3:48:07
7321 Jackson, L, 45F 3:48:07
7322 Ansel, R, 45M 3:48:08
7323 Gonzalez Hernandez, J, 43M 3:48:08
7324 Jackson, C, 33M 3:48:08
7325 Tapper, L, 28F 3:48:08
7326 Rojas Arroyo, G, 43M 3:48:08
7327 Dupuis, T, 37M 3:48:08
7328 Segall, M, 41F 3:48:09
7329 Margueritte, E, 27M 3:48:09
7330 Consedine, J, 39M 3:48:09
7331 Beauvallet, J, 34M 3:48:09
7332 Geddes, G, 47M 3:48:10
7333 Schnippengerd, A, 55M 3:48:10
7334 Knight, K, 37M 3:48:10
7335 Henriksson, P, 29M 3:48:10
7336 Cordioli, L, 41M 3:48:11
7337 Gearin, D, 49M 3:48:11
7338 Linnemeyer, P, 35M 3:48:11
7339 Fleming, W, 38M 3:48:11
7340 Snoeij, R, 31M 3:48:12
7341 Grava, T, 45M 3:48:12
7342 Wahl, D, 32M 3:48:13
7343 Picascia, D, 38M 3:48:13
7344 Van Der Zwet, J, 30M 3:48:13
7345 Dagon, P, 30M 3:48:13
7346 Alcoser, G, 41M 3:48:13
7347 Leijnen, C, 40M 3:48:13
7348 Homans, H, 43M 3:48:13
7349 Cook, R, 54M 3:48:14
7350 LaVecchia, J, 34M 3:48:14
7351 May, J, 19F 3:48:14
7352 Jonas, A, 50M 3:48:15
7353 Harchar, G, 32M 3:48:15
7354 Mertins, H, 49M 3:48:16
7355 Van Der Meer, J, 34F 3:48:16
7356 Roters, J, 45M 3:48:16
7357 Alameda, A, 42M 3:48:16
7358 Ley, M, 23M 3:48:17
7359 Bulkley, D, 43M 3:48:18
7360 Bonnion, L, 30M 3:48:18
7361 Ferreira, J, 46M 3:48:18
7362 Walther, M, 31M 3:48:18
7363 Genest-Boudreau, C, 33M 3:48:18
7364 Heimbouch, H, 28F 3:48:18
7365 Bertrand, P, 36M 3:48:19
7366 Loertscher, R, 42M 3:48:19
7367 Giorgio, T, 34M 3:48:19
7368 Kaufman, S, 27M 3:48:19
7369 Gathmann, G, 58M 3:48:19
7370 Sikora, B, 26M 3:48:19
7371 Egan, K, 31M 3:48:20
7372 Polte, H, 60M 3:48:20
7373 Fauconnier, D, 50M 3:48:20
7374 Van De Weyer, E, 28M 3:48:21
7375 Zarate Sanchez, H, 52M 3:48:21
7376 Spence, A, 33F 3:48:21
7377 Hoesch, E, 39M 3:48:22
7378 Winckler, H, 39M 3:48:22
7379 Lounissi, C, 34M 3:48:22
7380 Pakarinen, P, 60M 3:48:23
7381 Gauer, F, 50M 3:48:23
7382 Clark, B, 32M 3:48:23
7383 Keyloun, P, 40M 3:48:23
7384 Ratowski, W, 51M 3:48:24
7385 Guilfoyle, E, 30F 3:48:24
7386 Bredelow, A, 37M 3:48:24
7387 Millan Figueroa, A, 30M 3:48:24
7388 Kaegi, E, 44M 3:48:24
7389 Brizendine, A, 33M 3:48:24
7390 Valdez Reza, J, 29M 3:48:24
7391 Diaz, A, 49M 3:48:25
7392 Sieurin, M, 53M 3:48:25
7393 Jercic, H, 50M 3:48:25
7394 McDine, M, 31F 3:48:25
7395 Dugerdil, M, 40F 3:48:25
7396 Proctor, J, 39M 3:48:25
7397 Reilly, M, 21M 3:48:25
7398 Hernandez, Y, 43F 3:48:26
7399 Bernard, D, 34M 3:48:26
7400 Goncalves, A, 36M 3:48:26
7401 Dugerdil, J, 45M 3:48:26
7402 Smid, A, 44M 3:48:26
7403 Gibara, S, 26F 3:48:26
7404 Blyer, A, 49M 3:48:27
7405 Chemin, L, 28M 3:48:27
7406 O'Connor, K, 27M 3:48:27
7407 Simonte, S, 27M 3:48:27
7408 De Jong, A, 36M 3:48:28
7409 Pellegrino, S, 51M 3:48:28
7410 Galan, J, 37M 3:48:29
7411 Wazlawik, H, 36M 3:48:29
7412 Okano, T, 23M 3:48:29
7413 Barbier, P, 33M 3:48:29
7414 Riche, J, 45M 3:48:29
7415 Richardson, G, 44M 3:48:30
7416 Pereira, J, 42M 3:48:30
7417 Santucci, F, 41M 3:48:30
7418 Maher, N, 55M 3:48:30
7419 Loquet, M, 32F 3:48:30
7420 Garro, S, 30M 3:48:30
7421 Wehmeier, M, 39M 3:48:30
7422 Tunwall, W, 33M 3:48:31
7423 Wilks, D, 30F 3:48:31
7424 Tuckman, A, 25M 3:48:31
7425 Borfecchia, S, 55M 3:48:32
7426 Ebert, R, 52M 3:48:32
7427 McFadden, R, 46M 3:48:32
7428 Hart, E, 53M 3:48:32
7429 Guarducci, E, 34M 3:48:32
7430 McIntosh-King, B, 40F 3:48:32
7431 Remmers, G, 45M 3:48:32
7432 Hollenberg, R, 23M 3:48:32
7433 Gergel, D, 30M 3:48:33
7434 Noel, D, 22M 3:48:33
7435 Whitby, P, 47M 3:48:33
7436 Straub, R, 45M 3:48:34
7437 Ducros, V, 20M 3:48:34
7438 Bronne, P, 46M 3:48:34
7439 Smith*, T, 34M 3:48:34
7440 Castellanos Hurtado, L, 51M 3:48:34
7441 Herdick, W, 50M 3:48:34
7442 Wende, J, 18M 3:48:35
7443 Bernhardt, M, 31M 3:48:35
7444 Robertson, J, 38M 3:48:35
7445 Chapman, N, 33M 3:48:35
7446 Barrier, M, 37M 3:48:35
7447 Mindell, A, 29F 3:48:35
7448 Soares, J, 37M 3:48:35
7449 Alexander, C, 30M 3:48:36
7450 Minoia, F, 40M 3:48:36
7451 Crichton, D, 31M 3:48:37
7452 Andersen, M, 30M 3:48:37
7453 Zamora-Lepiz, O, 44M 3:48:37
7454 Ueda, T, 35M 3:48:38
7455 McIntosh-King, J, 42M 3:48:38
7456 Noblin, K, 37M 3:48:38
7457 Pacheco, H, 65M 3:48:38
7458 Donovan, T, 36M 3:48:39
7459 Reining, B, 50M 3:48:39
7460 Kiene, A, 35M 3:48:40
7461 Di Tuoro, A, 44M 3:48:40
7462 Gras, M, 40M 3:48:40
7463 Perea, J, 48M 3:48:41
7464 Sanchez, J, 34M 3:48:41
7465 Mathews, A, 33M 3:48:42
7466 Kovesdy, L, 40F 3:48:42
7467 Nakamichi, T, 43F 3:48:42
7468 Colon, L, 27M 3:48:42
7469 Rivera, L, 62M 3:48:42
7470 Rodriguez, M, 38M 3:48:42
7471 Elia, D, 31M 3:48:43
7472 Hicks, P, 37M 3:48:43
7473 Heerwagen, V, 25F 3:48:43
7474 Vingan, R, 34M 3:48:44
7475 Brugneaux, G, 47M 3:48:44
7476 Drachmann-Hansen, I, 38M 3:48:45
7477 Kretz, G, 33M 3:48:45
7478 Petersson, J, 34M 3:48:45
7479 Wrigley, C, 41M 3:48:45
7480 Henderson, G, 34M 3:48:45
7481 Opps, T, 44M 3:48:46
7482Faries, M, 25M 3:48:46
7483 Schoenherr, F, 34M 3:48:46
7484 Bourassin, G, 42M 3:48:46
7485 Schuch, W, 33M 3:48:46
7486 Habermann, C, 42M 3:48:46
7487 Scholl, H, 30M 3:48:46
7488 Di Gabriele, A, 27M 3:48:46
7489 Joseph, D, 44M 3:48:46
7490 Pare, J, 49M 3:48:46
7491 Dr Facsko, I, 37M 3:48:47
7492 Millan, R, 34M 3:48:47
7493 Sterba, G, 44M 3:48:47
7494 Seiler, E, 57M 3:48:48
7495 Sanchez Partida, J, 35M 3:48:48
7496 Hanssen, M, 47M 3:48:48
7497 Teitelbaum, S, 63M 3:48:49
7498 Gruner, W, 43M 3:48:49
7499 Raguso, J, 53M 3:48:49
7500 Gray, P, 52M 3:48:49
7501 Frederik, P, 26M 3:48:49
7502 Montanari, J, 46M 3:48:49
7503 Cailloux, M, 37M 3:48:50
7504 Sorensen, K, 35M 3:48:50
7505 Niemantsverdriet, P, 47M 3:48:50
7506 Grassi, D, 31F 3:48:50
7507 Sperti, G, 37M 3:48:50
7508 Los, L, 43M 3:48:51
7509 Dam-Widder, M, 31F 3:48:51
7510 Guderley, M, 38F 3:48:52
7511 Rubarth, J, 32M 3:48:52
7512 Guderley, G, 42M 3:48:52
7513 Dangler, J, 25M 3:48:52
7514 Charles, D, 60M 3:48:52
7515 Pedersen, K, 55M 3:48:52
7516 Hillen, K, 36M 3:48:52
7517 Bytnar, S, 28M 3:48:53
7518 Dam, F, 31M 3:48:53
7519 Newfield, A, 35M 3:48:53
7520 Capuano, I, 34M 3:48:53
7521 Landi, H, 35M 3:48:53
7522 Schiff-Martini, R, 34M 3:48:54
7523 Kowitz, G, 25M 3:48:54
7524 Valdes Flores, J, 33M 3:48:54
7525 Larys, C, 24M 3:48:54
7526 Petersen, H, 45M 3:48:54
7527 Myers, M, 40M 3:48:55
7528 Hernandez, J, 44M 3:48:55
7529 Hayden, R, 39M 3:48:55
7530 Hansen Steen, H, 39M 3:48:55
7531 Diamond, F, 39M 3:48:55
7532 Mahoney, J, 30F 3:48:55
7533 Gibson, P, 30M 3:48:56
7534 Rudolph, R, 45M 3:48:56
7535 Farres Espinas, J, 47M 3:48:56
7536 Schiemann, R, 43M3:48:56
7537 Potier, B, 36M 3:48:57
7538 Edwardsson, P, 36M 3:48:58
7539 Figgers Jr., R, 22M 3:48:58
7540 Schmid, S, 35M 3:48:58
7541 Cattano, J, 51M 3:48:58
7542 Reinhard, K, 41M 3:48:58
7543 Arnold, C, 50M 3:48:59
7544 Besancon, S, 40M 3:48:59
7545 Hardacker, D, 41M 3:48:59
7546 Marziali, M, 32M 3:49:00
7547 Greeuw, R, 50M 3:49:00
7548 Du Maire, K, 35M 3:49:00
7549 Sommerville, M, 44M 3:49:00
7550 Sneider, C, 35M 3:49:01
7551 Frohne, F, 51M 3:49:01
7552 Biuso, W, 35M 3:49:02
7553 Baldi, M, 40M 3:49:02
7554 Monroe, R, 43M 3:49:02
7555 Polner, D, 31M 3:49:02
7556 Simon, J, 30F 3:49:03
7557 Rochard, J, 47M 3:49:03
7558 Lang, G, 41M 3:49:04
7559 Van Huet, T, 41M 3:49:04
7560 Pawar, I, 38M 3:49:05
7561 Hoagland, J, 27F 3:49:05
7562 Reitermann, M, 37M 3:49:05
7563 Kyozuka, S, 42M 3:49:06
7564 Sertic, F, 25M 3:49:06
7565 Mortensen, G, 40M 3:49:06
7566 Holloway, S, 48M 3:49:06
7567 Battaglia, J, 32M 3:49:07
7568 Strandberg, J, 53M 3:49:07
7569 Rusk, K, 36M 3:49:07
7570 Koning, B, 23M 3:49:07
7571 Roeleveld, W, 39M 3:49:08
7572 Lanz, A, 52M 3:49:08
7573 Bass, A, 27M 3:49:08
7574 Rafi, D, 49M 3:49:08
7575 Delatour, B, 33M 3:49:08
7576 Keller, E, 44M3:49:09
7577 Falikovic, M, 43M 3:49:09
7578 Asikainen, E, 59M 3:49:09
7579 Van Der Starre, E, 35M 3:49:09
7580 Denison, T, 41M 3:49:09
7581 Hesselmann, J, 35M 3:49:09
7582 Adler, J, 35M 3:49:09
7583 Matius, R, 43M 3:49:09
7584 Bink, H, 28M 3:49:09
7585 Delloye, F, 31M 3:49:10
7586 Rodriguez, E, 35M 3:49:10
7587 Sampson, B, 47M 3:49:10
7588 Giesing, F, 26M 3:49:10
7589 Lemmens, B, 37M 3:49:10
7590 Ucko, M, 34M 3:49:11
7591 Allen, J, 36M 3:49:11
7592 David, B, 28M 3:49:11
7593 Van Oevelen, R, 39M 3:49:11
7594 Stevens, D, 45M 3:49:11
7595 Rott, H, 44M 3:49:12
7596 Yanchus, S, 29F 3:49:12
7597 Marmion, J, 27M 3:49:12
7598 Studer, G, 45M 3:49:12
7599 Burt, C, 29M 3:49:12
7600 Saltz, P, 52M 3:49:12
7601 Van Der Bruggen, R, 46M 3:49:12
7602 Szydlowski, R, 34M 3:49:12
7603 Montgomery, M, 30M 3:49:13
7604 Denitto, M, 46F 3:49:13
7605 Balsey, D, 47M 3:49:13
7606 Umble, T, 25M 3:49:14
7607 Flaherty, M, 28F 3:49:14
7608 Mayer, G, 40M 3:49:14
7609 Kornhauser, A, 50M 3:49:15
7610 Dobson, J, 40M 3:49:15
7611 De Ruijter, P, 47M 3:49:15
7612 Southerland, W, 28M 3:49:15
7613 Connors, J, 38M 3:49:16
7614 Poetter, T, 31M 3:49:16
7615 Guitard, B, 35M 3:49:16
7616Rickson, B, 24F 3:49:17
7617 Dibden, P, 43M 3:49:17
7618 Arai, H, 47M 3:49:17
7619 White, T, 30M 3:49:17
7620 Jimenez Mata, A, 28M3:49:18
7621 Boos, A, 26F 3:49:18
7622 Brennan, P, 56M 3:49:18
7623 Mead, A, 44M 3:49:18
7624 Keck, F, 33M 3:49:19
7625 Amengual, M, 33M 3:49:19
7626 Gundersen, R, 42M 3:49:19
7627 Newcomb, A, 37M 3:49:20
7628 Ramos, W, 41M 3:49:20
7629 Castaneda, C, 41M 3:49:20
7630 Dunfey, E, 38F 3:49:20
7631 Colon, P, 36M 3:49:21
7632 Subirats Bayego, E, 40M 3:49:21
7633 Bauer, R, 43F 3:49:22
7634 Walker, D, 36F 3:49:22
7635 Oliva, L, 39M 3:49:22
7636 Grevedon, S, 40M 3:49:22
7637 Lehrich, D, 23M 3:49:23
7638 Jacobsen, K, 44M 3:49:23
7639 Wintczak, C, 37M 3:49:23
7640 Loi, G, 55M 3:49:23
7641 Guelat, E, 48M 3:49:23
7642 Fokker, A, 37F 3:49:23
7643 Morgenstond, F, 41M 3:49:24
7644 Lugtenburg, J, 50M 3:49:24
7645 Morgan, E, 45F 3:49:24
7646 Kamakura, Y, 45F 3:49:24
7647 Lomonico, R, 53M 3:49:24
7648 Zemori, J, 44M 3:49:25
7649 Schmitt, K, 40M 3:49:25
7650 Dishberger, M, 37M 3:49:25
7651 Asadi, E, 31M 3:49:25
7652 Thielsch, D, 51M 3:49:25
7653 Roesti, A, 43M 3:49:25
7654 Corke, W, 46M 3:49:25
7655 Silva, A, 40M 3:49:25
7656 Omloo, L, 24M 3:49:25
7657 Michaels, R, 39M 3:49:25
7658 Studier, F, 30M 3:49:25
7659 Groot, H, 30M 3:49:25
7660 Darr, D, 36M 3:49:25
7661 Elley, R, 36M 3:49:26
7662 Mucino, C, 49M 3:49:26
7663 Gerrity, E, 48M 3:49:26
7664 Fiandrino, P, 31M 3:49:26
7665 Tamm, R, 48M 3:49:27
7666 Ghosh, D, 53M 3:49:27
7667 Allen, W, 34M 3:49:27
7668 Crone, R, 43M 3:49:27
7669 Meyer, D, 42M 3:49:27
7670Conlan, J, 49M 3:49:27
7671 Ghirlando, W, 52M 3:49:28
7672 Loureiro, A, 44M 3:49:28
7673 Buchan, J, 31M 3:49:28
7674 Miller, W, 31F 3:49:28
7675 Pernot, L, 47M 3:49:29
7676 Kitajima, Y, 28F 3:49:29
7677 Bierman, J, 26M 3:49:29
7678 Fernandez Lopez, E, 50M 3:49:30
7679 Heineman, M, 41M 3:49:30
7680 Le-Mouellic, R, 42M 3:49:30
7681 Oki, T, 23F 3:49:31
7682 Gonzalez Garcia, D, 35M 3:49:31
7683 Sears, D, 37M 3:49:32
7684 Hughes, K, 31F 3:49:32
7685 Nishizato, H, 46M 3:49:32
7686 McCrossan, J, 45F 3:49:33
7687 Boyd, B, 33M 3:49:33
7688 Pijpers, R, 36M 3:49:33
7689 Mathieu, A, 44M 3:49:33
7690 Stadler, T, 34M 3:49:34
7691 Toresi, A, 31M 3:49:34
7692 Graceffo, P, 42F 3:49:34
7693 Viaud, J, 46M 3:49:35
7694 Schoenfeldt, J, 55M 3:49:35
7695 Sweeting, C, 45M 3:49:35
7696 Marsa, P, 43M 3:49:35
7697 Graceffo, A, 44M 3:49:36
7698 Kilgore, K, 26M 3:49:36
7699 Heisinger, H, 45M 3:49:36
7700 Navarro Robles Gil, A, 40M 3:49:36
7701 Lawday, G, 46M 3:49:36
7702 Pereira, P, 32M 3:49:36
7703 Conijn, J, 36M 3:49:37
7704 Bruylant, M, 38M 3:49:37
7705 Wilson, D, 30M 3:49:37
7706 Zierke, P, 40F 3:49:37
7707 Stern, E, 43F 3:49:37
7708 Smith, D, 42M 3:49:37
7709 Clerc, J, 55M 3:49:38
7710 Valerie, G, 43M 3:49:38
7711 Jimenez, J, 50M 3:49:38
7712 Santana Santana, L, 48M 3:49:39
7713 Rivera, A, 39M 3:49:39
7714 Sullivan, B, 37M 3:49:39
7715 Madena, G, 43M 3:49:39
7716 Mac Donald, R, 30M 3:49:39
7717 Planas, P, 46M 3:49:40
7718 McPhillips, E, 25F 3:49:40
7719 Savage, F, 62M 3:49:40
7720 Socol, M, 45M 3:49:40
7721 Fouillit, J, 33M 3:49:40
7722 Lieberman, C, 25F 3:49:40
7723 Castillo Gutierrez, S, 44M 3:49:41
7724 Garza Dominguez, F, 60M 3:49:41
7725 Puheloinen, E, 44M 3:49:41
7726 Cahill, R, 26M 3:49:41
7727 Bamrud, B, 39F 3:49:41
7728 Hartie, R, 34M 3:49:41
7729 Coutsos, J, 33M 3:49:41
7730 Roncoroni, A, 50M 3:49:42
7731 McIntyre, J, 44F 3:49:42
7732 Kincaid, J, 33M 3:49:42
7733 Caprio, J, 34F 3:49:42
7734 Sandi Quesada, M, 41M 3:49:42
7735Martin, M, 48M 3:49:42
7736 Estevez, C, 36M 3:49:43
7737 Bourguignon, J, 34M 3:49:43
7738 Mahon, K, 47M 3:49:43
7739 McMonigle, M, 48M 3:49:44
7740 Nickerson, T, 26M 3:49:44
7741 Welsh, J, 55M 3:49:45
7742 Van Der Nol, C, 46M 3:49:45
7743 Menzies, R, 42M 3:49:46
7744 Gayman, V, 41M 3:49:46
7745 Kassak, H, 56M 3:49:47
7746 Colas, P, 40M 3:49:48
7747 Benassuti, G, 42M 3:49:48
7748 Gallagher, A, 36F 3:49:48
7749 Troche, M, 33M 3:49:48
7750 Chapman, S, 25M 3:49:49
7751 Mann, N, 26F 3:49:49
7752 Beck, B, 48M 3:49:49
7753 Rustum, J, 29M 3:49:49
7754 Bieman Den, M, 32F 3:49:49
7755 Bauer De La Isla, C, 25F 3:49:49
7756 Wendlandt, R, 44M 3:49:51
7757 Maloney, J, 36M 3:49:51
7758 Seymor, S, 43F 3:49:52
7759 Bogutsky, P, 42M 3:49:53
7760 Stoner, R, 49M 3:49:53
7761 Tagliavia, M, 39F 3:49:53
7762 Biekram, B, 34M 3:49:54
7763 Wolleter, S, 34M3:49:54
7764 Leonardi, M, 50M 3:49:54
7765 Merrick, F, 32M 3:49:54
7766 Gonzalez Rizo, E, 26M 3:49:55
7767 Simonson, J, 43M 3:49:55
7768 Bustamante, J, 47M 3:49:55
7769 Schwandt, V, 39M 3:49:55
7770 Keough, J, 20M 3:49:55
7771 Chavarria, C, 34M 3:49:55
7772Matti, A, 36F 3:49:56
7773 Bounaix, D, 42M 3:49:56
7774 Miller, G, 53M 3:49:56
7775 Owens, J, 33M 3:49:56
7776 Stone, S, 25F 3:49:56
7777 Power, K, 35M 3:49:56
7778 Aguillon, D, 41F 3:49:56
7779 Prugh, W, 41M 3:49:57
7780 Soriano, J, 44M 3:49:57
7781 De Reus, C, 47M 3:49:57
7782 Crawford, R, 38M 3:49:57
7783 Pueschner, R, 34M 3:49:57
7784 Colom, E, 53M 3:49:57
7785 Bagwell, R, 40M 3:49:57
7786 Tocha, J, 52M 3:49:57
7787 Piers, F, 50M 3:49:58
7788 Oostema, H, 42F 3:49:58
7789 Kent, H, 42M 3:49:58
7790 Boegelsack, D, 36M 3:49:58
7791 Guglielmo, R, 31M 3:49:58
7792 Sacchi, M, 37M 3:49:58
7793 Ng, W, 37M 3:49:58
7794 DaSilva, J, 50M 3:49:58
7795 Ricco, J, 52M 3:49:58
7796 Frank, M, 29M 3:49:59
7797 Lipp, W, 55M 3:49:59
7798 Schimpp, G, 33M 3:49:59
7799 Roessler, N, 29M 3:50:00
7800 Corley, M, 31M 3:50:00
7801 Cuddy, M, 28F 3:50:00
7802 Gadouas, D, 42F 3:50:00
7803 De Wit, D, 50M 3:50:01
7804 Daguet, P, 26M 3:50:01
7805 Ruch, W, 51M 3:50:01
7806 Panei Doria, C, 27M 3:50:01
7807 Myhre, L, 37F 3:50:02
7808 Wallach, M, 45M 3:50:02
7809 Codlin, D, 50M 3:50:02
7810 Sorlie, N, 46M 3:50:02
7811 Brichacek, G, 38M 3:50:02
7812 Adams, T, 31M 3:50:03
7813 Fimmerstad, C, 50M 3:50:03
7814 Nowaczyk, M, 31M 3:50:03
7815 Thuon, F, 36M 3:50:04
7816 Perez-Castro, J, 45M 3:50:04
7817 Tilly, J, 36M 3:50:04
7818 Ohlen, L, 27M 3:50:05
7819 Gould, J, 35M 3:50:05
7820 Meuldijk, G, 33M 3:50:05
7821 Ibarzabal Guerrero, H, 33M 3:50:06
7822 Handley, J, 32M 3:50:06
7823 Villiger, B, 50M 3:50:06
7824 Alanis Ocanas, C, 56M 3:50:07
7825 Lansbergen, P, 40M 3:50:07
7826 Larkin, B, 33M 3:50:08
7827 Goll, J, 54M 3:50:08
7828 Buono, G, 46M 3:50:09
7829 Goss, S, 23M 3:50:09
7830 Marchetti, C, 25M 3:50:09
7831 Cunningham, M, 26M 3:50:10
7832 Van Der Lee, J, 49M 3:50:10
7833 Hooper, J, 24M 3:50:10
7834 Ebara, Y, 45M 3:50:10
7835 Peters, A, 24F 3:50:10
7836 Tiberi, N, 35M 3:50:10
7837 Varotto, S, 47M 3:50:11
7838 Petroni, M, 50M 3:50:11
7839 Cameron, L, 34F 3:50:12
7840 Van Der Voek, J, 43M 3:50:12
7841 Boillot, P, 25M 3:50:13
7842 Henseler, T, 30M 3:50:13
7843 Brusaporco, R, 39F 3:50:13
7844 Becker, N, 21M 3:50:13
7845 Brusaporco, D, 42M 3:50:14
7846 Bonnin, J, 29M 3:50:14
7847 Huertas, L, 29M 3:50:14
7848 Schwab, J, 36M 3:50:14
7849 Boyd, S, 49M 3:50:15
7850 Rangel, G, 41M 3:50:15
7851 Cove, C, 40M 3:50:15
7852 Engmann, A, 28M 3:50:15
7853 Perreault, D, 34M 3:50:16
7854 Cohen, D, 40M 3:50:16
7855 Benson, P, 38M 3:50:16
7856 Antressangle, P, 31M 3:50:16
7857 Genua, T, 40M 3:50:16
7858 Guerrero Zarur, K, 36F 3:50:17
7859 Ringler, M, 55M 3:50:17
7860 Zarate, L, 22M 3:50:17
7861 Lopez, F, 47M 3:50:18
7862 Falkner, G, 57M 3:50:18
7863 Bartolini, M, 37M 3:50:18
7864 Angelastro, P, 30M 3:50:18
7865 Rochereau, G, 49M 3:50:18
7866 Paydos, J, 28F 3:50:19
7867 Griffin, C, 32F 3:50:19
7868 Dileo, F, 50M 3:50:19
7869 Soto Rodriguez, J, 45M 3:50:19
7870 Griffon, M, 45F 3:50:20
7871 Kaplan, D, 49M 3:50:20
7872 Sanchez Rangel, J, 31M 3:50:20
7873 Lynch, J, 30M 3:50:20
7874 Nowachek, S, 31M 3:50:21
7875 Bingham, S, 35F 3:50:21
7876 Burke, P, 35M 3:50:21
7877 Ugelow, R, 50M 3:50:21
7878 Jergas, E, 40F3:50:21
7879 Lory, J, 32M 3:50:21
7880 Del Valle Elizondo, R, 39M3:50:22
7881 Huether, K, 49M 3:50:22
7882 Schwartz, A, 33M 3:50:22
7883 Thompson, J, 50M 3:50:22
7884 Aryiku, J, 45M 3:50:22
7885 Ribaudo, A, 26F 3:50:22
7886 Trunk, F, 48M 3:50:23
7887 Van Den Oetelaar, B, 43F 3:50:23
7888 Huber, J, 51M 3:50:23
7889 McGuinness, J, 52M 3:50:23
7890 Velasquez, R, 46M 3:50:23
7891 Cullinan, J, 18M 3:50:24
7892 Abelbeck, H, 58M 3:50:24
7893 Behling, H, 40M 3:50:24
7894 Olovsson, F, 31M 3:50:24
7895 Buckley, J, 37M 3:50:24
7896 Fiorillo, L, 51M 3:50:25
7897 Veneau, G, 42M 3:50:25
7898 Gummert, B, 37M 3:50:25
7899 Carlback, M, 53F 3:50:25
7900 Ramirez, J, 35M 3:50:26
7901 Knape, R, 48M 3:50:26
7902 Montanino, G, 43M 3:50:26
7903 Dillon, J, 61M 3:50:26
7904 Kelly, J, 40F 3:50:26
7905 Hafkemeyer, C, 28M 3:50:26
7906 Sanchez, V, 50M 3:50:27
7907 Weisser, M, 55M 3:50:27
7908 Clavel, G, 64M 3:50:27
7909 Dorn, T, 44M 3:50:27
7910 Evans, J, 52M 3:50:27
7911 Steinbach, R, 29M 3:50:27
7912 Chaniot, P, 30M 3:50:28
7913 Prado Blagg, P, 44M 3:50:28
7914 Dougherty, M, 43M 3:50:28
7915 Dr Eitel, W, 47M 3:50:29
7916 Vallet, P, 55M 3:50:29
7917 Blewett, J, 48M 3:50:30
7918 Weber, H, 39M 3:50:30
7919 Hellhammer, M, 54M 3:50:30
7920 Ragucci, C, 40M 3:50:31
7921 Eldridge III, R, 28M 3:50:31
7922 Braun, E, 44M 3:50:32
7923 Stacchiotti, S, 31M 3:50:32
7924 Gillespie, A, 28F 3:50:32
7925 Bayles, G, 36M 3:50:33
7926 Heuillon, P, 38M 3:50:33
7927 Eisenga, F, 37M 3:50:33
7928 Bohdan, W, 39M 3:50:33
7929 Keville, P, 27F 3:50:33
7930 Rummukainen, K, 32M 3:50:33
7931 Diepenbroek, R, 33M 3:50:33
7932 Samuels, L, 42F 3:50:34
7933 Kondo, W, 33M 3:50:34
7934 Markey, F, 24M 3:50:34
7935 Corum, M, 38M 3:50:34
7936 Devaud, A, 51M 3:50:34
7937 Hagel, B, 37M 3:50:34
7938 Walters, J, 32M 3:50:35
7939 Berg, D, 30M 3:50:35
7940 Cody, B, 42M 3:50:35
7941 Mennes, T, 26F 3:50:35
7942 Neri, D, 38M 3:50:35
7943 Boyle, M, 34M 3:50:36
7944 Claude, G, 42M 3:50:36
7945 Gallo, R, 43M 3:50:36
7946 Biel, T, 37M 3:50:36
7947 Solera, J, 32M 3:50:36
7948 Phillips, G, 43M 3:50:37
7949 Toro, C, 41F 3:50:37
7950 Chacon, A, 47M 3:50:38
7951 Martel, J, 39M 3:50:38
7952 Winchock, E, 35M 3:50:38
7953 Vazquez Martin, J, 42M 3:50:38
7954 Frankfort, J, 40M 3:50:39
7955 Dombrowski, G, 41M 3:50:39
7956 Hoffmann, R, 29M 3:50:39
7957 Hostettler, J, 41M 3:50:39
7958 Cools, H, 43F 3:50:40
7959 Fleischer, J, 23M 3:50:40
7960 Hegarty, M, 35M 3:50:40
7961 Pape, T, 31M 3:50:40
7962 Lissens, M, 33F 3:50:40
7963 Healy, F, 43M 3:50:40
7964 Bonchristiano, A, 27M 3:50:40
7965 Fletcher, R, 43M 3:50:41
7966 Verheyen, I, 42F 3:50:41
7967 Muehe, H, 45M 3:50:41
7968 Glauser, A, 47M 3:50:41
7969 Zobel, K, 50M 3:50:41
7970 Doria, R, 51M 3:50:42
7971 Amsallem, G, 39M 3:50:42
7972 Aguilera, A, 30F 3:50:42
7973 Duffey, P, 36M 3:50:42
7974 Padilla, M, 38M 3:50:42
7975 Marsh, J, 31M 3:50:42
7976 Perret, F, 31M 3:50:43
7977 Mangino, R, 30M 3:50:43
7978 Van Dongen, R, 44M 3:50:43
7979 Berland, J, 32M 3:50:43
7980 Graham, C, 51M 3:50:43
7981 Yeatts, J, 51M 3:50:43
7982 Scopinich, V, 32F 3:50:43
7983 Smith, S, 28M 3:50:43
7984 Bouillon, P, 35M 3:50:44
7985 Winzenried, K, 39M 3:50:44
7986 Bergholz, N, 18M 3:50:44
7987 Bonino, F, 46M 3:50:44
7988 Durgin, E, 52M 3:50:45
7989 Briatte, D, 49M 3:50:45
7990 Jordan, M, 37F 3:50:45
7991 Coelho, C, 31M 3:50:45
7992 Steele, D, 25F 3:50:46
7993 Van Der Ven, E, 29M 3:50:47
7994 Janssen, W, 43M 3:50:47
7995 Machet, D, 43M 3:50:47
7996 Buchner, J, 55M 3:50:47
7997 Herdt, R, 47M 3:50:47
7998 Velardez, A, 45M 3:50:48
7999 Abescat, Y, 51M 3:50:48
8000 Descamps, J, 31M 3:50:48
8001 Barra, F, 40M 3:50:49
8002 Bertrand, J, 32M 3:50:49
8003 Schmalbach, R, 33M 3:50:49
8004 Moniz, L, 30M 3:50:49
8005 Guarnera, L, 32F 3:50:50
8006 Kotiranta, K, 46M 3:50:50
8007 Erhard, U, 27M 3:50:50
8008 Silva, W, 59M 3:50:50
8009 Steiniger, K, 52M 3:50:50
8010 Silagy, S, 41F 3:50:50
8011 McKenna, F, 32M 3:50:50
8012 Rossner, L, 24F 3:50:51
8013 Collier, L, 46M 3:50:51
8014 Villalobos, L, 40M 3:50:51
8015 Bakers, J, 50M 3:50:51
8016 Raffle, V, 34F 3:50:51
8017 Meier Freier, S, 46F 3:50:52
8018 Socin, D, 33M 3:50:52
8019 Meier, A, 46M 3:50:52
8020 Melo, H, 27M 3:50:52
8021 Atthem, P, 31M 3:50:52
8022 Suchecki, M, 37M 3:50:52
8023 Neveu, P, 42M 3:50:52
8024 Barra, R, 49M 3:50:52
8025 Paiao, L, 33F 3:50:52
8026 Mora Villegas, A, 38M 3:50:52
8027 Hagues, M, 42M 3:50:52
8028 Tabeling, R, 45M 3:50:53
8029 Schmidt, R, 50M 3:50:53
8030 Lavoie, D, 40M 3:50:53
8031 Basso, J, 45M 3:50:54
8032 Ledas, A, 35M 3:50:54
8033 Ozaki, Y, 44M3:50:54
8034 Wilson, H, 35M 3:50:55
8035 Kraus, A, 51M 3:50:55
8036 Matheson, M, 27M 3:50:55
8037 Bronzo, R, 30M 3:50:55
8038Menchetti, M, 33M 3:50:56
8039 Patron Gonzalez, R, 39M 3:50:56
8040 Greisen, S, 32M 3:50:56
8041 Wisler, K, 26F 3:50:57
8042 Riecken, R, 34M 3:50:57
8043 Hookham, S, 30F 3:50:57
8044 Mooij, D, 35M3:50:57
8045 Cherkasky, J, 35F 3:50:57
8046 Weerelts, J, 45M 3:50:57
8047 Olsen, T, 49M 3:50:58
8048 Natal, F, 28M 3:50:59
8049 Lunt, K, 27F 3:50:59
8050 Stucchi, M, 25M 3:50:59
8051 Tern, E, 48M 3:50:59
8052 Aubrey, K, 32M 3:51:00
8053 Doran, D, 34M 3:51:00
8054 Stankaitis, T, 46M 3:51:00
8055 Mead, L, 30F 3:51:01
8056 Pines, F, 47M 3:51:01
8057 Martinez, J, 34M 3:51:01
8058 Mahle, T, 36M 3:51:02
8059 Grandi, S, 28M 3:51:02
8060 Sloane, M, 23F 3:51:02
8061 Spaventa Salvatore, C, 51M 3:51:02
8062 Fortini, B, 34M 3:51:03
8063 Anthony, E, 38F 3:51:03
8064 Cadell, A, 28M 3:51:03
8065 Rosler, S, 53M 3:51:04
8066 Guillou, P, 40M 3:51:04
8067 Strudley, T, 32M 3:51:04
8068 Levy, P, 38M 3:51:04
8069 Field, J, 39F 3:51:04
8070 Corbarieu, P, 45M 3:51:04
8071 Savastano, F, 42M 3:51:04
8072 Weiss, S, 37M 3:51:04
8073 Juliao, P, 41M 3:51:05
8074 Kletzkin, M, 47M 3:51:05
8075 Mattar, C, 37M 3:51:05
8076 Marazzo, A, 41M 3:51:06
8077 Dorsel, W, 51M 3:51:07
8078 Reyl, D, 56M 3:51:07
8079 Hernandes, E, 37M 3:51:07
8080 Peris, J, 52M 3:51:08
8081 Mizzon, A, 45M 3:51:08
8082 Gonzalez, F, 45M 3:51:08
8083 Lewis III, W, 37M 3:51:08
8084 Goldfinger, R, 48M 3:51:08
8085 Faure, G, 48M 3:51:08
8086 Moss, S, 34M 3:51:09
8087 O'Brien, D, 35M 3:51:09
8088 Lee, L, 47M 3:51:09
8089 Loughlin Jr., T, 28M 3:51:09
8090 Duivenvoorden, J, 34M 3:51:10
8091 Lieberman, J, 46M 3:51:10
8092 Cadu, C, 37M 3:51:10
8093 Benadretti, C, 41F3:51:10
8094 Abbo, P, 54M 3:51:10
8095 Abrams, L, 52M 3:51:10
8096 Colmenares, J, 32M 3:51:11
8097 Wagner, A, 54M 3:51:11
8098 Saubier, N, 30M 3:51:11
8099 Brustenghi, C, 22F 3:51:12
8100 Cotter, B, 48M 3:51:12
8101 Jacks, A, 32M 3:51:12
8102 Iacovelli, J, 31M 3:51:12
8103 Horn, R, 29M 3:51:12
8104 Nyhuus, T, 50M 3:51:12
8105 Braun, H, 31M 3:51:12
8106 Arrue, P, 47M 3:51:12
8107 Juenemann, D, 38M 3:51:13
8108 Pena, T, 51M 3:51:13
8109 Schennen, J, 49M 3:51:13
8110 Horvath, K, 29F 3:51:13
8111 Ehlenz, W, 31M 3:51:13
8112 Bauer-Rowe, E, 36M 3:51:13
8113 Davis, J, 46F 3:51:13
8114 Domaille, J, 60M 3:51:14
8115 Luehrmann, K, 46M 3:51:14
8116 Cook, S, 39F 3:51:14
8117 Wehrmann, W, 60M 3:51:14
8118 Spence, C, 38M 3:51:15
8119 Cook, K, 39M 3:51:15
8120 Jercic, V, 22M3:51:15
8121 Duba, L, 38F 3:51:15
8122 Lemoigne, J, 45M 3:51:16
8123 Guenther, L, 44F 3:51:16
8124 Saroken, L, 46F 3:51:16
8125 Rubino, A, 31M 3:51:16
8126 Granli, M, 37M 3:51:16
8127 McLaughlin, E, 47M 3:51:16
8128 Galvan Kirsch, J, 40M 3:51:17
8129 Riecker, D, 27F 3:51:17
8130 Houwer, J, 47M 3:51:17
8131 Saint-Eve, J, 31M 3:51:17
8132 Pintus, N, 32M 3:51:17
8133 Peticchia, E, 54M 3:51:18
8134 Rydstroem, B, 50M 3:51:18
8135 Cunningham*, H, 36M 3:51:18
8136 Bunting, S, 28M 3:51:19
8137 Goetzke, K, 33M 3:51:19
8138 Cortes Alvarez, A, 21M 3:51:19
8139 Kubach, K, 33M 3:51:20
8140 Hierl, R, 50M 3:51:20
8141 Mastropietro, P, 30M 3:51:20
8142 Rayhill, M, 27F 3:51:20
8143 Heitzman, T, 34M 3:51:21
8144 Froehlich, T, 28F 3:51:21
8145 Kennedy, S, 31M 3:51:21
8146 Thill, J, 30F3:51:21
8147 Garner, R, 44M 3:51:21
8148 Caine, M, 24M 3:51:22
8149 Boerger, W, 41M 3:51:22
8150 Foreman, R, 48M 3:51:22
8151Steele, R, 41F 3:51:22
8152 Struckness, C, 40M 3:51:23
8153 Stankosh, R, 31M 3:51:23
8154 Crosson, D, 29M 3:51:23
8155 Hicks, C, 37F 3:51:23
8156 Teaford, C, 31M 3:51:23
8157 Thevenard, C, 47M 3:51:23
8158 Speroni, C, 52M 3:51:23
8159 Atkins, A, 32M 3:51:23
8160 Aries, R, 40M 3:51:24
8161 Robson, J, 39M 3:51:25
8162 Moller, C, 53M 3:51:25
8163 Soskin, S, 23M 3:51:25
8164 Connolly, C, 32M 3:51:25
8165 Cox, A, 20F 3:51:26
8166 Viguier, E, 43F 3:51:26
8167 Dubruque, J, 35M 3:51:27
8168 Spera, C, 35M 3:51:27
8169 Amigues, C, 48M 3:51:27
8170 Zambrano Venado, J, 41M 3:51:27
8171 Larsen, B, 47M 3:51:27
8172 Weimer, P, 45M 3:51:27
8173 Seber, R, 36M 3:51:28
8174 Groeneveld, L, 50M 3:51:28
8175 Romagnoli, E, 24F 3:51:28
8176 Smith Jr, N, 49M 3:51:28
8177 Stober, C, 33M 3:51:28
8178 Fahey, M, 34M 3:51:28
8179 Morris, D, 49M 3:51:29
8180 Vrolyk, I, 41M 3:51:29
8181 Sanders, J, 28M 3:51:29
8182 Mathis, K, 31M 3:51:29
8183 Niedbala, R, 47M 3:51:29
8184 Wells, J, 35F 3:51:30
8185 Jonette, P, 47M 3:51:30
8186 Seethaler Jr, R, 25M 3:51:30
8187 Collaris, R, 27M 3:51:31
8188 Potocnik, M, 44M 3:51:31
8189 Kudler, E, 38F 3:51:31
8190 Witz, A, 44F 3:51:31
8191 Witz, J, 43F 3:51:31
8192 Wuensch, U, 28M 3:51:31
8193 Dugast, J, 41M 3:51:31
8194 Tabbech, K, 22M 3:51:31
8195 Ferretti, S, 33M 3:51:32
8196 Nielsen, I, 48M 3:51:32
8197 Becker, K, 39M 3:51:32
8198 Liset, P, 34M 3:51:32
8199 Cosgrove, K, 38F 3:51:33
8200 Maier, S, 36M 3:51:33
8201 Allen, C, 28M 3:51:34
8202 Brooks, M, 25M 3:51:34
8203 Schran, B, 26M 3:51:35
8204 Cannon, W, 37M 3:51:35
8205 Brewer, M, 38M 3:51:35
8206 Pratt, R, 34M 3:51:36
8207Eggens, H, 37M 3:51:36
8208 Cuddy, R, 51M 3:51:37
8209 Nunez, F, 43M 3:51:37
8210 Denesuk, M, 31M 3:51:38
8211 Beischel, J, 37M 3:51:38
8212 Koole, D, 28M 3:51:39
8213 Clavaud, F, 37M 3:51:39
8214 Hill, F, 30M 3:51:39
8215 Cooperberg, D, 26M 3:51:39
8216 Phelan, P, 35M 3:51:39
8217 Boitier, V, 28M 3:51:39
8218 Dineen, J, 27M 3:51:39
8219 Glickenhaus, S, 50M 3:51:40
8220 Kreuzer, W, 49M 3:51:40
8221 Mason, R, 32M 3:51:40
8222 Weisberg, O, 22M 3:51:41
8223 Oswald, H, 26M 3:51:41
8224 Garrelts, D, 30M 3:51:41
8225 Lacey, R, 55M 3:51:41
8226 Rubenstein, J, 28M 3:51:41
8227 Krieger, J, 25M 3:51:43
8228 Kleeman, D, 50M 3:51:43
8229 Chia, A, 50M 3:51:43
8230 Levine, L, 25M 3:51:43
8231 Tulchin, L, 37F 3:51:44
8232 Dourson-Muller, A, 44M 3:51:44
8233 Dubois, I, 32F 3:51:44
8234 Roesch, K, 55M 3:51:44
8235 Tambe, J, 18M 3:51:44
8236 Schick, B, 36M 3:51:44
8237 De Lorenzo, G, 38M 3:51:45
8238 Sokol, J, 34M 3:51:45
8239 Murphy, F, 34M 3:51:45
8240 Mueller, H, 53M 3:51:46
8241 Sen, G, 46M 3:51:46
8242 Seiden, S, 40M 3:51:46
8243 Salis, R, 42M 3:51:46
8244 Knauerhase, H, 54M 3:51:47
8245 Schuit, L, 44M 3:51:47
8246 Magaro, F, 34M 3:51:47
8247 Gillieron, C, 65M 3:51:47
8248 Kostial, F, 46M 3:51:48
8249 Piron, C, 39M 3:51:48
8250 Thornton, S, 36M 3:51:49
8251 Brunelli, M, 47M 3:51:49
8252 Fisher, C, 28M 3:51:49
8253 Wilkerson, M, 37M 3:51:49
8254 Creaney, P, 29M 3:51:49
8255 Aciar, C, 50M 3:51:49
8256 Salom, A, 44M 3:51:50
8257 Fauque, J, 43M 3:51:51
8258 Amezcua, R, 46M 3:51:51
8259 Fernandez, H, 26M 3:51:52
8260 Ornelas Hernandez, S, 58M 3:51:52
8261 Mayer, J, 41M 3:51:52
8262 Strobel, R, 36M 3:51:53
8263 Hargrove, J, 50M 3:51:53
8264 Hafen, F, 38M 3:51:54
8265 Carberry, P, 41M 3:51:54
8266 Boutet, J, 49M 3:51:54
8267 Dickinson, F, 39M 3:51:55
8268 Munoz Padilla, U, 29M 3:51:55
8269 Turrian, A, 30M 3:51:55
8270 Verhoeckx, A, 36M 3:51:55
8271 Simcoe, M, 38M 3:51:55
8272 Perez Nieto, J, 53M 3:51:55
8273 Babbit, D, 32M3:51:56
8274 Smith, B, 46M 3:51:57
8275 Poissonnier, T, 34M 3:51:57
8276 Durham, W, 45M 3:51:57
8277 Andersen, R, 33M 3:51:57
8278 Tavares Davila, J, 44M 3:51:57
8279 Lukas, R, 39M 3:51:57
8280 Nasveschuk, B, 41M 3:51:58
8281 McIntyre, J, 42M 3:51:58
8282 Vianna, M, 38F 3:51:58
8283 Frati, T, 32M 3:51:58
8284 Krumhoefener, B, 32M 3:51:59
8285 Moulis, S, 29M 3:51:59
8286 Kondera, D, 28M3:51:59
8287 Prendergast, A, 24F 3:51:59
8288 Brun, M, 33M 3:52:00
8289 Burkhardt, F, 33M 3:52:00
8290 Spera, M, 47F 3:52:00
8291 Kenneally, T, 26M 3:52:00
8292 Lanigan, M, 26M 3:52:01
8293 Lafay, R, 50M 3:52:01
8294 Giorgi, J, 50M 3:52:01
8295 Armstrong, D, 51M 3:52:01
8296 Prado, F, 40M 3:52:01
8297 Cox, D, 35M 3:52:01
8298 Matheron, R, 46M 3:52:01
8299 O'Shaughnessy, K, 39F 3:52:01
8300 Alleman, M, 39M 3:52:02
8301 Paradiso, T, 36M 3:52:03
8302 Margevicius, T, 36F 3:52:03
8303 Copeland, F, 60M 3:52:03
8304Schmitz, W, 44M 3:52:04
8305 Hansen, C, 29M 3:52:04
8306 Petrucci, M, 27M 3:52:04
8307 Hobbs, D, 50M 3:52:04
8308 Kavanagh, P, 43M3:52:04
8309 Neville, B, 32M 3:52:04
8310 Vd Voort Vd Kley, F, 42M 3:52:05
8311 Merritt, P, 55M 3:52:05
8312 Serrano, C, 36M 3:52:06
8313 Oakes, W, 47M 3:52:06
8314 Bernard, M, 57M 3:52:06
8315 Bailly, J, 43M 3:52:06
8316 Tracy, D, 40M 3:52:07
8317 Selip, S, 40M 3:52:08
8318 Proepper, E, 39M 3:52:08
8319 Becerra, C, 27F 3:52:08
8320 Kooy, P, 26M 3:52:09
8321 Ayende, F, 33M 3:52:09
8322 Marchand, P, 54F 3:52:09
8323 Morand, G, 35M 3:52:09
8324 Vons, G, 49M 3:52:09
8325 Eda, Y, 25M 3:52:10
8326 Cashman, S, 29M3:52:12
8327 Madeira, P, 31M 3:52:12
8328 Johansson, K, 37M 3:52:12
8329 Smeele, J, 61M 3:52:13
8330 Grissot, J, 27M 3:52:13
8331 Welch, G, 38M 3:52:13
8332 Crispino, N, 41M 3:52:13
8333 Rojas, P, 38M 3:52:13
8334 Fakkel, H, 42M 3:52:13
8335 Vecchie, A, 50M 3:52:13
8336 Parolisi, S, 40M 3:52:13
8337 Vazquez Laslop, J, 31M 3:52:13
8338 Renaud, P, 41M 3:52:14
8339 Caruso, J, 31M 3:52:15
8340 Trombin, B, 55M 3:52:15
8341 Van Wersch, F, 51M 3:52:15
8342 Groen, J, 42M 3:52:16
8343 McGarr, R, 28M 3:52:16
8344 Osawa, S, 27M 3:52:16
8345 Ruedlinger, W, 44M 3:52:17
8346 Newman, J, 26M 3:52:17
8347 Dittrich, H, 49M 3:52:17
8348 Stewart, D, 40M 3:52:17
8349 Schapdler, R, 57M 3:52:17
8350 Daily, G, 35M 3:52:18
8351 Good, R, 44M 3:52:18
8352 Berkowitz, L, 45F 3:52:18
8353 De Koeyer, K, 49M 3:52:19
8354 Buckley, J, 33M 3:52:19
8355 Tarde, S, 29F 3:52:19
8356 Van De Braak, K, 44M 3:52:20
8357 Grose, D, 33M 3:52:20
8358 Osborne, C, 29F 3:52:20
8359 Asselman, J, 42M 3:52:21
8360 Edgin, A, 35M 3:52:21
8361 Loonen, A, 37M 3:52:21
8362 Beghim, P, 34M 3:52:21
8363 Katz, N, 44F 3:52:21
8364 Florence-Bareille, C, 40F 3:52:22
8365 Ensing, J, 46M 3:52:22
8366 Florence-Bareille, J, 47M 3:52:22
8367 Rennen, H, 45M 3:52:22
8368 Berger, S, 36M 3:52:22
8369 Kennedy, P, 55M 3:52:22
8370 Hofbauer, C, 28M 3:52:22
8371 Meloni, G, 46M 3:52:23
8372 Milbled, F, 32M 3:52:23
8373 Lindemans, P, 37M 3:52:23
8374 Lazaridis, J, 49F 3:52:23
8375 Peelle, D, 56M 3:52:24
8376 Mateboer, W, 39F 3:52:24
8377Standing, T, 30M 3:52:25
8378 Mitchell, W, 53M 3:52:25
8379 Prusinski, J, 43M 3:52:26
8380 Kristiansen, B, 48M 3:52:26
8381 Viola, S, 30F 3:52:26
8382 Willard, R, 44M 3:52:26
8383 Crocker, E, 30F 3:52:26
8384 Mooy, M, 41M 3:52:27
8385 Kaloidis, L, 35F 3:52:27
8386 Shepherd, A, 47M 3:52:27
8387 Gyger, H, 42M 3:52:28
8388 Freeberg, J, 27F 3:52:28
8389 Montilla, A, 21F 3:52:28
8390 Schwartz, H, 27M 3:52:29
8391 Parein, P, 33M 3:52:29
8392 Erre, J, 49M 3:52:29
8393 Scozzese, A, 31M 3:52:30
8394 Tripon, T, 33M 3:52:30
8395 Capelle, H, 59M 3:52:30
8396 Leiter, S, 41M 3:52:30
8397 Willett, B, 43M 3:52:31
8398 Kennedy, C, 36M 3:52:31
8399 Laporte, M, 42M 3:52:31
8400 Padilla, G, 43M 3:52:31
8401 Dower, R, 29M3:52:31
8402 Hirata, R, 39M 3:52:32
8403 Kiesecker, P, 33M 3:52:32
8404 Farley, D, 24M 3:52:32
8405 Gormley, D, 51M 3:52:32
8406 Falkenstein, C, 33F 3:52:33
8407 Smith, G, 55M 3:52:33
8408 Young, I, 52M 3:52:33
8409 Gross, D, 38M 3:52:33
8410 Reis, P, 33M 3:52:33
8411 Gazanhe, J, 45M 3:52:34
8412 Thepaut, A, 49M 3:52:34
8413 Strait, A, 34F 3:52:34
8414 Lefler, J, 52M 3:52:34
8415Takahashi, Y, 47F 3:52:34
8416 Goodwin, A, 25M 3:52:34
8417 Gambardella, M, 47F 3:52:34
8418 Isaacson, E, 38F 3:52:35
8419 Senkpiel, R, 63M 3:52:35
8420 Neems, J, 42M 3:52:35
8421 Neems, G, 40M 3:52:36
8422 Schubert, L, 43M 3:52:36
8423 Libre, E, 21M 3:52:36
8424 Fuchs, R, 23M 3:52:37
8425 Guerini Rocco, G, 48M 3:52:37
8426 Flood, G, 25M 3:52:37
8427 Stayton, C, 27F 3:52:37
8428 Dubray, D, 42M 3:52:37
8429 Whelan, H, 27F 3:52:37
8430 Le-Mene, J, 38M3:52:37
8431 Santimauro, M, 41M 3:52:38
8432 Volpi, P, 40M 3:52:38
8433 Dauber, P, 31M 3:52:38
8434 Bruno, R, 33M 3:52:38
8435 Hartman, A, 44M 3:52:39
8436 Van Berkel, T, 36M 3:52:39
8437 Buisson, D, 41M 3:52:39
8438 Rouland, P, 41M 3:52:39
8439 Braun, R, 37M 3:52:40
8440 Lichliter, W, 42M 3:52:40
8441 Moore, T, 49M 3:52:41
8442 Weiers, P, 27F 3:52:41
8443 Faulk, F, 42M 3:52:41
8444 Bertsch, T, 24M 3:52:41
8445 Pons, P, 40M 3:52:41
8446 Beyazit, M, 34M 3:52:42
8447 Fisk, L, 28M 3:52:42
8448 Bock, H, 44M 3:52:42
8449 Villette, J, 38M 3:52:42
8450 Dompier, K, 30M 3:52:42
8451 Oppenheim, M, 28M 3:52:43
8452 Egan, C, 26M 3:52:43
8453 Norman, T, 49M 3:52:43
8454 Fulton, S, 19F 3:52:43
8455 Pohmer, W, 41M 3:52:43
8456 Samad, D, 37M 3:52:43
8457 Kawasaki, M, 42M 3:52:43
8458 Stewart, A, 36M 3:52:44
8459 Kirch, B, 35M 3:52:44
8460 Kettler Dr, H, 39M 3:52:44
8461 Graham, J, 42M 3:52:45
8462 Lissberg, H, 58M 3:52:45
8463 Franco, F, 24M 3:52:46
8464 Irizarry, J, 53M 3:52:47
8465 Lee, D, 25M 3:52:48
8466 Peterson, H, 44M 3:52:48
8467 Andersson, B, 49M 3:52:49
8468 Samuelsen, J, 36F 3:52:49
8469 Barry, A, 36M 3:52:49
8470 Goldbach, F, 31M 3:52:50
8471 Shea, T, 40M 3:52:50
8472 Malik, P, 28M 3:52:50
8473 Kreis, R, 43M 3:52:50
8474 Velazquez, W, 31M 3:52:50
8475 Kotani, C, 34M 3:52:51
8476 Siegel, R, 32M 3:52:51
8477 Jiollent, P, 37M 3:52:51
8478 Damon, W, 38M 3:52:51
8479 De Boo, F, 45M 3:52:51
8480 Braun, R, 41M 3:52:51
8481 Domay, N, 46M 3:52:51
8482 Pena, J, 44M3:52:51
8483 Jones, K, 31M 3:52:52
8484 Grimshaw, T, 40M 3:52:52
8485 Pintilie, C, 37M 3:52:52
8486 De Giorgi, L, 41M 3:52:52
8487 Baussant, R, 61M 3:52:53
8488 Aust, P, 42M 3:52:53
8489 Vilchis, J, 51M 3:52:53
8490 Nerangis, N, 27F 3:52:54
8491 Castellares, L, 36F 3:52:54
8492 Pick, D, 33M 3:52:55
8493 Serra, P, 32M 3:52:55
8494 Schoninger, E, 36F 3:52:55
8495 Nunez, A, 40M 3:52:56
8496 Anderson, L, 32M 3:52:56
8497 Robinson, W, 60M 3:52:57
8498 Stuyfersant, A, 46M 3:52:57
8499 Bigelow, R, 48M 3:52:57
8500 Kemnitz, H, 41M 3:52:58
8501 Mestres Ballus, A, 38M 3:52:58
8502 Boeckl, G, 44M 3:52:59
8503 Lynn, J, 50M 3:52:59
8504 McCormick, E, 26M 3:53:00
8505 Specht, C, 30M 3:53:00
8506 Rossler, P, 32M 3:53:01
8507 Jaumouille, M, 45M 3:53:01
8508 Zerbe, A, 47M 3:53:01
8509 Ware, T, 27M 3:53:01
8510 De Beer, M, 25M 3:53:01
8511 Padgett, S, 44F 3:53:02
8512 Callan, G, 36M 3:53:02
8513 Grosbusch, R, 40M 3:53:02
8514 Abgottspon, J, 44F 3:53:02
8515 Lagalla, G, 37M 3:53:02
8516 Le Goff, J, 41M 3:53:02
8517 McCabe, J, 30M 3:53:03
8518 Ollier, P, 37M 3:53:03
8519 Aguilar, L, 34M 3:53:03
8520 Galtier, A, 37M 3:53:03
8521 Vassia, G, 35M 3:53:04
8522 Stolk, R, 50M 3:53:04
8523 Ricordeau, C, 40M 3:53:04
8524 Kayser, S, 39F 3:53:04
8525 Kayser, M, 39M 3:53:04
8526 Marks, V, 46M 3:53:05
8527 Kieffer, D, 51M 3:53:05
8528 Grout, J, 51F 3:53:05
8529 MacAdam, J, 37M 3:53:06
8530 Pradilla, M, 37F 3:53:06
8531 Zoechling, M, 50M 3:53:06
8532 Ireland, P, 39M 3:53:07
8533 Kupferberg, D, 31M 3:53:07
8534 Robin, Y, 37M 3:53:08
8535 Miller, I, 56M 3:53:08
8536 Hawkshaw-Burn, C, 49M 3:53:08
8537 Phillips, T, 42M 3:53:08
8538 Van Boeijen, H, 43M 3:53:08
8539 Da Costa, A, 34M 3:53:09
8540 Gevers, R, 43M 3:53:09
8541 Linsches, R, 44M 3:53:09
8542 Pirotte, P, 27M 3:53:09
8543 Gebel, M, 33M 3:53:09
8544 Stoeckli, C, 43M 3:53:10
8545 Cressot, E, 32M 3:53:10
8546 Reiss, M, 43M3:53:11
8547 Schumacher, H, 43M 3:53:11
8548 Alessandrini, L, 51M3:53:11
8549 Palombo, S, 34F 3:53:11
8550 Lebois, R, 53M 3:53:11
8551 Pieper, H, 55M 3:53:11
8552 Gavaghan, L, 34M 3:53:12
8553 Massier, M, 42F 3:53:12
8554 Kopke, P, 47M 3:53:13
8555 Vertrees, R, 57M 3:53:13
8556 Gomez, C, 39M 3:53:13
8557 Jamieson, A, 26F 3:53:13
8558 Mallery, K, 36M 3:53:13
8559 Van Zeggeren, P, 38M 3:53:13
8560 Claasen, H, 46M 3:53:13
8561 Rabou, J, 27F 3:53:13
8562 Kemp-Symonds, J, 30M 3:53:14
8563 Prado, L, 33M 3:53:14
8564 Meyer, E, 56F 3:53:14
8565 Rodea Martinez, J, 26M 3:53:14
8566 Archibald, T, 33M 3:53:14
8567 Wright, R, 31M 3:53:15
8568 Chung, M, 34M 3:53:16
8569 Stroo, P, 54M 3:53:16
8570 Meijwaard, D, 26M 3:53:16
8571 Balk, M, 46F 3:53:16
8572 Debille, C, 41M 3:53:17
8573 Llano, A, 56M 3:53:17
8574 Abe, T, 28M 3:53:17
8575 Ramon, T, 34M 3:53:18
8576 Morin, P, 36M 3:53:18
8577 Deer, F, 33M 3:53:18
8578 Swynghedauw, D, 24F 3:53:18
8579 Deer, J, 33M 3:53:18
8580 Lejeune, T, 34M 3:53:19
8581 Pabon, J, 47M 3:53:19
8582 Graham Jr, J, 55M 3:53:19
8583 Le-Gueuel, R, 29M 3:53:19
8584 Lakritz, K, 23M 3:53:19
8585 Korn, H, 53M 3:53:19
8586 Lopez Perez, J, 52M 3:53:20
8587 Stella, F, 47M 3:53:21
8588 Kotiranta, H, 35F 3:53:21
8589 Ayres, E, 53M 3:53:21
8590 Hasse, E, 31M 3:53:21
8591 Bojanowski, T, 30M 3:53:21
8592 Gatzke, R, 47M 3:53:22
8593 Guimaraes, L, 39M 3:53:22
8594 Etcheverry, S, 39F 3:53:22
8595 Muehrer, U, 38M 3:53:22
8596 Mesel, D, 52M 3:53:23
8597 Govers, A, 43M3:53:23
8598 Sarlin, J, 46M 3:53:23
8599 Dixon, R, 47M 3:53:23
8600 Murata, M, 31M 3:53:23
8601 Fear, K, 25F 3:53:24
8602 Fear, D, 25M 3:53:24
8603 Combette, M, 47F 3:53:24
8604 Tyssier, J, 55M 3:53:25
8605 Zipf, D, 46M 3:53:26
8606 Sylvestre, J, 41M 3:53:26
8607 Gomez, C, 41M 3:53:27
8608 Thies, W, 52M 3:53:27
8609 Gatch, T, 55M 3:53:27
8610 Poder, K, 47M 3:53:27
8611 Widegren, J, 47M 3:53:28
8612 Estrade, J, 25M 3:53:28
8613 Lyon, B, 27F 3:53:28
8614 Durkin, D, 30M 3:53:29
8615 Murphy, T, 44M 3:53:29
8616 Wojkiewicz, J, 38M 3:53:29
8617 Plocica, R, 22M 3:53:29
8618Yolanda, M, 35F 3:53:29
8619 Cruickshanks, J, 25M 3:53:29
8620 Lovland, T, 32M 3:53:30
8621 Murphy, K, 43M 3:53:30
8622 Perron-Bailly, J, 50M 3:53:30
8623 LaBree, E, 33F 3:53:30
8624 Davis, W, 37M3:53:30
8625 Wright, E, 25F 3:53:30
8626 Andreetta, G, 48M 3:53:31
8627 Brodsky, R, 42M 3:53:31
8628 Van Klink, C, 50M 3:53:31
8629 Hoets, P, 48M 3:53:32
8630 Wcislo, J, 53M 3:53:32
8631 Jakich-Browne, J, 41M 3:53:32
8632 Jauss, R, 53M 3:53:33
8633 Brennan, R, 42M 3:53:33
8634 Buzin, R, 47M 3:53:33
8635 Beekers, T, 33M 3:53:33
8636 Jablonski, W, 40M 3:53:33
8637 Cougard, H, 36M 3:53:34
8638 Miller, D, 44M 3:53:34
8639 Moore, B, 39M 3:53:34
8640Direnzo, M, 29M 3:53:34
8641 Abrams, M, 31M 3:53:35
8642 Karlsson, L, 43M 3:53:35
8643 Sandy, K, 29F 3:53:35
8644 Zonneveld, S, 29M 3:53:36
8645 Wise, J, 37M 3:53:36
8646 Echeverria, C, 41M 3:53:36
8647 McNulty, E, 27M 3:53:36
8648 Stephan, R, 37M 3:53:36
8649 Munoz Padilla, H, 38M 3:53:36
8650 Capiraso, M, 32M 3:53:36
8651 Wee, L, 36M 3:53:37
8652 Segura, J, 35M 3:53:37
8653 Seitz Jr, C, 37M 3:53:37
8654 Soest, P, 35M 3:53:37
8655 Hadley, R, 36M 3:53:37
8656 Lucia, S, 34M 3:53:37
8657 Luna, A, 42F 3:53:37
8658 Mazzaglia, S, 55M 3:53:37
8659 LaCorte, M, 39M 3:53:38
8660 Jones, R, 35M 3:53:38
8661 Lukas, W, 53M 3:53:38
8662 Yockel, T, 25M 3:53:38
8663 Kashuk, R, 39M 3:53:39
8664 Rodriguez, F, 54M 3:53:40
8665 Manning, J, 34M 3:53:40
8666 RUNNER NO. X3764, 35M 3:53:40
8667 Torres, J, 35M 3:53:40
8668 Molyneux, G, 32M 3:53:40
8669 Kemp, P, 45M 3:53:41
8670 Dooley, M, 32F 3:53:41
8671 Bradley, J, 39M 3:53:41
8672 Wissmann, E, 51M 3:53:42
8673 Schiltz, R, 22M 3:53:42
8674 Scarselli, D, 28M 3:53:43
8675 Sandmoe, B, 39M 3:53:43
8676 De Grook, L, 59F 3:53:43
8677 Vazquez, C, 34M 3:53:43
8678 De Silva Lopez, L, 41M 3:53:43
8679 Pabst, R, 53M 3:53:44
8680 Fernandez, F, 42M 3:53:44
8681 Sato, T, 48M 3:53:45
8682 Brook, D, 35M 3:53:45
8683 Sawamoto, A, 55M 3:53:45
8684 Pouteau, P, 37M 3:53:45
8685 Betar, H, 48M 3:53:46
8686 Paulen, J, 34M 3:53:46
8687 Bevan, D, 32F 3:53:47
8688 Mitchell, T, 41M 3:53:47
8689 Schmid, K, 33F 3:53:47
8690 Lloyd, L, 27F 3:53:48
8691 Cordero, R, 52M 3:53:48
8692 Brenner, R, 44M 3:53:48
8693 Vancini, F, 43M3:53:48
8694 Holmes, K, 45M 3:53:48
8695 Sheehan, K, 51F 3:53:49
8696 Flores, D, 36M 3:53:49
8697 Paolini, F, 39M 3:53:50
8698 Vanpenne, B, 55M 3:53:50
8699 Mulderrig, G, 29F 3:53:50
8700 Miro Gili, M, 46M 3:53:51
8701 Moureaux, P, 40M 3:53:52
8702 Kolderup, J, 38M 3:53:52
8703 Franken, A, 33M 3:53:53
8704 Lichtenberger, J, 24M 3:53:53
8705 Solow, H, 51M 3:53:54
8706 Yarling, T, 29M 3:53:54
8707 Jimenez, M, 33M 3:53:54
8708 Santella, J, 39M 3:53:55
8709 Burmeister, L, 42F 3:53:55
8710 Keilty, J, 41M 3:53:55
8711 Colon, S, 36M 3:53:55
8712 Girstl, H, 28F 3:53:55
8713 Meneguzzi, P, 30M 3:53:55
8714 Rosenberg, A, 43M 3:53:56
8715 Molotsky, G, 39M 3:53:56
8716 McHugh, T, 34M 3:53:57
8717 Zegas, S, 36M 3:53:57
8718 Shub, D, 45M 3:53:57
8719 Iacoviello, V, 29M 3:53:57
8720 Bavcevic, V, 24M 3:53:57
8721 Whittet, R, 36M 3:53:58
8722 Barkan, R, 29M 3:53:58
8723 Minsaas, S, 42M 3:53:58
8724 Sato, Y, 44M 3:53:58
8725 Reilly, T, 39M 3:53:58
8726 Amundsen, T, 47M 3:53:59
8727 Jaeger, J, 29M 3:53:59
8728 Sandal, K, 35M 3:53:59
8729 Fahey, J, 45M 3:53:59
8730 Coogan, J, 31M 3:53:59
8731 Pier, J, 39M 3:54:00
8732 Shullich, M, 35M 3:54:00
8733 Stankaitis, C, 28M 3:54:00
8734 Dorian, S, 29M 3:54:01
8735 McCaine, D, 30M 3:54:01
8736 Valentin, F, 58M 3:54:01
8737 Dedeurwarder, T, 26M 3:54:01
8738 McCain, L, 30F 3:54:01
8739 Laaber, L, 40M 3:54:01
8740 Keys, M, 33M 3:54:02
8741 Xerri, A, 43M 3:54:02
8742 Gibon, R, 36M 3:54:02
8743 Johnson, C, 43M 3:54:03
8744 Komine, T, 31M 3:54:03
8745 Nicholas, S, 34M 3:54:03
8746 Weitzel, A, 40M 3:54:03
8747 Rechholtz, J, 31F 3:54:03
8748 McManus, D, 24M 3:54:04
8749 Metzger, W, 43M 3:54:04
8750 McCrohan, S, 37M 3:54:04
8751 Van Den Bos, F, 42M 3:54:04
8752 Conradi, D, 46M 3:54:05
8753 Dominici, P, 39M 3:54:05
8754 Perkins, S, 42M 3:54:05
8755 Wall Jr, J, 43M3:54:05
8756 Schmitz, G, 40M 3:54:06
8757 Lauchnor, R, 35M 3:54:06
8758 Clarke, R, 49M 3:54:07
8759 Cruickshank, S, 49M 3:54:07
8760 Aust, J, 54F 3:54:07
8761 Miyazaki, M, 38M 3:54:08
8762 Minato, Y, 36M 3:54:08
8763 Arbolino, J, 43M 3:54:09
8764 Rojas, M, 35F 3:54:09
8765 Valero, N, 36F 3:54:09
8766 Legaspi, V, 37M 3:54:09
8767 Weiner, M, 29M 3:54:09
8768 Vnoucek, G, 55M 3:54:09
8769 Martinez De Escobar, R, 44M 3:54:10
8770 Jeppesen, P, 41M 3:54:10
8771 Boskase, H, 32M 3:54:10
8772 Alcock, F, 25M 3:54:10
8773 Somoza, S, 27M 3:54:11
8774 Becker, R, 48M 3:54:11
8775 Delmas, J, 36M 3:54:12
8776 Keegan, M, 27M 3:54:12
8777 Luongo, R, 42M 3:54:12
8778 MacNeill, M, 28F 3:54:12
8779 Diaz Martinez, C, 44M 3:54:12
8780 Chardenal, C, 39M 3:54:12
8781 Chardenal, C, 36F 3:54:13
8782 Panetto, A, 43F 3:54:13
8783 Berger, R, 41M 3:54:14
8784 Schneider-Bollig, U, 36M 3:54:14
8785 Peterson, G, 75M 3:54:15
8786 Gatto, J, 48M 3:54:15
8787 O'Donoghue, D, 41M 3:54:15
8788 Dieperink, P, 34M 3:54:16
8789 Goldberg, B, 33M 3:54:16
8790 Hegland, S, 48M 3:54:16
8791 Kristensen, B, 26M 3:54:16
8792 Raschke, H, 55M 3:54:16
8793 Ingebrigtsen, L, 26M 3:54:16
8794 Taylor, B, 29F3:54:16
8795 Dettling, E, 30M 3:54:16
8796 Roomer, M, 41M 3:54:16
8797 Cooper, R, 39F 3:54:17
8798 Haslett, F, 49M 3:54:17
8799 Meiller, J, 45M 3:54:17
8800 Christensen, G, 31M 3:54:17
8801 Gomez Urquiza, I, 45M 3:54:17
8802 Pillot, J, 40M 3:54:17
8803 Willems, E, 31M 3:54:18
8804 Lazaruk, K, 43M 3:54:18
8805 Mayer, J, 30F 3:54:18
8806 Bisceglie, C, 30M 3:54:18
8807 Scalamandre, D, 28F3:54:18
8808 Kane, S, 32M 3:54:18
8809 Rothbarth, B, 52F 3:54:19
8810 Koerner, W, 57M 3:54:19
8811 Poot, D, 54M 3:54:19
8812 Gould, J, 31M 3:54:19
8813 Bryer, M, 27M 3:54:19
8814 Anderson, R, 31M 3:54:20
8815 Bonhomme, G, 57M 3:54:20
8816 Rosenbaum, A, 53M3:54:20
8817 Murray, J, 31M 3:54:20
8818 Jaehtzen, H, 44M 3:54:21
8819 Oltmans, F, 31M 3:54:21
8820 Carlsson, T, 32M 3:54:21
8821 Leonard, D, 45M 3:54:21
8822 Thevenet, C, 20M 3:54:22
8823 Figueroa, M, 50F 3:54:22
8824 McGinnis, R, 45M 3:54:22
8825 Wehner, H, 30M 3:54:22
8826 Smith, M, 30M 3:54:23
8827 Maysounave, J, 45M3:54:23
8828 Missbrenner, R, 29M 3:54:23
8829 Brauneisen, J, 51M 3:54:24
8830 Braun, W, 37M 3:54:24
8831 Erichsen, N, 29M 3:54:25
8832 Casserly, C, 41M 3:54:25
8833 Schuettler, H, 59M 3:54:25
8834 Donnelly, J, 25M 3:54:25
8835 Rodrigues, K, 33F 3:54:26
8836Truglia, G, 39M 3:54:26
8837 Levy, A, 29F 3:54:26
8838 Gula, K, 24F 3:54:26
8839 Schuham, M, 26F 3:54:27
8840 Borg, A, 27F 3:54:27
8841 Cummiskey, K, 37M 3:54:27
8842 Hubert, B, 59M 3:54:27
8843 Suoza Rios, F, 52M 3:54:27
8844 Buffaloe, B, 45M 3:54:28
8845Dunlap, N, 24M 3:54:28
8846 Lee, R, 32M 3:54:28
8847 Coulon, A, 47M 3:54:28
8848 Jeffrey, M, 34M 3:54:28
8849 Eng, I, 42M 3:54:28
8850 Vaccaro, E, 30F 3:54:28
8851 Watson, T, 55M 3:54:29
8852 Bernstein, K, 35M 3:54:29
8853 Suarez Otero, H, 30M 3:54:30
8854McKenna, M, 29M 3:54:30
8855 Malek, N, 22M 3:54:30
8856 Stuckert, G, 51M 3:54:31
8857 Drew, C, 28F 3:54:31
8858 Marsal, F, 43M 3:54:32
8859 Stern, V, 30F 3:54:32
8860 Verbaan, J, 44M 3:54:32
8861 Vierk, L, 50M 3:54:32
8862 Henzler, O, 20M 3:54:32
8863 Skinner, S, 44F 3:54:33
8864 Huels, F, 53M 3:54:33
8865 Fors, C, 24M 3:54:33
8866 Henzler, H, 53M 3:54:33
8867 Jenschke, D, 33M 3:54:33
8868 Van Lith, D, 57M 3:54:33
8869 Schneidau, P, 43M 3:54:34
8870 Parizotto, M, 29M 3:54:34
8871 Dastillung, M, 41F 3:54:34
8872 Perez, J, 28M 3:54:34
8873 Maxwell, D, 28M 3:54:34
8874 Bailey, P, 35F 3:54:34
8875 Durbin, P, 29M 3:54:34
8876 Driguez, P, 52M3:54:34
8877 Monteverde, P, 33M 3:54:35
8878 Allario, J, 30M 3:54:35
8879 Leslie, J, 35M 3:54:35
8880 Van Heerden, W, 50M 3:54:35
8881 Bjorklin, I, 42F 3:54:35
8882 Kaempf, R, 39M 3:54:35
8883 Shevrin, M, 28M 3:54:35
8884 Anceau, J, 23M 3:54:36
8885 Colon, A, 40F 3:54:36
8886 Scacciafero, N, 39M 3:54:36
8887 Daniel, C, 41M 3:54:36
8888 Mocarski, S, 34M 3:54:36
8889 Azuma, A, 36M 3:54:36
8890 Geyer, T, 46M 3:54:36
8891 Smith, P, 35F 3:54:37
8892Sanchez Beltran, A, 35M 3:54:37
8893 Decker-Kern, U, 52F 3:54:37
8894 Mejia, R, 60M 3:54:37
8895 Van De Graaf, D, 40M 3:54:37
8896 Foerster, W, 65M 3:54:37
8897 Thomas, F, 43M 3:54:37
8898 Giusta, D, 46M 3:54:37
8899 Gregori, C, 49M 3:54:38
8900 Pantelidis, J, 41M 3:54:38
8901 Minardi, J, 36M 3:54:38
8902 Antonio Gallardo, B, 32F 3:54:38
8903 Paglietta, P, 39M 3:54:38
8904 Dalton, S, 44M 3:54:38
8905 Jesensky, K, 37M 3:54:39
8906 Fetscher, P, 48M 3:54:39
8907 Viverito, J, 61M 3:54:39
8908 Pikarski, J, 39M 3:54:39
8909 Guary, Y, 35M 3:54:39
8910 Leerink, H, 40M 3:54:39
8911 Claure, A, 40F 3:54:40
8912 Bodovitz, J, 36M 3:54:40
8913 Brand, U, 25M3:54:40
8914 De Reuver, R, 31M 3:54:40
8915 Brummer, R, 43M 3:54:40
8916 Benitez, G, 38M 3:54:41
8917 Hill, S, 48M 3:54:41
8918 Justice, S, 39M 3:54:41
8919 Deogratias, G, 32M 3:54:42
8920 Brent, L, 42F 3:54:42
8921 Kaser, H, 60M 3:54:42
8922 Sodl, M, 28M 3:54:43
8923 Molderings, H, 51M 3:54:43
8924 Wasson, T, 38M 3:54:43
8925 Reeves, W, 33M 3:54:43
8926 Difusco Jr, P, 45M 3:54:44
8927 Schuster, R, 35M 3:54:44
8928 Herd Dr, C, 45M 3:54:44
8929 Haubrich, G, 51M 3:54:44
8930 Markussen, H, 55M 3:54:45
8931 Haag, U, 63M 3:54:45
8932 Michel, M, 45F 3:54:45
8933 Hand, R, 46M 3:54:45
8934 Adourian, L, 28M 3:54:45
8935 Dunn, J, 51M 3:54:45
8936 Nagi, D, 45M 3:54:46
8937 Marshall, K, 29M 3:54:46
8938 Gunderskov, P, 28M 3:54:46
8939 Haas, D, 38M 3:54:46
8940 Bondeby, H, 39M 3:54:47
8941 Keszi, J, 37M 3:54:47
8942 Rubin, G, 36M 3:54:47
8943 Bowman, B, 48M 3:54:47
8944 Rex, C, 28M 3:54:48
8945 Wilson, C, 36M 3:54:48
8946 Tvedt, A, 55M 3:54:48
8947 Georgiana, F, 32M 3:54:48
8948 Lynch, J, 40M 3:54:48
8949 Thersiquel, B, 33M 3:54:49
8950 Matsuzaki, T, 36M 3:54:49
8951 Humbertclaude, C, 43M 3:54:49
8952 Caceres, J, 56M 3:54:49
8953 Wolter, G, 44M 3:54:50
8954 Laurendeau, A, 31M 3:54:50
8955 Zarate Alcalde, J, 39M 3:54:50
8956 Roche-Bayard, F, 34M 3:54:51
8957 Lanum, W, 28M 3:54:51
8958 Schoonmaker, C, 40M 3:54:51
8959 Roberts, J, 23M 3:54:51
8960 West, S, 25M 3:54:51
8961 Contreras Nava, D, 38M 3:54:51
8962 Kraft, U, 32M 3:54:51
8963 Mueller-Zeh, K, 46M 3:54:52
8964 Ebeling, S, 31M 3:54:52
8965 Westenberg, F, 41M 3:54:52
8966 Brunvand, B, 30M 3:54:52
8967 Garcia, C, 29M 3:54:52
8968 Boyer, L, 31M 3:54:52
8969 Herman, J, 42M 3:54:52
8970 Tartois, D, 37M 3:54:52
8971 Van Essen, F, 45M 3:54:53
8972 Egger, P, 35M 3:54:53
8973 Romancnick, L, 30F 3:54:53
8974 Ziegler, W, 50M 3:54:54
8975 Sugrue, J, 38M 3:54:54
8976 Nissensohn, L, 37M 3:54:54
8977 Schrage, P, 29M 3:54:55
8978 Kokscht, T, 36M 3:54:55
8979 Andrianne, J, 46F 3:54:55
8980 Miyasaka, K, 33M 3:54:55
8981 Delea, F, 53M 3:54:55
8982 Fourquet, J, 41M 3:54:55
8983 Chadam, J, 27M 3:54:56
8984 Celerino, J, 43M 3:54:56
8985 Rost, W, 41M 3:54:56
8986 Pinsker, R, 49M 3:54:56
8987 Bomme, K, 54M 3:54:57
8988 Zeller, J, 40M 3:54:57
8989 Grune, A, 35M 3:54:57
8990 Granger, M, 31M 3:54:57
8991 Ricaud, J, 39M 3:54:57
8992 Dourass, S, 42M 3:54:57
8993 Zavoli, P, 47M 3:54:57
8994 Shapiro, J, 41M 3:54:58
8995 Wildenhaus, H, 49M 3:54:58
8996 Beunot, M, 47F 3:54:58
8997 Remon, D, 60M 3:54:58
8998 Vernimmen, J, 26M 3:54:58
8999 Host-Hansen, T, 37M 3:54:58
9000 Wallis, G, 38M 3:54:58


The 4 Possible Governors On a Final Weekend Tour
John G. Rowland toured western Connecticut with busloads of supporters today, rallying Republicans in the part of the state that nearly elected him Governor in 1990.
The final poll before the election showed him holding on to a statistically insignificant lead in the four-way governor's race.
Comptroller William E. Curry Jr., the Democrat, who has generally held second place in the polls, spoke at churches and rallies in the New Haven area, while Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark of A Connecticut Party, third in polls but gaining, spent the day contesting Mr.
Rowland in Fairfield County.


McDonald Savors A Long Journey
"Jim," shouted a friend, "Virginia has finished!"
Jim McDonald of Marlboro, N.J., raced over to embrace his 44-year-old wife at the finish line of the New York City Marathon yesterday.
"Where were you?" he wondered.


Valassis Communications Inc.(VCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Top 20 Men


Vesta Insurance Group Inc.(VTA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'SEI,' 15, Is First to Be Arrested By New Police Anti-Graffiti Unit
A new citywide police squad to combat graffiti vandalism made its first arrest Saturday night, picking up a 15-year-old who is a suspect in 10 incidents of vandalism in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
The 25-member unit went into operation on Oct. 30 as part of a larger police strategy to crack down on the "quality of life" crimes, like prostitution, aggressive panhandling, loud radio playing and public beer drinking, that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has called "visible signs of a city out of control." In the past, the police in individual precincts worked with citizens' groups to attack graffiti vandalism.


Elek-Tek reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Something to Lose Those Baseball and Hockey Blues
Could there actually be a professional sport besides football to watch and to read about?
Finally, there is.
The papers were filled with pro basketball box scores over the weekend, long-awaited numbers that will remain a constant until June, lessening the sting of the long-lost baseball season and the vanishing hockey season.


Making Old Cadet Attitudes Die -- or Just Fade Away
Erin Burns spends most of her time here pulling her weight in a male world: clambering up 15-foot ropes, forcing her body through two minutes of pushups, making her voice deep to command a platoon of men during grueling weeklong bivouacs in muddy woods.
But she has also learned her strengths as a woman, learned that many of her male colleagues value her not just because she can compete in their world but because they have trouble competing in hers.


Beard (No Forest Ranger) Is Forever Putting Out Fires
The job listing said coach.
Butch Beard must be wondering why the Nets did not advertise the position as forest ranger.
Brush fires continue to crop up after only two losses.
Arson is suspected.
An inside job, clearly.


3 Arrested in Pastor's Death In Queens Church Robbery
In the end, the Rev.
Jong Kyu Kim probably was shot and killed because he did not have enough money to give his robbers, who thought that his humble church in Queens was a prosperous car service, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
And he most likely was alive when the three men set him on fire to cover their crime, a detective said.
These details about the last moments of Mr.
Kim, a 41-year-old Presbyterian minister, emerged yesterday during a news conference at which officials announced the arrest of three suspects, one of whom was 15 when the pastor was murdered on Aug. 27.


Home Beneficial Corp.(HBENB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp.(RLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Cites Intimidation by Singapore Over Article He Wrote
An American economist who left Singapore last month said today that he would not return here because he was fearful of being imprisoned over a newspaper opinion article published in Singapore in which he criticized "intolerant regimes" in Asia.
The State Department has protested the treatment of the economist, Christopher Lingle, who was interrogated by the Singapore police twice last month as a result the article, which appeared in The International Herald Tribune on Oct. 7.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about an appearance by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and three former New York City Mayors misidentified the man with them in some copies.
He was Mayor Jerry Jennings of Albany, not Rabbi Joseph Potasnic.


2 Art Forms Lovingly Intertwine
Music and dance don't really need each other.
Music is a self-sufficient art.
And choreographers have created fine works to speech, noises or silence.
Usually, however, music has been their favorite accompaniment.
So, too, composers have frequently been inspired by dance rhythms.
The interplay between music and dance was emphasized in "Recital With Dance," the program of compositions by Stravinsky and Ravel presented on Saturday night at the 92d Street Y by the violinist Young Uck Kim and Steffan Scheja, a pianist, who were joined in their final selection by two stars of the New York City Ballet, Darci Kistler and Nikolaj Hubbe.


Officials Say U.S. to Cut Forces in Haiti and Kuwait
In a decision that carries political as well as military significance, President Clinton has decided to withdraw thousands of troops from Haiti and the Persian Gulf, Administration officials said today.
They said the President would withdraw 6,000 Americans from Haiti by Dec. 1, leaving 9,000 troops to help bolster security there.
The President would also pull out virtually all 7,800 American ground troops in Kuwait by late December, the officials said.
They were deployed in October after the Iraq's elite Republican Guards moved toward Kuwait and appeared ready to threaten the country.


Matlack Systems Inc.(MLK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China's Power Needs Exceed Investor Tolerance
As China's supply of electrical power falls more and more behind its surging demand, the nation's Communist Party leadership is paralyzed by an ideological struggle over how much profit foreign investors should be allowed to make from the power industry.
With economic growth of nearly 12 percent predicted this year, China is failing to meet its goals for adding power generation.
Blackouts are plaguing the largest industrial centers like Shanghai, and shortages are cutting deeply into productivity nationwide.


CHRONICLE
ROSA PARKS , the 81-year-old matriarch of the civil-rights movement, who is being honored a peace festival in Stockholm, will soon have a prize in her name, The Associated Press reported.
The organizers of One Day of Peace, a Swedish-American festival, told Mrs.
Parks on Friday they were creating the Rosa Parks Peace Prize and would ask her to help in choosing its first winner next year, the 40th anniversary of her historic refusal to give up her seat to a white man on a bus in Montgomery, Ala.
The prize will be endowed by donations from Swedish corporations and citizens.


Movement Enhances 'Our Town's' Poignancy
It takes a brave man to buck a trend.
But Philip Jerry's "Our Town," performed by the American Repertory Ballet here tonight at the State Theater, is not just an unfashionable narrative dance.
The piece is also based on a play that develops slowly and is full of nuances of a sort not easily expressed in ballet.
Mr.
Jerry's dance, dedicated to his mother, is filled with the spirit of the Thornton Wilder classic, but it also succeeds in dramatic and pure dance terms.
Mr.
Jerry's retelling of the story is fairly simple.
He introduces these small-town characters promptly in a seamless flow of small encounters and events.
He establishes young Emily Webb's relationship with her parents immediately, at the same time creating a sense of her tumultuous embrace of life.
Her growing love for handsome young George Gibbs is also clearly charted, as is his initially bashful love for her.
Emily's death and return are handled with an almost painful simplicity as well as a good deal of ingenious staging.


Reagan's Illness Afflicts Millions, in Varying Ways
In disclosing on Saturday that he had developed Alzheimer's disease, former President Ronald Reagan said he wanted to make more people aware of the incurable illness, which is characterized by progressive mental and physical deterioration and which afflicts some four million Americans.
Many doctors are now applauding Mr.
Reagan's announcement, saying they expect it to lead to greater public awareness of Alzheimer's, just as Mr.
Reagan's surgery for colon cancer in 1985 heightened awareness of that disease.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 7 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
18001 Neisser, K, 29F 4:30:36
18002 Forman, S, 47F 4:30:36
18003 Perazzi, E, 34F 4:30:36
18004 Jud, R, 43M 4:30:36
18005 Peals, M, 28F 4:30:36
18006 Vavaseur, E, 34M 4:30:36
18007 Beal, D, 37F 4:30:37
18008 Linder, H, 46M 4:30:37
18009 Wolf, S, 48F 4:30:37
18010 Wile, E, 27M 4:30:37
18011 Schwartz, L, 39M 4:30:37
18012 Andersson, G, 47M 4:30:37
18013 Kennedy, B, 25M 4:30:37
18014 Purcell, E, 25F4:30:37
18015 White, R, 47F 4:30:38
18016 Netten, E, 38M 4:30:38
18017 Mattie, L, 43F 4:30:38
18018 Van Iperen, C, 34F 4:30:38
18019 Amanuma, A, 50M 4:30:38
18020 Weinstein, L, 30F 4:30:39
18021 Clark, E, 24F 4:30:39
18022 Reyners, C, 27M 4:30:39
18023 Verhaeghe, C, 30F 4:30:40
18024 Cerneck, F, 26F 4:30:40
18025 Raaum, P, 30M 4:30:40
18026 Becker, R, 47M 4:30:40
18027 Craig, S, 36F 4:30:41
18028 Malas, K, 28M 4:30:41
18029 Crane, S, 35M 4:30:41
18030 Kontturi, A, 66M 4:30:41
18031 Davis, P, 36F 4:30:41
18032Petrella, M, 50M 4:30:41
18033 Van Den Berg, S, 35F 4:30:42
18034Davenport, R, 43M 4:30:42
18035 Taubenheim, E, 25M 4:30:43
18036 Davis, R, 38M 4:30:43
18037 Zini Jr, L, 25M 4:30:43
18038 Silva, C, 49M 4:30:43
18039 Samit, E, 45M 4:30:44
18040 Weitman, W, 37F 4:30:44
18041 Coke III, R, 49M 4:30:44
18042 Morse, K, 28F 4:30:44
18043 Labate, P, 42M 4:30:45
18044 Hekelaar, H, 43M 4:30:45
18045 Alpert, T, 50M 4:30:46
18046 Pantoni, F, 48M 4:30:46
18047 Dente, J, 45M 4:30:46
18048 Propoggia, M, 48F 4:30:46
18049 Hernandez, W, 46M 4:30:46
18050 Utsumi, H, 45M 4:30:46
18051 Oelrich, S, 49M 4:30:47
18052 Martin, T, 33M 4:30:47
18053 Haro, L, 45M 4:30:47
18054 McCarthy, J, 50M 4:30:48
18055 Bittner, K, 35F 4:30:48
18056 Demian, P, 46M 4:30:48
18057 Waltman, P, 31M 4:30:48
18058 Beyer, M, 19M 4:30:49
18059 Nguyen, T, 61M 4:30:49
18060 Gearty, J, 33F 4:30:49
18061 Broska, K, 44M 4:30:49
18062 Wilkison, D, 52M 4:30:49
18063 Gommlich, C, 36M 4:30:49
18064 Fowler, J, 38M 4:30:50
18065 Stuyts, R, 42M 4:30:50
18066 Hagmann, F, 54M 4:30:50
18067 Scribner, D, 42F 4:30:50
18068 Bonneau, J, 41M 4:30:51
18069 Rosales, M, 41M 4:30:51
18070 Stenson, J, 26M 4:30:52
18071 Mesman, J, 43M 4:30:52
18072 Mercier, J, 30F 4:30:53
18073 Johnson, C, 50M 4:30:53
18074 Bergman, J, 24M 4:30:54
18075 Lionetti, B, 37M 4:30:54
18076 Randolph, A, 24F 4:30:54
18077 De Jong, P, 39M 4:30:54
18078 Weiler, R, 34M 4:30:54
18079 Frederic, J, 36F 4:30:55
18080 Folkesson, B, 49M 4:30:55
18081 Allen, S, 31F 4:30:55
18082 Van Den Dam, W, 37M 4:30:56
18083 Powell, L, 43M 4:30:56
18084 Cook, D, 28M 4:30:56
18085 Lecoq, B, 38M 4:30:56
18086 Van Den Dam, T, 34M 4:30:56
18087 Loeffler, P, 52M 4:30:56
18088 Puons, S, 49F 4:30:56
18089 Liu, E, 35F 4:30:56
18090 Aihara, N, 25M 4:30:57
18091 Cintron, J, 26M 4:30:57
18092 Vargas, V, 45M 4:30:57
18093 Svensk, L, 50M 4:30:57
18094 Kline, K, 37M 4:30:57
18095Krug, A, 62M 4:30:57
18096 Nylund, T, 30F 4:30:57
18097 Leijon, B, 31M 4:30:58
18098 Phillips, K, 27F 4:30:58
18099 Brady, D, 36F 4:30:58
18100 Preuss, D, 41M 4:30:58
18101 O'Callaghan, K, 39F 4:30:58
18102 Kissinger, J, 52M 4:30:59
18103 De Pijper, J, 43M 4:30:59
18104 Eichmann, M, 50F 4:30:59
18105 Kringstein, B, 33M 4:30:59
18106 Juergens, A, 33M 4:30:59
18107 Downs, J, 30F 4:31:00
18108 Prikkel, A, 41M 4:31:00
18109 Allen, L, 54M 4:31:00
18110 Vaulamo, K, 52F 4:31:00
18111 Tutler, D, 45M 4:31:00
18112 Van Den Berge, W, 38M 4:31:00
18113 Summergrad, D, 41M 4:31:00
18114 Carne, E, 35M 4:31:01
18115 Johnson, G, 46M 4:31:01
18116 Calderon, M, 30M 4:31:01
18117 Berg, E, 42M 4:31:01
18118 Gerstner, R, 46M 4:31:01
18119 Maubert, C, 35M 4:31:02
18120 Fallon, W, 46M 4:31:02
18121 Buck, E, 45M 4:31:02
18122 Taramona, D, 44M 4:31:02
18123Austin, B, 36F 4:31:02
18124 Brickweg, R, 46M 4:31:03
18125 Blessing, M, 47M 4:31:03
18126 Emmerth, S, 54M 4:31:03
18127 Bassanini, E, 50M 4:31:04
18128 Baer, A, 48M 4:31:04
18129 Bass, M, 59M 4:31:04
18130 Slick, S, 48F 4:31:05
18131 Evers, B, 50M 4:31:05
18132 Doerbaum, R, 46M 4:31:05
18133 Vescovi, G, 27F 4:31:05
18134 Garioni, A, 39M 4:31:05
18135 Flaquert, J, 31M 4:31:06
18136 Boyd, M, 28M 4:31:06
18137 Villenet, P, 29M 4:31:06
18138 McEvoy, K, 33F 4:31:06
18139 McGrath, J, 40M 4:31:07
18140 Vomacka, J, 47M 4:31:07
18141 Cohen, J, 49M 4:31:08
18142 Hoarau, M, 48F 4:31:08
18143 Cosnard, T, 32M 4:31:08
18144 Pigeau, V, 47F 4:31:08
18145 Larsen, E, 42M 4:31:08
18146 Roe, C, 28F 4:31:08
18147 Gaude, B, 34F 4:31:08
18148 Boynowsky, H, 25F 4:31:09
18149 Yund, L, 28F 4:31:09
18150 Canivet, M, 42F 4:31:09
18151 Beenen, J, 51M 4:31:10
18152 Smith, T, 30M 4:31:10
18153 Deide, D, 52M 4:31:10
18154 Helmke, J, 29M 4:31:10
18155 Leibowitz, D, 26M 4:31:10
18156 Chanel, D, 32F 4:31:10
18157 Oh, H, 48M 4:31:11
18158 McCarren, L, 47F 4:31:11
18159 Allison, S, 30M 4:31:11
18160 Paulus, L, 31F 4:31:12
18161 Cameron, M, 33M 4:31:12
18162 Millar, M, 33M 4:31:12
18163 Radoll, H, 50M 4:31:12
18164 Estrella, F, 57M 4:31:13
18165 Millar, D, 31M 4:31:13
18166 Skir, T, 52M 4:31:13
18167 Yamamoto, E, 26F 4:31:13
18168 McAteer, N, 34M 4:31:13
18169 Nacinovich, T, 54M 4:31:13
18170 Heckters, H, 46M 4:31:14
18171 Macpherson, D, 26M 4:31:14
18172 Strange, E, 29M 4:31:14
18173 Verlaan, C, 45M4:31:15
18174 Miroulis, T, 28M 4:31:15
18175 Catalano, J, 31M 4:31:15
18176 Odeen, A, 33F 4:31:15
18177 Olsson, K, 27F 4:31:16
18178 Jirik, S, 31F 4:31:17
18179 Viale, E, 41M 4:31:18
18180 Soroka, L, 46M 4:31:18
18181 Nakashian, M, 46F 4:31:18
18182 Piantanida, V, 56M 4:31:19
18183 Faro, L, 37F 4:31:20
18184 Montgomery, S, 25F 4:31:20
18185 Cook, W, 47M 4:31:20
18186 Telfer, I, 48M 4:31:20
18187 Schwartz, B, 48M 4:31:21
18188 Marra, J, 28M 4:31:21
18189 Holmes, R, 30M 4:31:21
18190 Flood, N, 41F 4:31:21
18191Cordel, M, 47F 4:31:21
18192 Carmo, R, 33M 4:31:22
18193 Larsson, S, 45M 4:31:22
18194 O'Connor, W, 51M 4:31:22
18195 Colom, S, 47M 4:31:22
18196 Einhorn, R, 58M 4:31:22
18197 Smith, T, 48M 4:31:22
18198 Yashar, D, 25M 4:31:22
18199 Hughes, E, 25F 4:31:22
18200 Kennard, L, 42F 4:31:23
18201 Cronin, K, 36F 4:31:23
18202 Lynch, C, 33F 4:31:23
18203 Lynch, W, 35M 4:31:23
18204 Baumgart, D, 43M 4:31:23
18205 Maione, W, 41M 4:31:23
18206 Ster, T, 42M 4:31:23
18207 Natera, R, 55F 4:31:24
18208 Gately, B, 45F 4:31:24
18209 McCarty, S, 27F 4:31:24
18210 McDonald, M, 33M 4:31:24
18211 Magpiong, G, 34M 4:31:25
18212 Hummer, J, 32M 4:31:25
18213 Schwartz, R, 52M 4:31:26
18214 Moucha, C, 23M 4:31:26
18215 Kington, J, 45M 4:31:26
18216 Velazquez, F, 52M 4:31:26
18217 Trofymowych, E, 35F 4:31:26
18218 Zeintl, H, 36M 4:31:27
18219 Wilson, F, 32M4:31:27
18220 Matakena, F, 54M 4:31:27
18221 Skalski, A, 37F 4:31:28
18222 Akihary, R, 43M 4:31:29
18223 Hirsch, I, 52M 4:31:30
18224 Cann, C, 29M 4:31:30
18225 Barndt, W, 41M 4:31:30
18226 Hale, J, 45M 4:31:31
18227 Pascheberg, A, 39M 4:31:31
18228 Sullivan, M, 41M 4:31:31
18229 Neuchi, A, 39M 4:31:31
18230 Palsho, E, 31M 4:31:31
18231 Lopez, R, 46M 4:31:31
18232 Laird, J, 26M 4:31:31
18233 Kameda, I, 47F 4:31:32
18234 Smith, P, 32M 4:31:32
18235 Sarmiento, C, 64M 4:31:32
18236 Mollo, L, 25F 4:31:32
18237 Beetel, R, 38M 4:31:32
18238 Corderi, B, 48F 4:31:33
18239 Guerin, M, 45M 4:31:33
18240 Kuramori, K, 27M 4:31:34
18241 Gallo, L, 40M 4:31:34
18242 Doutre, C, 52M 4:31:34
18243 Starsja, C, 43M 4:31:34
18244 Smith, N, 30F 4:31:34
18245 Kenny, J, 52M 4:31:34
18246 Sanders, E, 34M 4:31:35
18247 Brouwer, R, 33M 4:31:35
18248 Dubin Camarena, R, 18M 4:31:36
18249 Quik, P, 43F 4:31:36
18250 Quik, A, 47M 4:31:36
18251 Tucker, T, 44M 4:31:37
18252 Moyer, M, 28F 4:31:37
18253 Verwoert, C, 29F 4:31:38
18254 Ecklord, S, 25F 4:31:38
18255 Almeida, D, 39F 4:31:38
18256 Shore, F, 26F 4:31:39
18257 Johnsen, R, 53M 4:31:39
18258 Garcia, M, 53F 4:31:39
18259 Nagler, A, 28F 4:31:39
18260 Nagler, S, 56M 4:31:40
18261 Lecomte, E, 33M 4:31:40
18262 Cressey, S, 24F 4:31:40
18263 Neumann, E, 32F 4:31:40
18264 Mennocchi, L, 47M 4:31:41
18265 Hummel, P, 44M 4:31:41
18266 Casey, L, 34M 4:31:41
18267 LoPiccolo, D, 36F 4:31:42
18268 Wilson, J, 31F 4:31:43
18269 Santos Correa, J, 45M 4:31:43
18270 Conte, P, 52M 4:31:43
18271 Egtvedt, K, 51M 4:31:44
18272 Konietzka, T, 33M 4:31:44
18273 Rossignol, M, 40M 4:31:44
18274Courtney, M, 40M 4:31:44
18275 Arreguin, A, 37M 4:31:45
18276 Delong, D, 45F 4:31:45
18277 Antell, G, 35M 4:31:45
18278 Todor, J, 47M 4:31:46
18279 Templeman, N, 34M 4:31:46
18280 Brower, W, 45M 4:31:47
18281 Bautista Fajardo, C, 55F 4:31:47
18282 Donner, J, 24M4:31:47
18283 Hess, R, 31M 4:31:47
18284 Cohen, C, 37F 4:31:47
18285 Wells, T, 40F 4:31:47
18286 Blatter, E, 42F 4:31:48
18287 Duckworth, S, 54M 4:31:48
18288 Richard, V, 47M 4:31:48
18289 Hanle, R, 43F 4:31:48
18290 Pyle, E, 59M 4:31:48
18291 Hanle, R, 42M 4:31:48
18292 Mounier, J, 47M 4:31:48
18293 O'Connell, N, 33F 4:31:49
18294 Sloane, R, 37M 4:31:49
18295 Adreani, I, 46M 4:31:49
18296 Precin, P, 35F 4:31:49
18297 De Horde, C, 49M 4:31:49
18298 Temple, M, 25M 4:31:49
18299 Williams, J, 35F 4:31:49
18300 Calene, J, 66M 4:31:49
18301 Temple, R, 53M 4:31:50
18302 Boynton, J, 28F 4:31:50
18303 Cook, S, 45M 4:31:50
18304 Boynton, J, 29M 4:31:50
18305 Patock, K, 46M 4:31:50
18306 Ehring, D, 49M 4:31:50
18307 Jordan, M, 43M 4:31:50
18308 Meliarenne, M, 54M 4:31:50
18309 Pijbes, A, 45F 4:31:51
18310 Sirakovsky, S, 32F 4:31:51
18311 Harris, E, 27F 4:31:52
18312 Unger, L, 26F 4:31:52
18313 Byrne, D, 49M 4:31:52
18314 Krueger, B, 42M 4:31:52
18315 Breuer, H, 54M 4:31:53
18316 Casas Torres, F, 35M 4:31:53
18317 Siva, K, 37M 4:31:53
18318 Ramirez, B, 32F 4:31:54
18319 Shapiro, S, 39M 4:31:54
18320 Hammer, T, 26M 4:31:55
18321 Calvillo Garcia, J, 31M 4:31:55
18322 Mauclaire, E, 23F 4:31:55
18323 Sanchez, M, 35M 4:31:55
18324 Didier, S, 22M 4:31:55
18325 Farella, M, 32M 4:31:55
18326 Vaysse, C, 44M 4:31:56
18327 Been, W, 41M 4:31:56
18328 Olivo, M, 41F 4:31:56
18329 Eguiarte Madroeno, L, 61M 4:31:56
18330 Aukburg, S, 51M 4:31:57
18331 Marle, M, 55F 4:31:57
18332 Cich, K, 32M 4:31:57
18333 Somplatsky-Jarman, W, 47M 4:31:58
18334 Soo, M, 31M 4:31:59
18335 Balk, G, 36M 4:31:59
18336 Feraud, S, 44F 4:31:59
18337 Johansson, A, 26M 4:31:59
18338 Rysz, L, 39F 4:31:59
18339 Bornet, C, 34F 4:32:00
18340 Froehlich, M, 28F 4:32:00
18341 Eriksson, A, 27F 4:32:00
18342 Adams, R, 52F 4:32:01
18343 Williams, K, 27F 4:32:01
18344 Uhrman, H, 56M 4:32:01
18345 Kaminer, M, 53F 4:32:01
18346 Kendellen, M, 54M 4:32:01
18347 Van Mierlo, C, 29F4:32:01
18348 Geldof, M, 30F 4:32:02
18349 McBride, B, 30M 4:32:02
18350 Seignette, C, 24F 4:32:02
18351 Felesky, W, 25M 4:32:02
18352 Egg, S, 27F 4:32:02
18353 Porter, T, 46M 4:32:03
18354 Maxwell, M, 45M 4:32:03
18355 Golding, R, 21M 4:32:03
18356 O'Donnell, P, 45F 4:32:03
18357 De Koning, F, 40M 4:32:03
18358 Chown, W, 48M 4:32:03
18359 Ekstrom, G, 48M 4:32:03
18360 D'Angelo, M, 35M4:32:04
18361 Guyonnet-Carric, P, 41M 4:32:04
18362 Ville, E, 59M4:32:04
18363 Meier, P, 26F 4:32:04
18364 Rossi, C, 58M 4:32:04
18365 Cadman, W, 40F 4:32:04
18366 Wagenvoort, H, 45M 4:32:04
18367 Pauls, A, 28F 4:32:04
18368 Pauls, B, 27M 4:32:05
18369 Froese, I, 59F 4:32:05
18370 Chin, D, 40M 4:32:05
18371 Taylor Jr., W, 63M 4:32:06
18372 McCague, B, 44F 4:32:06
18373 Hinrichs, S, 37M 4:32:06
18374 Powers, C, 27F 4:32:06
18375 Capuano, K, 27F 4:32:06
18376 Kramer, J, 56M 4:32:07
18377 Aguilar, A, 69M 4:32:08
18378 Brown, W, 41M 4:32:08
18379 Schmid, D, 37F 4:32:08
18380 Flores, L, 28M 4:32:08
18381 Carlsson, L, 19F 4:32:08
18382 Guerrero Gomez, C, 43M 4:32:09
18383 Brunet, P, 44M 4:32:09
18384 Zinn, S, 50M 4:32:09
18385 Roske, H, 45M 4:32:09
18386 Hall, T, 34F 4:32:09
18387 Leventhal, D, 26M 4:32:09
18388 Liauba, E, 45F 4:32:09
18389 Leaton, R, 50M 4:32:10
18390 Farnsworth, H, 29F 4:32:10
18391 Fricker, D, 59M 4:32:10
18392 Johnson, P, 32F 4:32:11
18393Weischedel, C, 50F 4:32:11
18394 Hasegawa, M, 29M 4:32:12
18395 Pawel, M, 36F 4:32:12
18396 Viener, S, 45M 4:32:13
18397 Amice, A, 45M 4:32:14
18398 Jacobsen, T, 25F 4:32:14
18399 Foran, M, 39M 4:32:14
18400 Radwell, S, 36M 4:32:14
18401 Wijnans, D, 33M 4:32:14
18402 Hope, B, 25F 4:32:14
18403 Boardman, P, 31M 4:32:14
18404 Jones, C, 30M 4:32:15
18405 Sanchez-Delaiglesia, B, 60M 4:32:15
18406 Olsen, A, 39M 4:32:15
18407 Arnaud, M, 62M 4:32:15
18408 Piamonte, M, 26F 4:32:16
18409 Karczewski, G, 52M 4:32:17
18410 Karczewski, P, 26M 4:32:17
18411 Kilpatrick, C, 27F 4:32:17
18412 Muguerza Seitas, I, 49M 4:32:17
18413 Rotonda, A, 32F 4:32:17
18414 Grimes, J, 28M 4:32:17
18415 Tjemsland, K, 50M 4:32:17
18416 Kelly, B, 39F 4:32:18
18417 Clough, L, 39F 4:32:18
18418 Rocke, J, 50M 4:32:19
18419 Svensson, P, 30M 4:32:19
18420 Rotwein, C, 43F 4:32:19
18421 Tonino, R, 50M 4:32:19
18422 Lamoureux, L, 33M 4:32:19
18423 Irie, S, 47F 4:32:20
18424 Gerbino, F, 39M 4:32:20
18425Velasco, E, 39M 4:32:20
18426 Francisco, J, 34F 4:32:20
18427 Velichko, V, 47M 4:32:20
18428 Brown, C, 37M 4:32:20
18429 Harbaugh, M, 44F 4:32:20
18430 Skaggs, R, 41M 4:32:20
18431 Giesa, D, 43M 4:32:20
18432 Schwartz, T, 25M 4:32:21
18433 Cukerman, J, 60F 4:32:21
18434 Jerklind, B, 40M 4:32:21
18435 Snyder, C, 33M 4:32:21
18436 Irie, T, 52M 4:32:21
18437 Wcislo, P, 48M 4:32:21
18438 Enquist, L, 35F 4:32:22
18439 Ra, J, 31M 4:32:22
18440 Lonie, L, 31F 4:32:22
18441 Mayos Morales, J, 29M 4:32:22
18442 Misson,Jr, 31M 4:32:23
18443 Knight, J, 35M 4:32:23
18444 Dalton, E, 48F 4:32:23
18445 Livier, S, 37M 4:32:23
18446 Hawlitzky, K, 53M 4:32:24
18447 Cazeneuve, B, 28M 4:32:24
18448 Vere, J, 38M 4:32:24
18449 Martinez, M, 34F 4:32:24
18450 Hilverda, J, 41M 4:32:25
18451 Baragatti, D, 51M 4:32:25
18452 Verhoef, F, 51M 4:32:25
18453 Pospiech, H, 53M 4:32:25
18454 Camp, M, 24F 4:32:26
18455 Lorenz, B, 40M 4:32:26
18456 Lippman, A, 39M 4:32:26
18457 Eerens, N, 46M 4:32:26
18458 Van Swaaij, N, 38M 4:32:26
18459 Rehbock, G, 54M 4:32:26
18460 Marquez, J, 47M 4:32:27
18461 Vallowe, R, 39M 4:32:27
18462 Nepute, J, 42M 4:32:27
18463 Pilate, G, 48M 4:32:27
18464 Pros Farran, M, 19M 4:32:28
18465 Kasarsky, D, 45M 4:32:28
18466 Myhre, T, 39M 4:32:29
18467 Lindahl, D, 52M 4:32:29
18468 Catena, J, 34M 4:32:29
18469 Geisler, H, 57M 4:32:30
18470 Hernandez Vidales, A, 43M 4:32:30
18471 Traphagen, R, 44M 4:32:30
18472 Urrutia Martinez, C, 39F 4:32:30
18473 Gerard, J, 47M 4:32:31
18474 Peckham, L, 33F 4:32:31
18475 Sylvester, S, 34M 4:32:31
18476 Mailley, R, 25M 4:32:31
18477 Sabatier, P, 49M 4:32:31
18478 LaFontant, R, 34M 4:32:31
18479 Megret, J, 55M 4:32:32
18480 Smith, D, 43M 4:32:32
18481 Anderson, M, 37M 4:32:32
18482 Jacobs, D, 36F 4:32:32
18483 Tominelle, L, 45F 4:32:33
18484 Hall, T, 39M 4:32:34
18485 Steingart, B, 44F 4:32:34
18486 Wilt, R, 37M 4:32:34
18487 Ballerini, C, 28M 4:32:35
18488 Ballerini, R, 31M 4:32:35
18489 Turetsky, M, 61M 4:32:35
18490 Lathwell, J, 30F 4:32:35
18491 Ducreux, D, 47M 4:32:36
18492 Napolitano, J, 21M 4:32:36
18493 Roof, W, 54M 4:32:36
18494 Esterow, R, 34M 4:32:36
18495 Camilo, M, 28M 4:32:36
18496 Kiehnle, J, 29F 4:32:36
18497 Chavez, L, 50M 4:32:37
18498 Alicea, J, 30F 4:32:37
18499 Stipetic, M, 65M 4:32:37
18500 Capalbo, R, 36M 4:32:37
18501 Hoenel, I, 46F 4:32:37
18502 Buschkamp, K, 52F 4:32:37
18503 Strang, P, 43F 4:32:38
18504 Smiljanic, R, 32M 4:32:38
18505 Zwick, M, 50M 4:32:39
18506 Tarducci, R, 38M 4:32:40
18507 Rodriguez Del Pozo, E, 60M 4:32:40
18508 Sackett, T, 39F4:32:40
18509 Bloyer, L, 34F 4:32:40
18510 Barjuan Badell, J, 50M4:32:41
18511 Kasrzak, T, 46M 4:32:41
18512 Gray, P, 65M 4:32:42
18513 Zimbler, A, 35F 4:32:42
18514 Pesie, V, 28F 4:32:43
18515 Herzog-Knott, M, 34F 4:32:44
18516 Dictrow, J, 49M 4:32:45
18517 Knott, W, 42M 4:32:45
18518 Otto, X, 31M 4:32:45
18519 Devons MD, C, 34F 4:32:45
18520 Downs, T, 30M 4:32:45
18521 Southwick, D, 34M 4:32:46
18522 Cabaniss, J, 40M 4:32:46
18523 Huerta, P, 41M 4:32:46
18524 Whitney, M, 42M 4:32:47
18525 Pileggi, F, 33M 4:32:47
18526 Varady, R, 41M 4:32:48
18527 Valdes, N, 37M 4:32:48
18528 Lancha Jr, A, 30M 4:32:48
18529 Donza, G, 62F 4:32:48
18530 Hill, J, 40M 4:32:48
18531 Koch Sunnen, M, 36F 4:32:49
18532 Khazzam, S, 40M 4:32:49
18533 Nassar Wittman, R, 48F 4:32:49
18534 Weidmann, C, 25F 4:32:49
18535 Thompson, M, 52F 4:32:50
18536 Felsner, H, 53M 4:32:50
18537 Concato, V, 45M 4:32:51
18538 Griffiths, P, 42M 4:32:51
18539 Buffington, P, 30M 4:32:51
18540 Griffiths, D, 40F 4:32:51
18541 Chapuis, P, 49M 4:32:51
18542 Carriere, B, 36M 4:32:51
18543 Peters, P, 41F 4:32:52
18544 Mercado Lopez, H, 40M 4:32:52
18545 Henkel, A, 29M 4:32:52
18546 Sanchez Grozco, R, 42M 4:32:52
18547 Kent, A, 42F 4:32:52
18548 Larson, L, 51M 4:32:52
18549 Kornstein, S, 40M 4:32:52
18550 Carballo, F, 33M 4:32:52
18551 Osorio Larranaga, E, 45M 4:32:52
18552 Metzger, P, 35F 4:32:53
18553 Karbuczky, I, 35M 4:32:53
18554 Mazza, D, 51M 4:32:54
18555Nothomb, J, 30M 4:32:54
18556 Andre, J, 48M 4:32:54
18557 Warner, J, 40M 4:32:54
18558 Wolfe, J, 29M 4:32:54
18559 Van Den Berg, J, 35M 4:32:54
18560 Tisdale, R, 45M 4:32:55
18561 Aiu, J, 34M 4:32:55
18562 Keshavarz, R, 29M 4:32:55
18563 Davis, R, 31M 4:32:55
18564 Keshavarz, A, 20M 4:32:55
18565 Frias Morales, J, 34M 4:32:55
18566 Emmerth, C, 49F 4:32:56
18567 Muchnick, C, 52M 4:32:56
18568 McClure, E, 36M 4:32:57
18569 Frisenberg, L, 43M 4:32:57
18570 Bellmann, G, 40M 4:32:57
18571 Le-Goff, G, 41M 4:32:57
18572 Poomprakobsri, S, 50M 4:32:58
18573 Bryce, M, 33M 4:32:58
18574 Shapiro, P, 39M 4:32:58
18575 Marshall, A, 25F 4:32:58
18576 Albertini, B, 43M 4:32:59
18577 Rosecrans, J, 44F 4:33:00
18578 Shorrock, P, 50M 4:33:00
18579 Peterle, J, 27M 4:33:00
18580 Nolan, B, 30F 4:33:02
18581 Casama, D, 37M 4:33:02
18582 Sell, D, 63M 4:33:03
18583 Johnson, J, 32M 4:33:03
18584 Krasel, M, 54F 4:33:03
18585 Van Asbeck, S, 49M 4:33:03
18586 Campbell, J, 44M 4:33:03
18587Krasel, K, 53M 4:33:03
18588 Roehrig, G, 55F 4:33:04
18589 Sabin, T, 26M 4:33:04
18590 Knoppik, A, 51F 4:33:04
18591 Marzorati, L, 34M 4:33:04
18592 Knoppik, H, 48M 4:33:04
18593 Brown, L, 58M 4:33:04
18594 Ludke, L, 37F 4:33:05
18595 Chutkhan, S, 34M 4:33:05
18596 Cunningham, M, 33F 4:33:05
18597 Foronda, J, 32M 4:33:05
18598 Timmerman, B, 47M 4:33:05
18599 Lowry, A, 23F 4:33:06
18600Fiala, M, 47M 4:33:06
18601 Millo, S, 36F 4:33:06
18602 Craven, F, 40M 4:33:06
18603 Hollstein, J, 47M 4:33:06
18604 Sun, L, 34M 4:33:06
18605 Lublin, P, 24F 4:33:06
18606 Weischedel, R, 50M 4:33:06
18607 Wolfe, R, 36F 4:33:07
18608 Wilson, T, 47M 4:33:07
18609 Becker, W, 53M 4:33:07
18610 Hildreth, R, 46M 4:33:07
18611 Rueth, W, 48M 4:33:08
18612 Flores, M, 41M 4:33:08
18613 Fisher, W, 46M 4:33:09
18614 Scortecci, M, 48M 4:33:09
18615 Rodriguez, J, 28M 4:33:10
18616 Castaneda, J, 44M 4:33:10
18617 Haines, P, 45F 4:33:10
18618 Kee, D, 40M 4:33:10
18619 Frank, H, 37M 4:33:10
18620 Koontz, J, 37M 4:33:10
18621 Samuelsen, R, 43F 4:33:10
18622 Gross, B, 52M 4:33:11
18623 Benjert, L, 48M 4:33:11
18624 Stein, M, 50M 4:33:12
18625 Ross, L, 39F 4:33:13
18626 Tiller, B, 31M 4:33:13
18627 Merritt, B, 35M 4:33:13
18628 Calvo, J, 38M 4:33:13
18629 Joester, K, 38M 4:33:14
18630 Wasum, G, 54M 4:33:14
18631 Bender, E, 33M 4:33:14
18632 Gilligan, T, 52M 4:33:14
18633 Casey, W, 27M 4:33:14
18634 Sinder, M, 26M 4:33:14
18635 Tiller, L, 34F 4:33:14
18636 Walter, R, 59M 4:33:15
18637 Bauza, A, 23F 4:33:15
18638 Smith, K, 36F 4:33:15
18639 Walter, S, 37F 4:33:15
18640 Tornehl, T, 45M 4:33:15
18641 Freeman, L, 46M 4:33:15
18642Rubin, D, 25F 4:33:16
18643 Madsen, B, 48M 4:33:16
18644 Bianchi, T, 40M 4:33:16
18645 Bygland, A, 37F 4:33:17
18646 Linke, R, 42M4:33:17
18647 Roman, L, 35M 4:33:17
18648 Van Lokeren, R, 50F 4:33:17
18649 Speer Dr, U, 43M 4:33:17
18650 Crean, M, 30M 4:33:17
18651 Stopler, R, 49F 4:33:17
18652 Giordano, E, 36M 4:33:18
18653 Ugolini, R, 39M 4:33:18
18654 Stewart, M, 25M 4:33:18
18655 Bonelli, J, 29M 4:33:19
18656 Lavett, B, 50M 4:33:19
18657 Kufs, S, 45M 4:33:19
18658 Umana, C, 48M 4:33:19
18659 Barber, C, 26F 4:33:20
18660 Sonstein, A, 48M 4:33:20
18661 Carrara, M, 41F 4:33:20
18662 Nurminen, E, 33F 4:33:20
18663 Dabringhaus, K, 37F 4:33:21
18664 Haapala, E, 45M 4:33:21
18665 Hansen, O, 58M 4:33:22
18666 Richter, M, 26M 4:33:22
18667 Otte, D, 51M 4:33:22
18668 Stroppa, R, 45M 4:33:23
18669 Meijer, R, 28M 4:33:23
18670 Jacobson, T, 46M 4:33:23
18671 Smith, J, 46M 4:33:23
18672 Ackley, T, 46M 4:33:24
18673 Slocum, W, 37M 4:33:24
18674 Clemens, K, 60M 4:33:24
18675 Rosenbaum, F, 29F 4:33:24
18676 Goldstein, M, 40F 4:33:24
18677 Petry, R, 36M 4:33:24
18678 Matsuyoshi, J, 47F 4:33:24
18679 Hadow, A, 30F 4:33:24
18680 Perez, B, 52M 4:33:25
18681 Garatti, L, 65M 4:33:25
18682 Huguet, S, 34F 4:33:26
18683 Roche, I, 38F4:33:26
18684 Hermansson, S, 51M 4:33:26
18685 Markowitz, J, 32M 4:33:26
18686 Sakowitz, L, 35F 4:33:26
18687 McNabb, D, 41M 4:33:28
18688 Vigouroux, C, 54M 4:33:29
18689 Briggs, M, 37F 4:33:29
18690 Ligon, C, 44F 4:33:30
18691 Murphy, D, 44M 4:33:30
18692 Bazilio, C, 39F 4:33:30
18693 Sato, M, 39M 4:33:30
18694 O'Shea, C, 31F 4:33:30
18695 Voelckner, T, 22F 4:33:31
18696 Hoffmann, E, 39F 4:33:31
18697 Young, U, 37F 4:33:31
18698 Stodter, J, 42F 4:33:31
18699 Montgomery, R, 35F 4:33:31
18700 Engelken, R, 23M 4:33:32
18701 Soza, J, 32M 4:33:32
18702 Alaoui, E, 53F 4:33:32
18703 Beetz, K, 43M 4:33:32
18704 Young, D, 24M 4:33:32
18705 Kwak, K, 19F 4:33:32
18706 Bloch, K, 53M 4:33:32
18707 Cusumano, M, 49M4:33:33
18708 Carey, C, 64M 4:33:33
18709 Noble, R, 52M 4:33:33
18710 Segal, M, 46M 4:33:33
18711 Kingston, K, 32M 4:33:34
18712 Wolter, T, 24M 4:33:35
18713 Korol, S, 36F 4:33:36
18714 Flavien, J, 45M 4:33:36
18715 Geitel, F, 57M 4:33:36
18716 Allen, M, 27M 4:33:37
18717 Moerer, S, 32F 4:33:38
18718 Schlegel, B, 56M 4:33:38
18719 Pozzi, M, 40M 4:33:38
18720 Goldman, D, 53M 4:33:39
18721 Kashima, T, 36M 4:33:39
18722 Juarez, R, 40M 4:33:39
18723 Girardeau, R, 54M 4:33:39
18724 Onel, K, 31F 4:33:40
18725 Onel, K, 31M 4:33:40
18726 Hafner, V, 41F 4:33:40
18727 King, E, 55M 4:33:40
18728 Oliveira, L, 47M 4:33:41
18729 Klingheim, B, 46M 4:33:42
18730 Steenburgh, F, 24M 4:33:42
18731 Eklund, P, 51M 4:33:43
18732 Oosterwaal, R, 35M 4:33:43
18733 Clerbout, F, 20M 4:33:43
18734 Brixey, R, 27M 4:33:43
18735 Floberg, W, 46M 4:33:43
18736 Romo, M, 49F 4:33:44
18737 Silvestri, R, 49M 4:33:44
18738 Chiaro, P, 54M 4:33:44
18739 Ducroco, A, 53M 4:33:45
18740 Rybarski, J, 40M 4:33:45
18741 Prior, R, 38M 4:33:45
18742 Habermacher, H, 51M 4:33:46
18743 Woods, E, 28F 4:33:46
18744 Shaughnessy, C, 35M 4:33:46
18745 Meier, F, 59M 4:33:46
18746 Bolleboom, G, 56M 4:33:46
18747 Hribal, L, 32F 4:33:47
18748 Gleich, D, 32F 4:33:47
18749 Brattinga, E, 28M 4:33:47
18750 Obey, A, 47M 4:33:47
18751 Vizcaino, J, 57M 4:33:47
18752 Racioppo, M, 65M 4:33:48
18753 Wright, G, 34M 4:33:48
18754 Jacobsen, B, 44M 4:33:48
18755 Luber II, J, 27M 4:33:48
18756 Kilbey, C, 34F 4:33:48
18757 Chi, J, 53F 4:33:48
18758 Kuroda, K, 43M 4:33:49
18759 Masella, J, 37F 4:33:49
18760 Pizzi, M, 24M 4:33:50
18761 Brewster, J, 55M 4:33:50
18762Audoin, D, 47M 4:33:50
18763 Oconnor, J, 40F 4:33:50
18764 Kubota, H, 60M 4:33:50
18765 Beldring, H, 34M 4:33:50
18766 Semb, A, 28M 4:33:51
18767 McGeehan, J, 44M 4:33:51
18768 Berney, S, 51M 4:33:51
18769 Vontobel, H, 49M 4:33:51
18770 Moore, J, 40M 4:33:51
18771 McElreath, J, 56M 4:33:51
18772 Bencivenni, M, 54M 4:33:51
18773 Kavesh, J, 26M 4:33:52
18774 Somorjai, K, 38F 4:33:52
18775 D'Alleva, A, 28M 4:33:52
18776 Cassell, M, 51M 4:33:52
18777 Venn, E, 27M 4:33:53
18778 Doiron, M, 40M 4:33:53
18779 Leblond, J, 45M 4:33:53
18780 Haworth, A, 41M 4:33:53
18781 Bereszko, S, 30F 4:33:53
18782 Henderson, L, 29F 4:33:54
18783 Klein, H, 51M 4:33:54
18784 Bertolas, E, 38M 4:33:54
18785 Dalcero, C, 25F 4:33:54
18786 Dalcero, N, 51M 4:33:55
18787 Pugh, B, 46M 4:33:55
18788 Schokker, D, 34M 4:33:55
18789 Garcia, M, 32M 4:33:55
18790 Floch, J, 33F 4:33:56
18791 Watnick, D, 33M 4:33:56
18792 Bigit, J, 35F 4:33:56
18793 Bernstein, B, 39M 4:33:57
18794 Byrnes, T, 47M 4:33:57
18795 Steadman, E, 51M 4:33:57
18796 Mager, J, 41M 4:33:57
18797 Behr, A, 41M 4:33:57
18798 Salomon, O, 25M 4:33:57
18799 Dean, P, 48M 4:33:57
18800 Zuckerman, B, 47M 4:33:57
18801 Guillemot, G, 60M 4:33:58
18802 Le-Neindre, B, 50M 4:33:58
18803 Royan, P, 34M 4:33:58
18804 Van Deelen, M, 34F 4:33:58
18805 Roonprapunt, C, 25M 4:33:58
18806 Van Der Klaauw, G, 30M 4:33:59
18807 Schlagwein, J, 44M 4:33:59
18808 Verwey, J, 56M 4:34:00
18809 Nunez, R, 36M 4:34:00
18810 Dovey, A, 34M 4:34:00
18811 Strang, T, 44M 4:34:00
18812 Gordillo, R, 51M 4:34:01
18813 Giunti, A, 41M 4:34:02
18814 Taylor, K, 38M 4:34:03
18815 Clark, J, 44M 4:34:03
18816 Thomas, E, 47M 4:34:03
18817 Hofbauer, M, 34M 4:34:03
18818 Baer, A, 20F 4:34:03
18819 Martelli, J, 38F 4:34:03
18820 Gruenhagen, U, 52M 4:34:03
18821 De Roo, K, 39M 4:34:04
18822 Van Der Veer, M, 33M 4:34:04
18823 Van Der Veer, R, 39M 4:34:04
18824 Cohen, B, 38M 4:34:04
18825 Baller, W, 44M 4:34:04
18826 Clough, P, 32F 4:34:04
18827 Grimbs, S, 29M 4:34:05
18828 Dilettuso, M, 26F 4:34:05
18829 May, G, 42M 4:34:06
18830 Bond, A, 53M 4:34:06
18831 Lewallen, J, 50M 4:34:06
18832 Golsh, G, 30M 4:34:06
18833 Moran, J, 27M4:34:06
18834 Dwyer, P, 43M 4:34:06
18835 Tellez, C, 32M 4:34:06
18836 Roberts, K, 36F 4:34:07
18837 Ferris, E, 25M 4:34:07
18838 Hanson, C, 34F 4:34:07
18839 Sherman, R, 47M 4:34:08
18840 Luther, J, 28F 4:34:08
18841 Smith, S, 33M 4:34:08
18842 Lavigne, J, 47F 4:34:09
18843 Petiteville, J, 46M 4:34:09
18844 Schlafly, T, 46M 4:34:09
18845 Scully, E, 47M 4:34:10
18846 Curtil, B, 44M 4:34:10
18847 Campbell, M, 31F 4:34:10
18848 Hernandez, M, 41F 4:34:11
18849 Raczok, M, 36M 4:34:11
18850 Perez Gonzalez, L, 45M 4:34:11
18851 Pena Leal, A, 36M 4:34:12
18852 Steed, M, 28M 4:34:13
18853 Coltro, A, 34F 4:34:13
18854 Esposito, F, 38M 4:34:13
18855 Gansberg, S, 47F 4:34:13
18856 Arrell, K, 53M 4:34:13
18857 Hack, D, 42M 4:34:14
18858 Powell, K, 52M 4:34:14
18859 Jansen, A, 35F 4:34:14
18860 Catanzaro, A, 28M 4:34:14
18861 Lie, E, 41M 4:34:14
18862 Pennings, W, 38F 4:34:15
18863 Bureau, C, 27M 4:34:15
18864 Gilbert, J, 38M 4:34:15
18865 Rospos, T, 42M 4:34:15
18866Van Oranje-Nassau, B, 24M 4:34:15
18867 Kirk, P, 49M 4:34:15
18868 Bruesehaber, K, 55M 4:34:16
18869 Thorbek, J, 55F 4:34:16
18870 Verhoorn, W, 53M 4:34:16
18871 Zuravnsky, A, 39M 4:34:16
18872 Moonan, T, 45M 4:34:16
18873 English, C, 43M 4:34:16
18874 McFadden, J, 37M 4:34:17
18875 Butt, C, 38M 4:34:18
18876 Gallego, C, 34M 4:34:18
18877 Alber, E, 53M 4:34:18
18878 Adelman, M, 20M 4:34:18
18879 Pinnel, A, 23F 4:34:18
18880 Kling, J, 32F 4:34:18
18881 Whittelsey, T, 38M 4:34:18
18882 McGinity, C, 30M 4:34:19
18883 Hermiston, A, 33M 4:34:19
18884 Grauls, C, 48M 4:34:19
18885 Fritzsche, R, 29M 4:34:19
18886 Janlewicz, C, 48M 4:34:19
18887 Sivertsen, G, 45M 4:34:19
18888 Conrad, M, 34M 4:34:20
18889 Kwok, T, 32M 4:34:20
18890 Porter, R, 40M 4:34:20
18891 Nedorost, D, 58M 4:34:20
18892 Sagor, G, 39M 4:34:20
18893 Burghuber, O, 43M 4:34:20
18894 Nix, J, 48M 4:34:20
18895 Mallach, W, 37M 4:34:21
18896 Torbeck, C, 36F 4:34:21
18897 Knoblauch, G, 45M 4:34:21
18898 Gallagher, P, 39M 4:34:21
18899 Shelly, A, 52M 4:34:21
18900 Stannard, K, 31F 4:34:22
18901 Maton, R, 33F 4:34:22
18902 Bartoli, F, 22M4:34:23
18903 Craine, J, 48M 4:34:23
18904 Dodman, P, 33F 4:34:23
18905 Wycoff, J, 43F 4:34:23
18906 Mueller, M, 27F 4:34:24
18907 Burke, M, 39M 4:34:24
18908 Augath, P, 26M 4:34:24
18909 Benziger, C, 24M 4:34:24
18910 Schoeneborn, E, 31F 4:34:25
18911 Muccia, B, 46F 4:34:25
18912 Neske, R, 47M 4:34:25
18913 Loo, N, 37M 4:34:25
18914 Teller, I, 28M 4:34:27
18915 Skulstad, C, 33F 4:34:27
18916 Gundersen, T, 41M 4:34:27
18917 McMorris, M, 24F 4:34:27
18918 Andrews, H, 21F 4:34:27
18919 Blanc, J, 62M 4:34:28
18920 Rivera Atanacio, A, 42M 4:34:28
18921 Moffitt, K, 57F 4:34:28
18922 Wosleger, J, 26M 4:34:28
18923 Knight, J, 31F 4:34:28
18924 Wooten, S, 22F 4:34:28
18925 Joubert, D, 34M 4:34:28
18926 Cabrol, G, 46M 4:34:28
18927 Woodring, G, 23M 4:34:28
18928 Norton, A, 28F 4:34:28
18929 Govil, N, 27M 4:34:28
18930 Robinson, K, 32M 4:34:29
18931 Weighart, J, 28F 4:34:29
18932 Nathan, A, 22M 4:34:29
18933 Buchanan, G, 37M 4:34:30
18934 Zerella, D, 39F 4:34:30
18935 McCormick, K, 23F 4:34:30
18936 Nathan, P, 57M 4:34:31
18937 Colombo, E, 59M 4:34:31
18938 Hodes, L, 30F 4:34:31
18939 Wolrath, C, 50M 4:34:31
18940 May, A, 30M 4:34:31
18941 Bellows, F, 26F 4:34:31
18942 Kallmeyer, D, 32F 4:34:32
18943 Ritman, G, 39M 4:34:32
18944 Bulich, B, 51F 4:34:32
18945 Gjefsen, O, 34M 4:34:32
18946 Wildhagen, O, 47M 4:34:33
18947 Woolf, W, 59M 4:34:33
18948 Henning, H, 49M 4:34:33
18949 Del Grande, G, 50M 4:34:33
18950 Disilvio, M, 39M 4:34:33
18951 Dodd, J, 30M 4:34:33
18952 Grindell, M, 34M 4:34:33
18953 Choureau, A, 38M 4:34:33
18954 Weyer, J, 53M 4:34:33
18955 Rovai, R, 53M 4:34:33
18956 Torriente, N, 39F 4:34:34
18957 Barran, B, 47F 4:34:34
18958 Tartaglia, J, 31M 4:34:34
18959 Mooney, D, 38M 4:34:35
18960 Petko, J, 40M 4:34:35
18961 Lee, R, 22M 4:34:35
18962 Mullen, L, 26F 4:34:36
18963 Christiansen, B, 39M 4:34:36
18964 Wedel-Jansens, H, 40F 4:34:37
18965 Caputo, M, 42F 4:34:37
18966 Russel, O, 35M 4:34:38
18967 Espinosa, R, 30M 4:34:38
18968 Carney, J, 28F 4:34:38
18969 Jansson, L, 40M 4:34:38
18970 Cho, S, 21F 4:34:39
18971 Zambrano Ramos, G, 49M 4:34:39
18972 Beck, U, 47F 4:34:39
18973 Van Rhijn, M, 39F 4:34:39
18974 Joo, S, 52M 4:34:39
18975 De Jong, P, 44M 4:34:39
18976 Sano, Y, 43F 4:34:39
18977 Gase, R, 40M 4:34:39
18978 Hunt, T, 35M 4:34:40
18979 Asakura, M, 28F 4:34:40
18980 Decker, T, 26M 4:34:40
18981 Seery, C, 29M 4:34:40
18982 Outteryck, D, 31M 4:34:40
18983 Leal Tobias, A, 43M 4:34:40
18984 Preininger, K, 55M 4:34:40
18985 Gochko, K, 38M 4:34:41
18986 Zarate, A, 41M 4:34:41
18987 Shepherd, W, 32M 4:34:41
18988 Van Wattum, R, 53M 4:34:41
18989 Scholz, U, 50M 4:34:41
18990 Sandberg, S, 42M 4:34:42
18991 Ridley, A, 60M 4:34:42
18992 Sullivan, J, 36M 4:34:42
18993 Kolman, J, 28F4:34:43
18994 Schwidder, U, 35M 4:34:43
18995 Duelien, T, 21F 4:34:43
18996 Kjeverud, O, 21M 4:34:44
18997 Clemen, D, 31M 4:34:44
18998 Massoni, A, 38M 4:34:45
18999 Fietzek, H, 54M 4:34:45
19000 Callan, K, 32F 4:34:47
19001 Bascumam, E, 60M 4:34:48
19002 Palumbo, K, 40F 4:34:48
19003 Deitch, M, 29M 4:34:49
19004 Bunemer Neto, J, 48M 4:34:49
19005 Combs, W, 52M 4:34:49
19006 Goyette, D, 43M 4:34:50
19007 Amano, T, 44M 4:34:51
19008 Solarek, G, 37M 4:34:52
19009 Edl, J, 44M 4:34:52
19010 Solarek, D, 34F 4:34:52
19011 Daniel, C, 39M 4:34:52
19012 Negri, M, 38M 4:34:52
19013 Lipnik, S, 64M 4:34:52
19014 Avento, S, 28F 4:34:52
19015 Littman, E, 52M 4:34:52
19016 Cohen, P, 47M 4:34:53
19017 Dyngeland, G, 54F 4:34:53
19018 Rakes, L, 28F 4:34:53
19019 McCourt, M, 44M 4:34:53
19020 Ernst, P, 46M 4:34:53
19021 Frankfurt, M, 58M 4:34:54
19022 Christ, C, 30F 4:34:54
19023 Dobry, N, 55M 4:34:54
19024 Savland, E, 53F 4:34:55
19025 Andriesse, M, 30F 4:34:55
19026 Vendrig, J, 54M 4:34:55
19027 Eijlander, D, 50M 4:34:56
19028 Etzrodt, F, 42M 4:34:56
19029 Esser, M, 44F 4:34:56
19030 Adams, J, 55M 4:34:56
19031 Holmes, T, 43F 4:34:56
19032 Friedman, M, 61M 4:34:57
19033 Febinger, E, 46M 4:34:57
19034 Flynn, M, 37M 4:34:57
19035 Mull, W, 36M 4:34:57
19036 Moskello, M, 44F 4:34:57
19037 Buczyner, E, 51M 4:34:58
19038 Brunschwig, G, 27M 4:34:58
19039 Meggoe, P, 39F 4:34:58
19040 Karlsson, K, 42M 4:34:58
19041 Fueg, A, 54F 4:34:59
19042 Sheehan, D, 32M 4:34:59
19043 Rubin, L, 46M 4:34:59
19044 Kolan, M, 45M 4:34:59
19045 Topouzis, M, 25M 4:34:59
19046 Kaufman, A, 36M 4:34:59
19047 Gomes, A, 36M 4:35:00
19048 Miles, B, 43M 4:35:00
19049 Parker, M, 34M 4:35:00
19050 Sombray, C, 54F 4:35:00
19051 Hurley, R, 32M 4:35:00
19052 Beltran, J, 46M4:35:00
19053 Landman, A, 55M 4:35:00
19054 Knaub, R, 38M 4:35:01
19055 Hughes, J, 25M 4:35:01
19056 Bowen, L, 40F 4:35:02
19057 Bartlam, M, 30M 4:35:02
19058 Giordano, G, 34M 4:35:02
19059 Mateo De Sanchez, C, 33F 4:35:02
19060 Coates, S, 35F 4:35:03
19061Montagano, P, 34F 4:35:03
19062 Kreisman, P, 38F 4:35:03
19063 Bourgeois, P, 44M 4:35:04
19064 Doldi, P, 33M 4:35:04
19065 Slater, R, 51M 4:35:06
19066 Cavanna, J, 41M 4:35:06
19067 Wolfson, G, 20F 4:35:07
19068 Fumero Vergas, J, 30M 4:35:07
19069 Johnston, P, 38F 4:35:08
19070 Johnson, K, 20F 4:35:08
19071 Precuzzi, J, 46M 4:35:08
19072 Sacher, M, 40M 4:35:08
19073 Allen, S, 31M 4:35:09
19074 Crotty, C, 26M 4:35:09
19075 Boyce, R, 40M 4:35:09
19076 Martinelli, C, 61M 4:35:10
19077 Bouman, M, 26M 4:35:11
19078 Moss, S, 33M 4:35:11
19079 Seeber, S, 28F 4:35:13
19080 Blair, R, 51M4:35:14
19081 Moore, T, 57M 4:35:14
19082 Caramanolis, R, 36M 4:35:14
19083 Melendez, R, 40M 4:35:15
19084 Mattei, J, 21M 4:35:15
19085 Rollin, B, 50M 4:35:16
19086 Kaaboun, M, 28M 4:35:16
19087 Hernandez Romano, C, 47F 4:35:17
19088 Miller, L, 30F 4:35:17
19089 Sorrentinno, C, 29F 4:35:18
19090 Haarklou Hansen, G, 47F 4:35:18
19091 Toshav, M, 48M 4:35:18
19092 Dougherty, L, 28M 4:35:18
19093 Ross, D, 33M 4:35:18
19094 Meyer, M, 40M 4:35:19
19095 Robles Farias, J, 49M 4:35:19
19096 Fanning Jr, T, 56M 4:35:20
19097 Gilligan, M, 32M 4:35:21
19098 Driessen, E, 26M 4:35:22
19099 McClellon, R, 34M 4:35:22
19100 Blake, B, 51M 4:35:22
19101 Franco, V, 40F 4:35:23
19102 Sandrock, D, 47M 4:35:23
19103 Zinker, N, 52M 4:35:23
19104 Ferreira, W, 39M 4:35:23
19105 Wauquier, F, 49M 4:35:24
19106 Thompson, C, 47M 4:35:24
19107 Gai, L, 50M 4:35:24
19108 O'Reilly, T, 58M 4:35:24
19109 Pedersen, E, 50M 4:35:24
19110 Nussbaum, D, 42M 4:35:24
19111 Schuett, G, 44M 4:35:24
19112 Schwenk, I, 22F 4:35:25
19113 Slaymaker, J, 36M 4:35:25
19114 Shelden, K, 27F 4:35:25
19115 Raguso, M, 50F 4:35:25
19116 Swig, M, 38F 4:35:25
19117 Cronje, L, 35F 4:35:25
19118 Song, P, 28M 4:35:25
19119 Van Garderen, J, 54M 4:35:25
19120 Smit, R, 51M 4:35:25
19121 McKee, B, 28M 4:35:25
19122 Kern, H, 50M 4:35:26
19123 Fiori, P, 41M 4:35:26
19124 La Hatte, G, 43M 4:35:26
19125 Weil, L, 28M 4:35:27
19126 Ducret, R, 49M 4:35:28
19127 Armentano Neto, A, 44M 4:35:28
19128 Branigan, J, 39M 4:35:28
19129 Simila, B, 30M 4:35:29
19130 Aronovitz, J, 23F 4:35:29
19131 Wallis, R, 42M 4:35:29
19132 Surratt, J, 58M 4:35:29
19133 Fidanza, F, 20M 4:35:29
19134 Clareman, P, 31F 4:35:29
19135 Blum, G, 50F 4:35:30
19136 Pianin, D, 31F 4:35:30
19137 Kallonen, R, 38M 4:35:30
19138 Huus, T, 44M 4:35:30
19139 Martinez, H, 53M 4:35:30
19140 Hyvonen, O, 49M 4:35:30
19141 Hare, J, 30M 4:35:31
19142 Cofino, J, 40F 4:35:31
19143 Fernandez, R, 20F 4:35:31
19144 McLoughlin, M, 57M 4:35:32
19145 Ranson, S, 23M 4:35:32
19146 Schulz, W, 51M 4:35:33
19147Lyons, J, 35M 4:35:33
19148 Priego, A, 27F 4:35:33
19149 Reidy, R, 33M 4:35:34
19150 Gill, G, 23M 4:35:34
19151 Kurtz, H, 25F 4:35:34
19152 Gosselin, C, 39F 4:35:34
19153 Bershatsky, L, 55M 4:35:34
19154 Bahary, J, 33M 4:35:34
19155 Molander, S, 50M 4:35:35
19156 Wienckowski, A, 47F 4:35:35
19157 Connolly, L, 39M 4:35:35
19158 Jones, C, 30F 4:35:36
19159 Vaillancourt, C, 30M 4:35:36
19160 Zaneri, L, 41F 4:35:36
19161 McCormack, M, 47M 4:35:37
19162 Skold, P, 42M 4:35:38
19163 Gibson, T, 34M 4:35:38
19164 Bremer, K, 50M 4:35:39
19165 Welte, M, 36M 4:35:39
19166 Mezzacappa, J, 31F4:35:39
19167 Vang, B, 30M 4:35:39
19168 Quill, R, 47M 4:35:40
19169 Adelung, U, 49M 4:35:41
19170 Pipal, J, 53M 4:35:41
19171 Baker, M, 36F 4:35:41
19172 Hylen, I, 57M 4:35:41
19173 Quintaba, M, 54M 4:35:42
19174 Waltman, R, 34F 4:35:42
19175 Irvine, K, 25F 4:35:44
19176 Ring, B, 33F 4:35:44
19177 Contino, M, 35F 4:35:45
19178 Hayashida, Y, 31F 4:35:45
19179 Curren, T, 40M 4:35:46
19180 Parpaillon, P, 30M 4:35:46
19181 Kanao, T, 20F 4:35:46
19182 Winter, E, 51M 4:35:46
19183 Quintero, D, 32M 4:35:47
19184 Dege, B, 29F 4:35:47
19185 Seltzer, D, 41M 4:35:48
19186 Poli, P, 44M 4:35:48
19187 Kesin, J, 54F 4:35:48
19188 Mauron, A, 46F 4:35:49
19189 Mauron, C, 46M 4:35:49
19190 Sullivan, E, 33F 4:35:49
19191 Griffiths, G, 29F 4:35:50
19192 Moreau, J, 52M 4:35:50
19193 McCaffrey, S, 44M 4:35:50
19194 Van Vreeswijk, J, 50M 4:35:50
19195 Gallo, C, 37F 4:35:50
19196 Tinoco, C, 44M 4:35:50
19197 Cohen, G, 43M 4:35:50
19198 Herren, G, 48F 4:35:50
19199 Smith, T, 43M 4:35:51
19200 Morishita, Y, 49F 4:35:51
19201 Banahan, M, 30M 4:35:51
19202 Kurland, B, 53M 4:35:52
19203 Gruner, D, 27M 4:35:52
19204 Windler, A, 50M 4:35:52
19205 Mathews, A, 56M 4:35:53
19206 Schade, B, 31M 4:35:53
19207 Yonover, S, 30M 4:35:53
19208 Knoch Md, H, 32M 4:35:54
19209 Gleichmann, W, 32F 4:35:54
19210 Markoff, M, 40M 4:35:54
19211 Chuquer, M, 35M 4:35:55
19212 David, E, 31F 4:35:56
19213 Auguston, P, 40M 4:35:57
19214 Steere, C, 37M 4:35:57
19215 Bubba, R, 51M 4:35:57
19216 Gutierrez Jimenez, D, 27F4:35:58
19217 Fong, K, 40M 4:35:58
19218 Garcia Lopez, S, 51M 4:35:58
19219 Rejjali, U, 41F 4:35:58
19220 Rejjali, A, 47M 4:35:59
19221 Marchand, C, 31M 4:36:00
19222 Walbridge, G, 25M 4:36:00
19223 Capecci, F, 48M 4:36:00
19224 Le Hebel, M, 40F 4:36:00
19225 Bernarding, C, 23F 4:36:01
19226 Shulman, A, 29F 4:36:01
19227 Easley, K, 45F 4:36:01
19228 Nevarez, J, 53M 4:36:01
19229 Trinidad, G, 25M 4:36:02
19230 Schneiderhorn, E, 48F 4:36:03
19231 Schmeing, L, 53M 4:36:04
19232 Sardelli, A, 41M 4:36:04
19233 Vinot, P, 54M 4:36:05
19234 Tabor, A, 26M 4:36:05
19235 Sheils, M, 45F 4:36:05
19236 Tabor Jr, O, 27M 4:36:06
19237 Marynen, P, 29M 4:36:06
19238 Fedeli Santucci, O, 56M 4:36:06
19239 Lelandais, W, 27M 4:36:06
19240 Yasukawa*, T, 26M 4:36:06
19241 Guevara, Y, 36F 4:36:06
19242 Ledamoisel, S, 41M 4:36:07
19243 Saavedra Valadez, E, 50M 4:36:07
19244 Serra, D, 26F 4:36:07
19245 Schanz, C, 34F 4:36:08
19246 Kelly-Farmer, S, 25F 4:36:08
19247 Kelly, E, 49M 4:36:09
19248 Larroque, S, 20F 4:36:09
19249 Schmidt, J, 47M 4:36:09
19250 Curran, C, 53F 4:36:10
19251 Craig, B, 27M 4:36:10
19252 Montroll, K, 33F 4:36:10
19253 Brady, R, 46M 4:36:10
19254 Gearheart, J, 29F 4:36:10
19255 Sgalaberna, A, 53M 4:36:11
19256 D'Amico, D, 40M 4:36:11
19257 Schuler, E, 30F 4:36:12
19258 Tveter, N, 33M 4:36:13
19259 Manaris, A, 28M 4:36:13
19260 Gordon, R, 34M 4:36:13
19261 Cheatham, H, 47M 4:36:14
19262 Andress, R, 37M 4:36:16
19263Abrams, C, 45F 4:36:16
19264 Weickert, H, 52M 4:36:16
19265 Baier, R, 46F 4:36:17
19266 Vallieres, A, 39F 4:36:17
19267 Paul, H, 44M 4:36:18
19268 Krumrie, C, 35F 4:36:18
19269 King, B, 51M 4:36:18
19270 Holmberg, K, 21F 4:36:18
19271 Dinwoodie, D, 40F 4:36:19
19272 McCourt, J, 45M 4:36:19
19273 Safos, J, 45M 4:36:19
19274 Henderson, W, 30M 4:36:20
19275 Link, T, 30M 4:36:20
19276 Barakat, N, 21M 4:36:20
19277 Rushton, P, 51M 4:36:20
19278 Montano, F, 37M 4:36:21
19279 Ovenshire, D, 27M 4:36:21
19280 Androw, L, 43F 4:36:21
19281 Martens, F, 31M 4:36:21
19282 McCarthy, J, 26F 4:36:21
19283 Iio, C, 31F 4:36:21
19284 Kimber-Winfree, W, 35F 4:36:21
19285 Havenis, J, 38M 4:36:22
19286 Johnson Jr, T, 39M 4:36:22
19287 Godfrey, I, 47M 4:36:22
19288 Rhoodie, A, 28F 4:36:22
19289 Whitt, D, 26F 4:36:23
19290 Skattum, D, 33M 4:36:23
19291 Panis-Sinterniklaas, M, 38F 4:36:23
19292 Starr, C, 38M 4:36:23
19293Bertsch, J, 25M 4:36:23
19294 Hodge, F, 37M 4:36:23
19295 Panis, C, 41M 4:36:23
19296 Huss, H, 44M 4:36:24
19297 Mulliner, S, 42F 4:36:24
19298 Nahum, L, 48M 4:36:24
19299 Leone, K, 44M 4:36:24
19300 Kabacinski, R, 41M 4:36:24
19301 Uzawa, K, 32M 4:36:25
19302 Brecher, S, 30M 4:36:26
19303 Schwab, L, 43F 4:36:26
19304 Schwartz, E, 52F 4:36:26
19305 Li, Y, 28M 4:36:26
19306 Hoberman, R, 35M 4:36:27
19307 Schwab, M, 42M 4:36:27
19308 Spelbrink, D, 44F4:36:27
19309 Fessenden, L, 39F 4:36:27
19310 Smith, I, 31M 4:36:27
19311 Sorge, M, 36M 4:36:27
19312 Galaviz Martinez, R, 46M 4:36:28
19313 Schwabe, A, 31M 4:36:28
19314 Lurie, M, 31M 4:36:29
19315 Hayes, D, 32M 4:36:29
19316 Kollar, M, 36M 4:36:29
19317 Hines, G, 53F 4:36:30
19318 Gorostieta, E, 32F 4:36:30
19319 Klinger, A, 31M 4:36:30
19320 Leertouwer, T, 41F 4:36:30
19321 Fitch, S, 44F 4:36:31
19322 Lipski, W, 44M 4:36:31
19323 Judge, T, 37M 4:36:31
19324 Welling, C, 45M 4:36:31
19325 Nilsson, G, 52M 4:36:31
19326 Welling, K, 46F 4:36:31
19327 Colletto, K, 52F 4:36:32
19328 DeMarco, R, 61M 4:36:32
19329 Tolsma, J, 56M 4:36:32
19330 Garcia, F, 42M 4:36:32
19331 Gordon, H, 35M 4:36:33
19332 Dupuis, J, 44M 4:36:33
19333 Guinessey, J, 37M 4:36:33
19334 Leyshon-Hughes, E, 49M 4:36:33
19335 Fast Valenzuela, J, 43M 4:36:34
19336 Huesch, S, 23F 4:36:35
19337 O'Brien, M, 47M 4:36:35
19338 Kaufmann, M, 34M 4:36:35
19339 Schulte, D, 31F 4:36:36
19340 Walsh, W, 23M 4:36:36
19341 Lopez Pena, R, 50M 4:36:36
19342 Hughes, C, 23F 4:36:36
19343 Somrak, R, 42F 4:36:37
19344 Acunto, A, 48M 4:36:37
19345 Mithalal, K, 26F 4:36:37
19346 Levy, E, 38F 4:36:37
19347 Paul, L, 50M 4:36:38
19348 Wolcott, T, 31F 4:36:38
19349 Marvin, C, 41F 4:36:38
19350 Hart, T, 37M 4:36:39
19351 Kelsey, R, 52M 4:36:39
19352 Bornemeier, S, 51M 4:36:40
19353 Farrin, J, 29F 4:36:40
19354 Starcevic, A, 56M 4:36:40
19355 Rance, M, 46M 4:36:40
19356 Le Bris, B, 29M 4:36:40
19357 Ash-Totten, R, 35F 4:36:41
19358 Garcia, E, 31F 4:36:41
19359 Le Bris, R, 59M 4:36:42
19360 Schouver, R, 41M 4:36:42
19361 Frontz, M, 25M 4:36:42
19362 Petti, G, 41M 4:36:42
19363 Berkley, T, 32M 4:36:42
19364 Niceforo, D, 59M 4:36:42
19365 Dupuy-Salle, R, 60M 4:36:42
19366 Wahl, Q, 48M 4:36:42
19367 Gerwien, J, 48M 4:36:42
19368 Mitchell, T, 38M 4:36:42
19369 Corbalan, T, 28F 4:36:42
19370 Bethea, T, 38F 4:36:42
19371 Bedetti, G, 42M 4:36:42
19372 Danilowitz, B, 52M 4:36:42
19373 Fonteyn, C, 49M 4:36:43
19374 Fourcade, J, 55M 4:36:43
19375 Palmeri, M, 47M 4:36:43
19376 Castanos, S, 40M 4:36:44
19377 Hanson, D, 53M 4:36:44
19378 Boisvert, K, 32F 4:36:44
19379 DeMarco, J, 27F4:36:44
19380 Durbin, M, 26M 4:36:45
19381 Rider, E, 27F 4:36:45
19382 Kelly, P, 41M 4:36:45
19383 Thorell, S, 43M 4:36:45
19384 Rea, J, 29M 4:36:45
19385 Heckman, H, 36F 4:36:46
19386 Pelletier, F, 35F 4:36:46
19387 Croucher, N, 30F 4:36:46
19388 Geiss, H, 58M 4:36:47
19389 Larsen, J, 47M 4:36:47
19390 Gonzalez, J, 22M 4:36:47
19391 Puckett, T, 34F 4:36:47
19392 Fogle, T, 48M 4:36:47
19393 Muratore, T, 29M 4:36:48
19394 Lewis, C, 45M 4:36:48
19395 Desheulles, S, 47F 4:36:48
19396 Desheulles, J, 48M 4:36:49
19397 Sattler, N, 31F 4:36:49
19398 Schleife, H, 45M 4:36:49
19399 Zisswiller, B, 36F 4:36:49
19400 Kaufmann, J, 46M 4:36:49
19401 Volpetti, M, 32M 4:36:50
19402 Hall, G, 39M 4:36:52
19403 Beauchamp, R, 32M 4:36:52
19404 Osorio, M, 27M 4:36:52
19405 Breard, D, 50M4:36:52
19406 Hoesl, W, 32M 4:36:53
19407 Goodman, B, 22M 4:36:53
19408 Tuz, P, 40M 4:36:53
19409 Piedade, T, 20M 4:36:53
19410 Torres, E, 48M 4:36:54
19411 Townsend, J, 46M 4:36:54
19412 Nicholson, C, 38M 4:36:55
19413 Hodge, C, 41M 4:36:55
19414 Carducci, P, 45M 4:36:56
19415 Genson, J, 43F 4:36:56
19416 McElheron, M, 46M 4:36:57
19417 Kaegi, R, 41F 4:36:57
19418 Roy, J, 45F 4:36:57
19419 Buchmann, S, 40F 4:36:57
19420 Pouliquen, J, 58M 4:36:58
19421 Crist, K, 22F 4:36:58
19422 Wagner, P, 42F 4:36:58
19423 Hodgson, J, 45F 4:36:58
19424 McGrann, M, 37M 4:36:59
19425 Olsen, T, 38M 4:36:59
19426 Ley, B, 44F 4:37:01
19427 Wesenberg, R, 46F4:37:01
19428 Salazar, F, 32M 4:37:01
19429 Geiss, R, 38F 4:37:02
19430 Barry, N, 34F 4:37:02
19431 Ross, V, 45F 4:37:03
19432 Miller, W, 29M 4:37:03
19433 Aliquo, J, 36M 4:37:03
19434 Malaguit, J, 49M 4:37:03
19435 Sala, R, 29F 4:37:03
19436 Whiteside, C, 40F 4:37:03
19437 Fader, L, 34M 4:37:04
19438 Andrade, T, 26M 4:37:04
19439 Browne, C, 50M 4:37:05
19440 Feyling, K, 45F 4:37:05
19441 Dao, D, 46M 4:37:05
19442 Bogen, T, 47M 4:37:05
19443 Beisner, B, 55M 4:37:05
19444 Hearon, E, 37M 4:37:05
19445 Sato, K, 24M 4:37:05
19446 Rossabi, A, 23M 4:37:05
19447 Gill, R, 23M 4:37:05
19448 Nutting, R, 32M 4:37:06
19449 Bitterlin, F, 61M 4:37:06
19450 Villanueva Farias, A, 57M 4:37:06
19451 Gehlen, H, 49M 4:37:06
19452 Sapp, J, 27F 4:37:06
19453 Kass, M, 40M 4:37:07
19454 Koppenhagen, A, 46M 4:37:07
19455 Houdayer, J, 46M 4:37:07
19456 Cook, K, 33M 4:37:07
19457 Olsthoorn, J, 42M 4:37:07
19458 Albrecht, K, 60M 4:37:08
19459 Thiessen, H, 40M 4:37:09
19460 Smith, T, 32F 4:37:09
19461 Devesa, X, 27M 4:37:10
19462 Chezar, B, 48M 4:37:11
19463 Kudrecki, S, 28F 4:37:11
19464 Franz, T, 30M 4:37:11
19465 Lindsay, P, 38M 4:37:11
19466 Goldfarb, N, 26M 4:37:11
19467 Diniz, A, 57M 4:37:12
19468 Oliveira, W, 31M 4:37:12
19469 Weiner, S, 51M 4:37:13
19470 Karl, V, 32M 4:37:14
19471 Bonfiglio, J, 40M 4:37:15
19472 Aceves, B, 52F 4:37:15
19473 Gershowitz, S, 45F 4:37:15
19474 Gaine Jr, W, 38M 4:37:16
19475 Jensen, L, 38M 4:37:16
19476 Flores, F, 46M 4:37:17
19477 Dahlstroem, B, 30M 4:37:17
19478 Salaroli, A, 52M 4:37:17
19479 Salazar, W, 25M 4:37:18
19480 Tarjan, I, 29F 4:37:18
19481 Cobb, J, 53M 4:37:18
19482 Grady, M, 39M 4:37:18
19483 Whalen, S, 35F 4:37:19
19484 Long, M, 51F 4:37:19
19485 Rodriguez, H, 50F 4:37:19
19486 Pond, C, 49M 4:37:19
19487 Sanders, M, 40M 4:37:19
19488 Venegas Morales, G, 59F 4:37:20
19489 Doherty, M, 39F 4:37:20
19490 Brantjes, A, 52M 4:37:20
19491 Jensen, P, 37M 4:37:20
19492 Hammarley, J, 42M 4:37:20
19493 Rucker, N, 35F 4:37:20
19494 Sanger, S, 33F 4:37:21
19495Van Tongeren, P, 44M 4:37:21
19496 Blake, J, 39M 4:37:21
19497 Doherty, P, 40M 4:37:21
19498 Westad, G, 50F 4:37:21
19499 Silver, L, 67M 4:37:22
19500 Ferruzzi, T, 36M 4:37:22
19501 McLeod, G, 41M4:37:23
19502 Como, R, 41M 4:37:23
19503 Colletti, P, 53M 4:37:23
19504 Goldin, B, 42F 4:37:23
19505 Weischedel, S, 26F 4:37:23
19506 Bourgain, J, 31M 4:37:23
19507 Cornelius, K, 36M 4:37:23
19508 Holland, M, 50M 4:37:24
19509 Kullmann, B, 52F 4:37:24
19510Coltro, M, 35M 4:37:24
19511 Paiva, R, 25F 4:37:25
19512 Fryman, D, 47M 4:37:25
19513 Stinchi, C, 28M 4:37:25
19514 Dishberger, D, 37F 4:37:26
19515 Loscul, F, 33M 4:37:26
19516 Scott, S, 35M 4:37:26
19517 Kawasaki, S, 29M 4:37:26
19518 Sheerin, S, 29F 4:37:26
19519 Kruger, M, 39M 4:37:26
19520 McCormack, B, 51M 4:37:28
19521 Maguire, B, 36M 4:37:28
19522 Cerioli, E, 47M 4:37:28
19523 Cabrolier, R, 34M 4:37:28
19524 Falla, N, 29F 4:37:28
19525 Geddes, D, 33M 4:37:29
19526 Lopez, D, 32M 4:37:29
19527 Walton, G, 52M4:37:29
19528 Griffiths, G, 39M 4:37:30
19529 Clayton, M, 50M 4:37:30
19530 Hirakawa, T, 60M 4:37:30
19531 Vigil Perez Vargas, J, 33M 4:37:31
19532 Fafournoux, J, 43M 4:37:31
19533 Ross, P, 38M 4:37:31
19534 Cohen, R, 44M 4:37:31
19535 Stephen, M, 53F 4:37:31
19536 Macland, A, 54M 4:37:32
19537 Judenne, D, 34F 4:37:32
19538 Janzen, H, 36M 4:37:33
19539 Rankin, T, 62M 4:37:33
19540 Barbe, F, 35M 4:37:33
19541 Schiff, L, 33F 4:37:34
19542 Malara, A, 48M 4:37:34
19543 Lanzaro, L, 40M 4:37:34
19544 West, S, 40F 4:37:34
19545 Carson, S, 52M 4:37:35
19546 Pardew, D, 49M 4:37:35
19547 Siff, J, 50F 4:37:35
19548 Koningen, C, 29F 4:37:35
19549 Buhl, T, 53M 4:37:35
19550 Ventura, C, 49M 4:37:36
19551 Thaler, X, 35M 4:37:36
19552 Berinstein, D, 27F 4:37:36
19553 Dilorenzo, P, 41M 4:37:36
19554 Dewally, J, 44M 4:37:37
19555 Tornquist, K, 29F 4:37:37
19556 Sanchez-Figueroa, N, 32F 4:37:37
19557 Palmieri, M, 32F 4:37:37
19558 Fitzpatrick, J, 40F 4:37:37
19559 Oliveira, N, 41F 4:37:37
19560 Trupia, P, 46M 4:37:37
19561 Mariton, P, 37M 4:37:37
19562 Verne, J, 35M 4:37:37
19563 Radu, R, 40M 4:37:37
19564 Letissier, A, 35F 4:37:37
19565 Amico, B, 28F 4:37:38
19566 Luetkemeier, J, 28M 4:37:38
19567 Thomas, J, 19F 4:37:38
19568 Vish, K, 42M 4:37:38
19569 Ventrone, K, 42F 4:37:38
19570 Petrucci, D, 39M 4:37:38
19571 Swaine, J, 46M 4:37:39
19572 Langell, M, 26F 4:37:39
19573 Thizy, J, 29M 4:37:39
19574 Whitman, G, 46M 4:37:39
19575 Fry, C, 34M 4:37:39
19576 Petro, D, 28M 4:37:39
19577 Damet, M, 43F 4:37:39
19578 Piveteau, H, 44M 4:37:40
19579 Lagna, G, 30F 4:37:40
19580 Learner, D, 46M 4:37:41
19581 Waldman, W, 50M 4:37:41
19582 Thorpe, R, 54M 4:37:41
19583 Brigham, W, 23M 4:37:42
19584 Exelbert, R, 33M 4:37:42
19585 Tricarico, C, 28M 4:37:43
19586 Soderstrom, K, 48M 4:37:43
19587 Wojcik, E, 42M 4:37:44
19588 Coquerel, J, 50M 4:37:44
19589 Albertis, C, 63M 4:37:44
19590 Grippo, G, 30F 4:37:44
19591 Martinez, E, 27M 4:37:45
19592 Kopf, H, 52M 4:37:45
19593 Dorn, A, 33M 4:37:45
19594 Maier, K, 32M 4:37:46
19595 Kass, R, 39M 4:37:46
19596 Blasco, E, 41F 4:37:46
19597 Lau, T, 36M 4:37:46
19598 Peters, V, 50F 4:37:46
19599 Shaw, P, 52M 4:37:47
19600 Gover, L, 53M 4:37:48
19601 Peters, M, 58M 4:37:48
19602 Wells, J, 26M 4:37:49
19603 Dvorak, E, 52M 4:37:49
19604 Fortin, M, 50F 4:37:49
19605 Nakura, K, 25M 4:37:49
19606 Grimes, G, 34M 4:37:49
19607 Bouley, G, 45M 4:37:49
19608 Klein, M, 38F 4:37:50
19609 Schomisch, D, 42M 4:37:50
19610 Escobar, P, 53M 4:37:51
19611 Fritz, R, 54M 4:37:52
19612 Barazer, P, 34M4:37:52
19613 Shaffer, S, 28M 4:37:53
19614 Gardner, J, 46M 4:37:53
19615 Marolf, R, 51F 4:37:54
19616 Zessner, I, 54F 4:37:54
19617 Newman, P, 36F 4:37:54
19618 Schmidgall, E, 36F 4:37:54
19619 DeBoise, K, 33F 4:37:55
19620 Schaller, Y, 36F 4:37:55
19621 Depraetere, J, 29M 4:37:55
19622 Jefferies, P, 43M 4:37:56
19623 Kwok, J, 39M 4:37:56
19624 Schaulat, O, 33M 4:37:56
19625 Hanson, K, 37M 4:37:56
19626 Kokas, B, 46M 4:37:57
19627 Shimizu, H, 34M 4:37:57
19628 Schiels, T, 44M 4:37:57
19629 Dussau, C, 24M 4:37:58
19630 Oto, J, 40M 4:37:58
19631 Roby, C, 42F 4:37:58
19632 Germain, F, 34M 4:37:59
19633 Fernandez Lopez, L, 43M 4:37:59
19634 Strange, T, 35M 4:38:00
19635 Alpert, E, 30F 4:38:00
19636 Caucino, J, 33M 4:38:01
19637 Griffioen, R, 54M 4:38:01
19638 Rigney, J, 40M 4:38:01
19639 Carrillo, M, 38M 4:38:02
19640 Ween, M, 48M 4:38:03
19641 Tholen, S, 44M 4:38:03
19642 Hunter, J, 45M 4:38:04
19643 Olivares Rangel, L, 53M 4:38:04
19644 Chohfi, R, 51M 4:38:05
19645 Mishler, W, 51M 4:38:05
19646 Beristain Martinez, B, 42F 4:38:05
19647 Ladouceur-Frank, K, 36F 4:38:06
19648 Ajbar, M, 41M 4:38:06
19649 Anderson, K, 31M 4:38:06
19650 Stroud, A, 25F 4:38:06
19651 Bolier, R, 32M 4:38:07
19652 Baldassarre, K, 31F 4:38:07
19653 Hennessey, S, 29M 4:38:07
19654 Daley, J, 35M 4:38:08
19655 Busson, D, 46M 4:38:08
19656 Knepple, B, 45M 4:38:09
19657 Whitcomb, L, 57M 4:38:09
19658 O'Hagan, C, 45F 4:38:09
19659 Young, R, 42M 4:38:10
19660 Robrecht, L, 50F 4:38:10
19661 Fass, L, 54M 4:38:10
19662 Naranjo Ortiz, A, 54M 4:38:10
19663 Bahls, W, 44M 4:38:10
19664 Pasternak, D, 37M 4:38:10
19665 Rowson, S, 28M 4:38:11
19666 Tritsch, J, 37M 4:38:11
19667 Craft, R, 55M 4:38:11
19668 Feldman, L, 28M 4:38:12
19669 Gonzalez, V, 43M 4:38:12
19670 Matthews, B, 41M 4:38:13
19671 Sarbinowski, J, 29M 4:38:13
19672 Angione, G, 35M 4:38:13
19673 Skoke, D, 44M 4:38:13
19674 Schreiber, C, 31F 4:38:14
19675 Tuccillo, W, 43M 4:38:14
19676 Boyer, G, 49M 4:38:14
19677 Le Hebel, F, 20F 4:38:14
19678 Lau, D, 45M 4:38:14
19679 Magalhaes, L, 31F 4:38:15
19680 Hoeppli, V, 36F 4:38:15
19681 Castillo, S, 30F 4:38:15
19682 Lesseur, J, 27F 4:38:15
19683 Franzovitch, U, 32M 4:38:16
19684 Purcell, S, 24F 4:38:16
19685 Feldman, K, 33M 4:38:16
19686 Harris, J, 53M 4:38:17
19687 Sanchez, V, 62M 4:38:17
19688 Tahuilan, A, 26M 4:38:18
19689 Szambel, R, 34M 4:38:18
19690 Barth, E, 44M 4:38:18
19691 McMorris, P, 51F 4:38:19
19692 Moreno Perez, A, 42M 4:38:19
19693 Pinter, E, 30M 4:38:19
19694 Kawas, P, 45M 4:38:20
19695 Nikolai, R, 32M 4:38:20
19696 De Haan, K, 28F 4:38:20
19697 Rimmelzwaan, M, 27M 4:38:20
19698 Gibbons, G, 39M 4:38:20
19699 Dalzell, G, 38M 4:38:21
19700 Redican, R, 30M 4:38:21
19701 Lindquist, L, 24F 4:38:21
19702 Ornelas Cabrera, L, 32M 4:38:21
19703 Willems, M, 45M 4:38:22
19704 Spek, T, 41M 4:38:22
19705 Di-Credico, R, 37M 4:38:22
19706 Nederlof, R, 34M 4:38:22
19707 Rodrigues, F, 36F 4:38:22
19708 Maragoudakis, J, 38M 4:38:22
19709 Cappello, D, 24F 4:38:23
19710 Cevaer, D, 43M 4:38:23
19711 Martin, J, 40M 4:38:23
19712 Rouyre, C, 39M 4:38:23
19713 Petit, E, 28M 4:38:23
19714 Lefebvre, S, 42M 4:38:23
19715 Strehaino, B, 45M 4:38:24
19716 Morales, F, 41M 4:38:24
19717 Chan, R, 24F 4:38:24
19718 Lorenc, T, 30M 4:38:24
19719 Julian, R, 29M 4:38:24
19720 Diplock, B, 47M 4:38:25
19721 Cottin, P, 32M 4:38:25
19722 Oosterhout, M, 41F 4:38:25
19723 Ruffin, F, 40M 4:38:25
19724 Recalcati, A, 49M 4:38:25
19725 Krause, D, 45M 4:38:25
19726 Kowol, J, 62M 4:38:25
19727 Priori, J, 45M 4:38:25
19728 Galey, M, 36M 4:38:25
19729 Oberholzer, J, 33F 4:38:25
19730 Wilansky, B, 47M 4:38:25
19731 Votino, F, 54M 4:38:25
19732 Smith, L, 30F 4:38:25
19733 Anbrose, W, 47M 4:38:26
19734 Marshall, J, 19F 4:38:26
19735 Johnson, V, 62M 4:38:26
19736 Benini, V, 54M 4:38:26
19737 Hugosson, L, 48M 4:38:27
19738 Spiegel, H, 37M 4:38:28
19739 Trebilcock, G, 50M 4:38:28
19740 Monks, B, 27M 4:38:28
19741 Kershaw, L, 53M 4:38:28
19742 Sacco, J, 38M 4:38:29
19743 Garriques, M, 39F 4:38:30
19744 Verga, F, 30M 4:38:30
19745 Stulbaum, S, 28M 4:38:31
19746 Cutler, G, 32M 4:38:31
19747 Levine, P, 49M 4:38:31
19748 Massey, A, 51M 4:38:31
19749 Villegas, S, 38F 4:38:32
19750 Hagen, P, 41M 4:38:32
19751 Sieurin, C, 27F 4:38:32
19752 Chressman, B, 45M 4:38:33
19753 Longosz, J, 33M 4:38:33
19754 Levine, D, 25M 4:38:33
19755 Borgen, S, 36F 4:38:33
19756 Yablans, G, 57M 4:38:34
19757 Stanton, B, 40M 4:38:34
19758 Hennessy, N, 30F 4:38:34
19759 Kast, H, 46M 4:38:34
19760 Schmidt, P, 38M 4:38:34
19761 Luks, F, 41M 4:38:34
19762 Ramos, B, 38F 4:38:35
19763 Gauthier, A, 42M 4:38:35
19764 Bergin, C, 28F 4:38:35
19765 Callahan, M, 27M 4:38:35
19766 Lindstrom, K, 43M 4:38:36
19767 Dorazio, M, 35M 4:38:36
19768 Sumida, K, 60M 4:38:36
19769 Morrow, J, 56M 4:38:36
19770 Gaertner, R, 60F 4:38:37
19771 Van Straalen, A, 43M 4:38:37
19772 Morin, G, 51M 4:38:37
19773 Blatter, H, 43M4:38:37
19774 Sullivan, M, 54M 4:38:37
19775 Adamson, E, 57M 4:38:37
19776 Palk, E, 53F 4:38:38
19777 Chin, S, 48M 4:38:38
19778 Bardo, K, 40M 4:38:39
19779 Brinkmann, F, 43M 4:38:39
19780 Woolley, J, 58M 4:38:39
19781 Schult Dr, P, 47M 4:38:39
19782 Toro, O, 48M 4:38:39
19783 Wallon, D, 52M 4:38:39
19784 O'Shea, J, 39F 4:38:40
19785 Jost, B, 52M 4:38:40
19786 McNeil, M, 30M 4:38:41
19787 Mastrogiacomo, P, 39F 4:38:41
19788 Pyott, F, 30M 4:38:41
19789 Bauernfeino, E, 26F 4:38:42
19790 Reynolds, K, 36F 4:38:42
19791 Schmick, D, 40F 4:38:42
19792 Korsmo, J, 39F 4:38:43
19793 Wong, K, 40M 4:38:44
19794 Lecoustre, P, 40M 4:38:44
19795 Kobori, T, 35M 4:38:44
19796 Tinger, R, 49M 4:38:45
19797 Favier, P, 37M4:38:45
19798 Turk, F, 51M 4:38:45
19799 Wilfong, A, 24F 4:38:45
19800 Bundgaard, J, 29F 4:38:45
19801 Watkins, J, 42F 4:38:46
19802 Ralson, T, 41F 4:38:46
19803 Hyne, K, 37M 4:38:46
19804 Wolters, J, 48M 4:38:47
19805 Pagan, J, 48M 4:38:47
19806 Rezzonico, L, 25F 4:38:47
19807 Cunningham, M, 25M 4:38:47
19808 Rosenbaum, E, 26M 4:38:48
19809 Reyes, C, 63M 4:38:49
19810 Giandoreggio, T, 25M 4:38:49
19811 Goodrich, M, 26M 4:38:49
19812 Nunez, J, 35M 4:38:50
19813 Ives, S, 29F 4:38:50
19814 Blatt, E, 53M 4:38:50
19815 Turner, L, 30M 4:38:50
19816 Gonzalez Robledo, J, 51M 4:38:50
19817 Webster, K, 25F 4:38:50
19818 Freedman, D, 37M 4:38:51
19819 Gonzalez, M, 28M 4:38:51
19820 Hynes, D, 44M 4:38:51
19821 Thomas, D, 34M 4:38:51
19822 Lockhart, W, 46M 4:38:51
19823 Gyllenspetz, U, 45M 4:38:51
19824 Tessitore, G, 62M 4:38:52
19825 Huzen, W, 51M 4:38:52
19826 Snow, J, 54M 4:38:52
19827 Emerson, H, 41M 4:38:52
19828 Jahn, P, 28F 4:38:54
19829 Zamora, D, 43M 4:38:55
19830 Schult, B, 28F 4:38:55
19831 Rognstad, G, 51F 4:38:55
19832Hughes, L, 42F 4:38:55
19833 Bosch, N, 37M 4:38:56
19834 Barrera Bravo, J, 40M 4:38:56
19835 Haider, B, 36M 4:38:56
19836 Smith, B, 45F 4:38:56
19837 Power, C, 38M 4:38:56
19838 Klich, J, 25M 4:38:56
19839 Chavez Haro, Y, 43F 4:38:57
19840 Katz, J, 26M 4:38:57
19841 Fuentes Colin, R, 52M 4:38:58
19842 Katz, B, 31M 4:38:58
19843 Hockenberry, J, 34M 4:38:58
19844 Le-Goff, C, 19F 4:38:58
19845 Peigne, L, 35F 4:38:59
19846 McGarry, M, 31M 4:38:59
19847 Verrier, J, 22M 4:38:59
19848 Mougnaud, P, 45M 4:39:00
19849 Knijnenburg, J, 39M 4:39:00
19850 Miller, S, 24M 4:39:00
19851 Higgins, D, 25M 4:39:00
19852 Bittscheidt, H, 53M 4:39:01
19853 Rocque, R, 45M 4:39:01
19854 Bonnouvrier, R, 43M 4:39:01
19855 Drescher, K, 59M 4:39:03
19856 Riegler, M, 25F 4:39:04
19857 De Fromont, M, 37M4:39:04
19858 Riegler, K, 26M 4:39:04
19859 Sperone, M, 37M 4:39:05
19860 Spillane, J, 42M 4:39:05
19861 Dazzo, F, 42M 4:39:06
19862 Ezaki, T, 62M 4:39:06
19863 Ernst, T, 36M 4:39:06
19864 Kimbrell, J, 27F 4:39:07
19865 Sprintschnik, G, 45M 4:39:07
19866 Mezzo, S, 25M 4:39:07
19867 Johnson, R, 42M 4:39:08
19868 Kenel, J, 41M 4:39:08
19869 Gilligan, J, 40M 4:39:08
19870 Lac, J, 53M 4:39:08
19871 Ward, J, 42M 4:39:08
19872 Deveau, R, 49M 4:39:09
19873 Brodsky, J, 39F 4:39:09
19874 Pasquale, R, 44M 4:39:09
19875Walsh, T, 28M 4:39:09
19876 Hirst, M, 38M 4:39:09
19877 Brzana, J, 51M 4:39:09
19878 Sirvent, S, 40M 4:39:09
19879 Racault, C, 45F4:39:09
19880 Pietromonaco, M, 31F 4:39:09
19881 Racault, P, 50M 4:39:09
19882 Gelineau, M, 31F 4:39:10
19883 Schiemann, S, 42F 4:39:10
19884 Blanco, R, 47M 4:39:10
19885 Constanti, J, 41M 4:39:11
19886 Martinez, G, 41F 4:39:11
19887 Daqui, I, 55M 4:39:11
19888 Richard, M, 49F 4:39:11
19889 Cepeda, C, 37F 4:39:12
19890 De Guzman, A, 42M 4:39:12
19891 Sakamoto, O, 50M 4:39:13
19892 Gerbson, S, 43M 4:39:13
19893 Forssmann, W, 55M 4:39:13
19894 Schupler, M, 26F 4:39:13
19895 Dolan, K, 37M 4:39:14
19896 Gallin, H, 21M 4:39:14
19897 Rosati, V, 36M 4:39:14
19898 Biegel, S, 31M 4:39:15
19899 Hopkins, G, 40M 4:39:15
19900 DeMarco, N, 31F 4:39:15
19901 Vazquez, A, 35M 4:39:16
19902 Sitton, D, 41M 4:39:16
19903 Do Ngoc, P, 34M 4:39:17
19904 Sutton, M, 52M 4:39:17
19905 Degennaro, M, 52M 4:39:17
19906 Withers*, K, 30F 4:39:17
19907 Vais, B, 65M 4:39:17
19908 Marshall, J, 34F 4:39:18
19909 Davidson, A, 43M 4:39:18
19910 Baldini, M, 47M 4:39:18
19911 Wohlenberg, E, 54F 4:39:18
19912 Sticklat, G, 40M 4:39:18
19913 Finerty, S, 35F 4:39:19
19914 Pikarski, M, 44M 4:39:19
19915 Amirian, C, 29F 4:39:19
19916 Holm, J, 37M 4:39:19
19917 Smith, F, 49F 4:39:19
19918 Hudgens, H, 25F 4:39:20
19919 Berwick, S, 37F 4:39:20
19920 Neff, J, 40F 4:39:20
19921 Kenny, K, 29F 4:39:20
19922 Langbein, T, 40M 4:39:21
19923 Cole, M, 52M 4:39:21
19924 Segering, K, 61M 4:39:21
19925 Michelini, R, 30F 4:39:21
19926 Vasquez, M, 26F 4:39:21
19927 Chagnon, D, 48M 4:39:21
19928 Pinto, J, 60M 4:39:21
19929 Bernard, K, 52M 4:39:21
19930 Ottavy, P, 35M 4:39:22
19931 Petit, D, 38M 4:39:23
19932 Wallace, C, 28F 4:39:23
19933 Miller, G, 34M 4:39:24
19934 Landers, J, 39M 4:39:24
19935 Paysant, L, 62M 4:39:24
19936 Gonzalez, P, 48F 4:39:25
19937 Weldon, K, 32F 4:39:25
19938 Armstrong, R, 61M 4:39:25
19939 Fitts, F, 48M 4:39:25
19940 Albert, D, 34M 4:39:25
19941 Michel, J, 54M 4:39:26
19942 Dunn Jr, J, 53M 4:39:26
19943 Paret, M, 30F 4:39:27
19944 Dunn, J, 29M 4:39:27
19945 Janne, M, 57M 4:39:27
19946 Penfield, P, 47F 4:39:28
19947 Paulsson, P, 47M 4:39:28
19948 Buche, S, 50F 4:39:28
19949 Holst, R, 26M 4:39:28
19950 Mruk, F, 34M 4:39:29
19951 Reagan, M, 25F 4:39:29
19952 Vervik, A, 30M 4:39:29
19953 Lowe, A, 25F 4:39:29
19954 Parris, S, 44F 4:39:30
19955 Quinn, H, 27F 4:39:30
19956 Bain, T, 34M 4:39:30
19957 Dombrowski, S, 31M 4:39:30
19958 Gorden, J, 27M 4:39:30
19959 D'Ercole, C, 35M 4:39:30
19960 Butler, N, 44F 4:39:30
19961 Roberts, D, 27M 4:39:31
19962 Muendel, D, 42M 4:39:31
19963 Taylor, S, 29F 4:39:31
19964 Chabaud, R, 47M 4:39:31
19965 Wehrli, M, 63M 4:39:32
19966 Asmus, K, 58M 4:39:32
19967 Dombrowski, D, 24M 4:39:33
19968 Roos, C, 48M 4:39:33
19969 Wilson, J, 49M 4:39:33
19970 Odden, A, 32F 4:39:34
19971 Pieper, J, 50M 4:39:34
19972 Silvani, V, 24F 4:39:34
19973 Murrisch, J, 23M 4:39:34
19974 Benvenuti, C, 48M 4:39:34
19975 Ait Abdelmalek, H, 31F 4:39:34
19976 Waggner, C, 62M 4:39:34
19977 Omar, M, 49M4:39:34
19978 O'Connor, T, 53M 4:39:34
19979 Demarest, J, 35M 4:39:35
19980 Huet, A, 52M 4:39:35
19981 Conte, M, 39F 4:39:35
19982 Cano, G, 58M 4:39:35
19983 Renssen, S, 39M 4:39:36
19984 Sancilio, D, 29F 4:39:36
19985 Diaz, A, 45M 4:39:36
19986 Gomez, M, 33F 4:39:36
19987 Walsh, D, 25M 4:39:36
19988 Lipman, B, 28M 4:39:37
19989 Walsh, M, 46M 4:39:37
19990 Kapatkin, A, 38F 4:39:37
19991 Garza Rodriguez, M, 55M 4:39:37
19992 Birchard, S, 40F 4:39:39
19993 Huigen, E, 33F 4:39:39
19994 Kreek, M, 34F 4:39:39
19995 Holmer, T, 33F 4:39:39
19996 Grapentin, D, 32M 4:39:39
19997 Cradden, P, 49F 4:39:40
19998 Prieur, E, 39M 4:39:40
19999 Pallares Morales, H, 47M 4:39:40
20000 Maki, T, 52F 4:39:41
20001 Glantz, A, 46M 4:39:41
20002 Mois, J, 38M 4:39:41
20003 Estaba, M, 45F 4:39:41
20004 Chacin, A, 44M 4:39:41
20005 Selya, B, 58M 4:39:41
20006 Jaekel, C, 49M 4:39:43
20007 Pyden, A, 29M 4:39:43
20008 Guerette, N, 40F 4:39:43
20009 Lang, S, 42F 4:39:43
20010 Scholl, A, 28M 4:39:43
20011 Diaz, J, 38M 4:39:44
20012 De Boer, E, 38M 4:39:44
20013 Olitt, J, 66M 4:39:44
20014 Allman, D, 34M 4:39:44
20015 Dickens, L, 36F 4:39:45
20016 Grundlingh, S, 35M 4:39:46
20017 Kloosterman, M, 29M 4:39:46
20018 Van De Water, G, 32M 4:39:47
20019 Campos Cue, R, 54M 4:39:48
20020 Weiss, S, 43M 4:39:48
20021 Owen, A, 41F 4:39:49
20022 McDevitt, M, 47M 4:39:49
20023 Cahill, P, 52M 4:39:49
20024 Pisani, O, 50M 4:39:49
20025 Johnston, C, 53M 4:39:50
20026 Roman, C, 31M 4:39:50
20027 Preli, R, 37F 4:39:50
20028 Rovai, J, 57M 4:39:51
20029 Ashida, K, 31M 4:39:51
20030 Malling, K, 32M 4:39:51
20031 O'Dwyer, M, 36F 4:39:51
20032 Van Der Linden, T, 61F 4:39:52
20033 Frykman, L, 35M 4:39:52
20034Hogan, P, 23F 4:39:52
20035 Barrett, A, 40F 4:39:53
20036 Zarate, R, 46M 4:39:54
20037 Farley, R, 56M 4:39:55
20038 Cissik, P, 46F4:39:56
20039 McNabb, L, 40F 4:39:56
20040 Schofield, J, 39M 4:39:56
20041 Silva Filho, J, 51M 4:39:57
20042 Miller, M, 26F 4:39:57
20043 Cacciuttolo, C, 35M 4:39:57
20044 Lutzak, L, 42M 4:39:58
20045 Mialkowski, J, 42F 4:39:58
20046 Haun, K, 27M 4:39:58
20047 Devlin, T, 27F 4:39:59
20048 Komar, L, 42M 4:39:59
20049 Powell, M, 39F 4:39:59
20050 Silverman, E, 25M 4:40:00
20051 Moelders, A, 42F 4:40:00
20052 Thom, H, 42F 4:40:01
20053 Sokerka, G, 48M 4:40:01
20054 Johnson, E, 43M 4:40:01
20055 Bressi, P, 29M 4:40:01
20056 Wilner, S, 26M 4:40:01
20057 Williams, S, 24F 4:40:01
20058 Dunn, J, 27F 4:40:01
20059 Mackin, M, 32F 4:40:01
20060 Jimenez Villar, S, 50M 4:40:02
20061 Duterme, D, 25M 4:40:02
20062 Murphey, B, 42M 4:40:02
20063 White, J, 50M 4:40:02
20064 Gregory, M, 49F 4:40:02
20065 Korver, H, 38M 4:40:02
20066 Devlin, J, 30M 4:40:02
20067 Tanner, J, 46F 4:40:02
20068 Van Der Jagt, A, 37M 4:40:03
20069 Devlin, J, 58M 4:40:03
20070 Debenedictis, M, 24F 4:40:03
20071 Kepner, T, 35M 4:40:03
20072 Castiglione, C, 38M 4:40:03
20073 Cooper, A, 23F 4:40:03
20074 McCafferty, D, 40F 4:40:03
20075 Lei Pop, L, 39M 4:40:04
20076 Blom-Brusik, C, 46F 4:40:04
20077 Farrar, G, 51M 4:40:04
20078 Hammarborg, C, 46M 4:40:04
20079Friedenberg, M, 28M 4:40:05
20080 Candeago, P, 37M 4:40:05
20081 Monnois, C, 50M 4:40:05
20082 Wenger, G, 52M 4:40:05
20083 Coscarelli, R, 57F 4:40:05
20084 Duke, M, 51M 4:40:06
20085 Fay, J, 36M 4:40:07
20086 Nomiyama, K, 52M 4:40:07
20087 Ribola, C, 56M 4:40:08
20088 Etienne, A, 42M 4:40:08
20089 Gaudreau, M, 22F 4:40:08
20090 Kashyap, S, 45F 4:40:08
20091 Kagita, M, 52M 4:40:09
20092 Miller, J, 30F 4:40:09
20093 Magnini, R, 58M 4:40:10
20094 Olivo, J, 56M 4:40:10
20095 Skivington, I, 38M 4:40:11
20096 Hamilton, L, 30F 4:40:11
20097 Cullen, J, 44M 4:40:12
20098 Hansen, E, 35M 4:40:13
20099 Lightstone, R, 34M 4:40:13
20100 Nolan, E, 36F 4:40:14
20101 Schleitzer, G, 45M 4:40:14
20102 Joseph, S, 33M 4:40:14
20103 Koen, K, 37M 4:40:14
20104 Spear, K, 25F 4:40:14
20105 Benson, J, 39M 4:40:15
20106 Shuman, R, 42M 4:40:15
20107 Boissel, Y, 57M 4:40:15
20108 Rick, W, 69M 4:40:15
20109 Capatides, M, 39M 4:40:15
20110 Paik, C, 31F 4:40:16
20111 Short, M, 32M 4:40:17
20112 Mannion, T, 38M 4:40:17
20113 Fox, T, 34F 4:40:17
20114Kammerer, R, 60M 4:40:17
20115 Koehler, H, 59M 4:40:17
20116 Glazer, S, 24F 4:40:18
20117 Culliton, D, 36M 4:40:18
20118 Barroso, H, 38M 4:40:18
20119 Grammatico, J, 43M 4:40:19
20120 Culliton, C, 38M 4:40:19
20121 Brown, D, 50M 4:40:21
20122 Moeser, S, 41F 4:40:21
20123 Lovelace, J, 49M 4:40:22
20124 Pannier, M, 42M 4:40:22
20125 Boyle, D, 44M 4:40:22
20126 McGrath, A, 28F 4:40:22
20127 Mc Cartan, E, 41M 4:40:22
20128 Lorenzetti, J, 46M 4:40:23
20129 Gamble, C, 31M 4:40:23
20130 Crespin, R, 57M 4:40:23
20131 Gerardi, M, 33M 4:40:23
20132 Lavorano, C, 37M 4:40:23
20133 Paitry, E, 57M 4:40:23
20134 Van Meerten, A, 27F 4:40:23
20135 Van Meerten, H, 52M 4:40:23
20136 Melhorn, E, 47F 4:40:24
20137 Martin, B, 43F4:40:24
20138 Schetelich, T, 39M 4:40:24
20139 Gazzo, F, 31M 4:40:24
20140 McLaughlin, E, 40F 4:40:24
20141 Coughlin, P, 37M 4:40:24
20142 Ethridge, H, 53M 4:40:24
20143 Rojas, W, 39M 4:40:25
20144 Buettner, H, 57F 4:40:25
20145 Guilleminot, R, 45M 4:40:25
20146 Colten, S, 25M 4:40:25
20147 Gemelli, J, 39M 4:40:25
20148 Veschini, C, 41M 4:40:26
20149 Longin, M, 29M 4:40:26
20150 Bisig, R, 44F 4:40:26
20151 Williams, M, 30M 4:40:26
20152 Johansson, J, 42M 4:40:27
20153 Zampetti, N, 48M 4:40:28
20154 Leriche, F, 36M 4:40:28
20155 Mueller, K, 60M 4:40:29
20156 Haarmeier, D, 49M 4:40:29
20157 Wentworth, D, 34M 4:40:29
20158 Urbina, L, 38M 4:40:29
20159 Keating, A, 29F 4:40:30
20160 Laird, S, 36M 4:40:30
20161 Nicastro, N, 53M 4:40:31
20162 Van Veldhoven, A, 33M 4:40:31
20163 McKay, R, 39M 4:40:31
20164 Vandewalle, J, 40M 4:40:31
20165 Villalba Morales, R, 19M 4:40:32
20166 Karlin, L, 29M 4:40:32
20167Blakeslee, M, 40M 4:40:32
20168 Marker, H, 61M 4:40:33
20169 Terzi, A, 24M 4:40:33
20170 Van Der Knaap, L, 40M 4:40:33
20171 Teeter, A, 38F 4:40:33
20172 Andrewitz, H, 57F 4:40:34
20173 Boyer, H, 33F 4:40:34
20174 Welbie, A, 28M 4:40:35
20175 Toman, J, 29M 4:40:35
20176 Templeton, M, 47M 4:40:36
20177 Williams, G, 56M 4:40:36
20178 Jacobs, L, 38M 4:40:36
20179 O'Kelley, H, 23F 4:40:36
20180 Kerese, C, 31F 4:40:37
20181 Lorenzi, M, 32M 4:40:37
20182 Curran, J, 24F 4:40:37
20183 Lopez, P, 57F 4:40:37
20184 O'Kelley, L, 51M 4:40:37
20185 Campbell, G, 31M 4:40:38
20186 Schmuckler, M, 57F 4:40:38
20187 Annichiarico, P, 33M 4:40:38
20188 Takayama, M, 27F 4:40:38
20189 Getoff, T, 39F 4:40:38
20190 Lorenzo, A, 27M 4:40:39
20191 Pol, E, 46F 4:40:39
20192 Madsen, J, 41M 4:40:39
20193 Colia, R, 55M 4:40:40
20194 Alatini, L, 47F 4:40:40
20195 Huse, D, 42M 4:40:41
20196 Hazard, D, 45M 4:40:41
20197 Bohlin, P, 42M 4:40:41
20198 Morgan, R, 46M 4:40:41
20199 Zizza, E, 25M 4:40:41
20200 Figge, J, 52M 4:40:42
20201 Koide, S, 71M 4:40:43
20202 Brickweg, D, 39M 4:40:43
20203 Schor, P, 35M 4:40:43
20204 Rust, H, 57M 4:40:43
20205 Humphreys, J, 38F 4:40:43
20206 Wenzel, M, 26F 4:40:43
20207 Kramer, P, 36M 4:40:44
20208 Dwyer, A, 25F 4:40:44
20209 Bumpus, J, 51F 4:40:44
20210 Schneider, L, 29F 4:40:44
20211 Frenay, E, 30M 4:40:44
20212 Miller, E, 42M 4:40:44
20213 Guarino, F, 47M 4:40:44
20214 Greven, J, 37M 4:40:44
20215 Hanna, J, 60F 4:40:45
20216 De Jong, R, 37M 4:40:45
20217 Anderson, M, 40F 4:40:45
20218 O'Regan, D, 41M 4:40:46
20219 Anand, J, 52M 4:40:46
20220 Adkins, B, 29F 4:40:46
20221 Carrera, C, 30M 4:40:47
20222 Dizier, M, 39M 4:40:47
20223 Pinol, D, 35M 4:40:47
20224 Maynard, S, 43F 4:40:48
20225 Anderson, K, 27M 4:40:48
20226Van Des Pijll, J, 44M 4:40:48
20227 Heinrich, T, 45F 4:40:49
20228 Taschl, C, 23M 4:40:50
20229 Takano, M, 31F 4:40:50
20230 Bauer, J, 40M 4:40:50
20231 Lee, E, 40F 4:40:50
20232 Gomez Marval, F, 50M 4:40:51
20233 Ross, J, 25M 4:40:51
20234 Minguez, G, 33M 4:40:52
20235 Squire, A, 44M 4:40:52
20236 Woodcock*, M, 51M 4:40:52
20237 Jacobs, C, 47F 4:40:53
20238 Pastolove, M, 24M 4:40:53
20239 Ryan, T, 39M 4:40:53
20240 Atienza, R, 47M 4:40:54
20241 Camera, R, 53M 4:40:54
20242 Brouwer, C, 32M 4:40:55
20243 Nichols, D, 53M 4:40:55
20244 Wasserfall, I, 46F 4:40:56
20245 Ducros, M, 45M 4:40:56
20246 Biancato, J, 42M 4:40:56
20247 Ehret, C, 46F 4:40:56
20248 Kendall, J, 47M 4:40:57
20249 Fukushima, K, 27M 4:40:57
20250 Mokrzycki, M, 29M 4:40:57
20251 Adam, P, 31M 4:40:58
20252 Halberg, K, 25F 4:40:58
20253 Garza Perales, E, 43M 4:40:58
20254 Lee, K, 26F 4:40:58
20255 Grandelli, K, 27F 4:40:58
20256 Pasquet, T, 40M 4:40:58
20257 Richardson, E, 55F 4:40:58
20258 Buckland, L, 65M 4:40:59
20259 Wajnberg, L, 34M 4:41:00
20260 Doolan, M, 27F 4:41:01
20261 McCoy, J, 46M 4:41:01
20262 Wesolowksi, A, 31F 4:41:01
20263 Kruse, N, 42M 4:41:01
20264 Ricart Mila, F, 31M 4:41:01
20265 Blanchette, D, 39F 4:41:01
20266 Hoyos, J, 35M 4:41:02
20267 Chinon, P, 38M 4:41:02
20268 De Alba Brewster, G, 30M 4:41:02
20269 Silvestre, J, 44M 4:41:03
20270 Pizzo, L, 46M 4:41:03
20271 Nacron, R, 42M 4:41:04
20272 Navidi, A, 35M 4:41:04
20273 Droege, P, 38M 4:41:04
20274 Haeberle, V, 32M 4:41:05
20275 Coughlin, K, 28M 4:41:05
20276 Caballero Jr, P, 43M 4:41:05
20277 Iturralde, R, 39M 4:41:05
20278 Rau, M, 36M 4:41:06
20279 Moriya, T, 30M4:41:06
20280 Vogel, G, 37M 4:41:06
20281 Sparks, R, 29F 4:41:07
20282 Steer, S, 50F 4:41:07
20283 Campello, J, 35M 4:41:07
20284 Brunner, K, 26F 4:41:07
20285 Wilder, T, 40M 4:41:09
20286 Wambold, G, 40M 4:41:09
20287 Mackenzie, A, 38F 4:41:10
20288 Hogan, E, 34M 4:41:10
20289 Wolfson, B, 48F 4:41:10
20290 O'Brien, M, 27F 4:41:11
20291 Kotkaslamti, V, 59M 4:41:11
20292 Hunter, S, 42F 4:41:11
20293 Blaise Jr, O, 48M 4:41:11
20294 Vastinesluoma, K, 49M 4:41:11
20295 Delong, N, 44F 4:41:12
20296 Biondo, J, 55M 4:41:12
20297 Gisler, C, 31M 4:41:12
20298 Nederlof, M, 32M 4:41:12
20299 Lapinski, A, 24M 4:41:12
20300 Sullivan, B, 40M 4:41:13
20301 Plugge, T, 42M 4:41:13
20302 Van Onselen, J, 44M 4:41:13
20303Jett, D, 40M 4:41:13
20304 Meuser, M, 28F 4:41:13
20305 Burns, K, 31M 4:41:14
20306 Muggeo, D, 37M 4:41:14
20307 Oakley, W, 50M 4:41:14
20308 Rosenstein, L, 28M 4:41:15
20309 Ferez, B, 37M 4:41:15
20310 Clarke, P, 28M 4:41:16
20311 Stady, J, 31F 4:41:16
20312 Brouwer, R, 37M 4:41:16
20313 Centeno, H, 48M 4:41:16
20314 Rieder, M, 37M 4:41:17
20315 Friedman, A, 49M 4:41:17
20316 George-Batier, J, 41M 4:41:17
20317 Danziger, M, 47M 4:41:18
20318 Wehr, A, 44M 4:41:18
20319 Landry, M, 50F 4:41:19
20320 Landry, D, 49M 4:41:20
20321 Pokela, C, 54F 4:41:20
20322 Caccamo, A, 35M 4:41:20
20323 Dieda, G, 18M 4:41:20
20324 Sanchez, A, 47M 4:41:21
20325 Alesso, A, 55M 4:41:21
20326 Fialkovich, R, 41M 4:41:21
20327 Duque Alanis, J, 42M 4:41:21
20328 Cobrinik, D, 40M 4:41:21
20329 Dallay, D, 35M 4:41:22
20330 Schollaert, C, 55M 4:41:23
20331 Tupaz, D, 41M 4:41:23
20332 Legrand, J, 44M 4:41:23
20333 Egan, W, 38M 4:41:23
20334 Newton, B, 45F 4:41:23
20335 Perinelli, M, 38F 4:41:24
20336 Gutierrez, D, 39M 4:41:24
20337 How, C, 47F 4:41:24
20338 Jones, R, 35M 4:41:24
20339 Toussaint, J, 25M 4:41:25
20340 Roberts, J, 47M 4:41:26
20341 Cantrell, C, 40M 4:41:26
20342 Colon, F, 51M 4:41:26
20343 Swatt, G, 50M 4:41:26
20344 Van Zandvoort, C, 34F 4:41:26
20345 Coupet, C, 40F 4:41:27
20346 Le Bloas, M, 46F 4:41:27
20347 Cairo, G, 28M 4:41:27
20348 Zamboni, S, 39M 4:41:28
20349 Edwards, S, 27M 4:41:28
20350 Quigg, G, 41M 4:41:28
20351 Dumas, D, 49F 4:41:28
20352 Caviglia, G, 48M 4:41:28
20353 Guiot, L, 23F 4:41:28
20354 Pillet, J, 50M 4:41:29
20355 Richard, A, 46M 4:41:29
20356 Aguera, M, 49F 4:41:29
20357 Aguera, J, 49M 4:41:29
20358 Blondet, P, 50M 4:41:29
20359 Saffran, B, 34M 4:41:29
20360 Graham, R, 38M 4:41:30
20361 Sasako, K, 41F 4:41:30
20362 Schwegel, A, 50M 4:41:30
20363 Frederic, D, 32F 4:41:30
20364 Garcia, I, 59M 4:41:31
20365 Rosengarten, M, 43M 4:41:32
20366Zadnikar, T, 47F 4:41:32
20367 Dregne, J, 39F 4:41:33
20368 Mitchell, D, 36F 4:41:33
20369 Pugliese, R, 63M 4:41:33
20370 Hope, S, 38M 4:41:34
20371 Coiro, R, 35M 4:41:34
20372 Stewart, S, 33F 4:41:34
20373 Tessler, L, 26M 4:41:35
20374 Tyranski, C, 27M 4:41:35
20375 Van Seenus, T, 30M 4:41:35
20376 Van Ham, E, 49M 4:41:35
20377 Kershaw, D, 52M 4:41:35
20378 Wienbelt, S, 33F 4:41:36
20379 Gregory, D, 42M 4:41:36
20380 Schnaitt, E, 26M 4:41:36
20381 Gonzalez, A, 59M 4:41:36
20382 Saleh MD, A, 35M 4:41:36
20383 Athineos, P, 37M 4:41:37
20384 Schwenk, B, 44F 4:41:37
20385 Dilg, C, 43F 4:41:37
20386 Schiff, L, 58F 4:41:37
20387 Donnellan, M, 34F 4:41:38
20388 Dilg Dr., H, 36M 4:41:38
20389 Rusbridge, S, 48M 4:41:39
20390 Gomez, M, 40F 4:41:39
20391 Joubert, C, 36F 4:41:39
20392 Kramer, S, 40M 4:41:39
20393 Krautwald, P, 32M 4:41:39
20394 Hoffman Jr, D, 32M 4:41:39
20395 Kuchukov, O, 26F 4:41:40
20396Gastaldi, H, 46M 4:41:40
20397 Weinmann, K, 34M 4:41:40
20398 Haynes, C, 28M 4:41:41
20399 Goldthwaite, S, 50F 4:41:41
20400 Magpiong, E, 57M 4:41:41
20401 Welberg, F, 54M 4:41:41
20402 Ryan*, R, 30M 4:41:41
20403 Otton, N, 45F 4:41:41
20404 McSherry, J, 50F 4:41:41
20405 Yoshida, H, 57M 4:41:41
20406 Viljoen, B, 36M 4:41:41
20407 Holliday, B, 60M 4:41:41
20408 Desmond, S, 24M 4:41:42
20409 Connor, L, 47M 4:41:42
20410 Wold, J, 37M 4:41:42
20411 Toullec, H, 31M 4:41:42
20412 Thibaudat, D, 45M 4:41:43
20413 Roux, C, 43M 4:41:43
20414 Thornton, E, 25F 4:41:44
20415 Reijerse, P, 44M 4:41:44
20416 Couzens, M, 48M 4:41:45
20417 Angley, J, 32F 4:41:45
20418 Robinne, B, 37M 4:41:46
20419 Lestage, P, 42M 4:41:46
20420 Huizinga, H, 43F 4:41:46
20421 Kurzner, L, 33M 4:41:46
20422 Sherman, S, 40M 4:41:46
20423 Reddy, C, 21F 4:41:47
20424 Messina, M, 29M 4:41:47
20425 Becker, M, 26F 4:41:47
20426 Weiner, M, 46M 4:41:47
20427 Wolbring, L, 40M 4:41:47
20428 Maddalo, G, 48M 4:41:48
20429 Mizrahi, S, 40M 4:41:48
20430 Tak, J, 68M 4:41:48
20431 Ponthus, J, 52M 4:41:48
20432 Van Elzen, M, 37M 4:41:48
20433 Van Aggelen, J, 58M 4:41:48
20434 Smith, O, 55M 4:41:49
20435 O'Neill, J, 39F 4:41:49
20436 Gilroy, R, 31M 4:41:49
20437 Nickoloff, B, 30M 4:41:49
20438 Holland, C, 33M 4:41:50
20439 Palenque, A, 50F 4:41:50
20440 Welz, K, 44M 4:41:51
20441 Welz, E, 40F 4:41:51
20442 Cafiero, V, 25F 4:41:51
20443 Woodard, H, 29F 4:41:51
20444 Mendoza Cruz, V, 40M 4:41:51
20445 Girsky, J, 26M 4:41:52
20446 Moore, G, 49M 4:41:52
20447 Stien, J, 45M 4:41:52
20448 Lalanne, J, 46M 4:41:52
20449 Wuelfrath, M, 41M 4:41:53
20450 Bergang, V, 25F 4:41:53
20451 Leibow, R, 29F 4:41:53
20452 Whittle, E, 39M 4:41:54
20453 Nomura, S, 60F 4:41:54
20454 Ceroni, B, 43M 4:41:54
20455 Okunaga, T, 30M 4:41:54
20456 Meldrum, P, 36M 4:41:55
20457 Starr, M, 29M 4:41:55
20458 Meyer, T, 47M 4:41:55
20459Francois, J, 50M 4:41:55
20460 Blanco, L, 31M 4:41:55
20461 Liu, J, 22F 4:41:55
20462 Cervino, K, 24F 4:41:56
20463 Errable, J, 29M 4:41:56
20464 Ramer, G, 27M 4:41:56
20465 Chabagno, J, 42M 4:41:57
20466 Sry, J, 32M 4:41:57
20467 Pirttioja, P, 41F 4:41:57
20468 Fitzgerald, M, 42M 4:41:57
20469 Sakurada, S, 31M 4:41:57
20470 Cao, C, 47M 4:41:58
20471 Negishi, K, 26F 4:41:58
20472 Con Villa, J, 34M 4:41:58
20473 Bresser, G, 61M 4:41:58
20474 Ross, T, 37M 4:41:58
20475 Whitaker, S, 38F 4:41:58
20476 Mautner, M, 49F 4:41:58
20477 Grenawalt, J, 35M 4:41:59
20478 Titan, S, 36M 4:41:59
20479 Savage, M, 29M 4:41:59
20480 Hindelid, H, 41M 4:42:00
20481 Cappucci, S, 48M 4:42:00
20482 Van Der Voort, M, 58F 4:42:00
20483 Torres, L, 50M 4:42:00
20484 Low, J, 46M 4:42:01
20485 Liantonio, F, 45M 4:42:01
20486 Goldstein, D, 29M 4:42:01
20487 Carcamo, A, 28F 4:42:01
20488 Wilson, J, 48F 4:42:01
20489 Goni, A, 29F 4:42:02
20490 Goulet, L, 34M 4:42:02
20491 Arregui, I, 40F 4:42:02
20492 Lewis, H, 52F 4:42:02
20493 Livingston, C, 33F 4:42:02
20494 Zuzuarregui, I, 41F 4:42:03
20495 Bultman, T, 52M 4:42:03
20496 Heinz, E, 22F 4:42:03
20497 Lloyd, C, 34F 4:42:03
20498 Gonzalez, R, 62M 4:42:03
20499 Sait, P, 34F 4:42:03
20500 Crochemore, P, 53M 4:42:04
20501 Bayer, D, 33M 4:42:04
20502 Crochemore, J, 51M 4:42:04
20503 Crochemore, A, 56M 4:42:05
20504 Whitehurst, J, 36F 4:42:05
20505 Duran Pinales, C, 55M 4:42:05
20506 Johnston, M, 44M 4:42:05
20507 Turley, J, 27M 4:42:05
20508 Perri, M, 36M 4:42:06
20509 Middleton, B, 63M 4:42:06
20510 Fais, N, 36F 4:42:06
20511 Flanagan, S, 32F 4:42:07
20512 Flynn, D, 23F 4:42:08
20513 Cancel, T, 35M 4:42:08
20514 Cohen, E, 34M 4:42:08
20515 Reithemann, F, 50M 4:42:08
20516 Scheck, D, 26M 4:42:08
20517 Ochoa Torres, J, 46M 4:42:09
20518 Lankford, C, 21M 4:42:09
20519 Villareal, R, 40M 4:42:09
20520 Pellegrino, J, 30M 4:42:10
20521 Kenneally, M, 28M 4:42:10
20522 Sommer, J, 41M 4:42:10
20523 Luna, J, 38M 4:42:10
20524 Gross, S, 22M 4:42:10
20525 Potthoff, W, 50M 4:42:11
20526 Atwell, J, 45M 4:42:11
20527 Burgess, C, 40M 4:42:11
20528 Wolfe, J, 49M 4:42:11
20529 Wise, M, 39M 4:42:11
20530 Schuman, D, 37F 4:42:11
20531 Silver-Kolodin, L, 35F 4:42:12
20532 Wise, K, 40F 4:42:12
20533 Rosa, D, 47M 4:42:12
20534 Kessler, M, 35M 4:42:12
20535 Marsella, D, 43M 4:42:12
20536 Diamandopoulos, A, 24F 4:42:12
20537 Mueller, E, 49F 4:42:12
20538 Steiner, M, 43M 4:42:13
20539 Siony, D, 34M 4:42:13
20540 Dronkers, W, 60M 4:42:13
20541 Lerner, M, 23M 4:42:13
20542 Schlie-Neiseke, O, 37F 4:42:13
20543 Dronkers, C, 33M 4:42:14
20544 Toledano MD, B, 34M 4:42:14
20545 Flood, R, 40M 4:42:14
20546 DeBenedicts, G, 25F 4:42:15
20547 Carbone, P, 31M 4:42:15
20548 Williams, V, 46M 4:42:15
20549 Aupperlee, C, 27M 4:42:15
20550 Lochte, R, 42M 4:42:15
20551 Diana, P, 38M 4:42:16
20552 Sanchez-Navarro, R, 35M 4:42:16
20553 Gourdon, J, 52M 4:42:16
20554 Azak, A, 57M 4:42:16
20555 Carper, M, 42F4:42:17
20556 Khan, S, 30F 4:42:17
20557 Ritchie, E, 50F 4:42:17
20558 Carper, D, 42M 4:42:17
20559 Dufour, C, 46M 4:42:18
20560 Greten, R, 47M 4:42:18
20561 Dittmann, H, 43M 4:42:18
20562 Jimenez, F, 27M 4:42:19
20563 Vidra, C, 33F 4:42:19
20564 Riccitelli, R, 38M 4:42:19
20565 Travers, R, 38F 4:42:19
20566 Gilder, M, 46M 4:42:20
20567 Blaikie, P, 32F 4:42:20
20568 Lythgoe, D, 57M 4:42:20
20569 Pierce-Watne, G, 46F 4:42:20
20570 Landman, M, 36F 4:42:20
20571 Lambrite, S, 34F 4:42:21
20572 Perez, A, 53M 4:42:21
20573 Carta, J, 27M 4:42:21
20574 Woolf, B, 41F 4:42:22
20575 Richmann, R, 33M 4:42:22
20576 Scharmann, H, 60M 4:42:22
20577 Chanteloup, J, 44M 4:42:22
20578 Cano, P, 55M 4:42:22
20579 Font, E, 35M 4:42:22
20580 Raynold, V, 40F 4:42:23
20581 Kutzen, T, 41M 4:42:23
20582 Edelstein, H, 28F 4:42:23
20583 Smit, F, 32M 4:42:24
20584 Sieper, V, 25F 4:42:24
20585 Gatzias, D, 63M 4:42:24
20586 Dicken, H, 39M 4:42:24
20587 Kovacs, L, 30M 4:42:25
20588 Gehring-Schmidt, C, 40F 4:42:25
20589 Rojas, P, 45M 4:42:25
20590 Villa Islas, M, 61M 4:42:25
20591 Garsjoe, W, 52F 4:42:25
20592 Clark, F, 26M 4:42:25
20593 Marinello, R, 38M 4:42:25
20594 Hayes, M, 39F 4:42:26
20595 Armstrong, D, 43M 4:42:26
20596 Kruschel, R, 47F 4:42:27
20597 Luthi, S, 45M 4:42:27
20598 Nelson, R, 40M 4:42:27
20599 Ahkami, S, 25F 4:42:27
20600 Krawcheck, J, 28M 4:42:28
20601 Schollaert, Y, 25M 4:42:28
20602 Baerg, B, 35F 4:42:28
20603 Hohn, H, 49M 4:42:29
20604 Stagni, V, 52M 4:42:29
20605 Walf, J, 44M 4:42:29
20606 Missouri, N, 41F 4:42:29
20607 Azmy, N, 29F 4:42:29
20608 Robinson, T, 47M 4:42:29
20609 Weamer, M, 43M 4:42:29
20610 Harsch, D, 31M 4:42:30
20611 Komissaroff, L, 45M 4:42:30
20612 Kennedy, S, 30F 4:42:31
20613 Gleeson, P, 42M 4:42:31
20614Castaneda Rosales, G, 29F 4:42:31
20615 Burkert, R, 33M 4:42:31
20616 Campos Aleman, E, 50M 4:42:31
20617 Griffin, P, 37M 4:42:32
20618 Karstens, R, 52F 4:42:32
20619 Brousset, J, 45M 4:42:33
20620Ely, R, 55F 4:42:33
20621 Tyler, L, 46M 4:42:34
20622 Holmes, M, 42M 4:42:34
20623 Burke, M, 45M 4:42:34
20624 Plagnard, A, 50M 4:42:35
20625 DeFazio, M, 34M 4:42:35
20626 Hu, E, 23M 4:42:35
20627 Murray, S, 35M 4:42:35
20628 Stijnman, N, 57M 4:42:35
20629Dempsey, J, 31M 4:42:35
20630 Zwart, A, 36M 4:42:36
20631 Rasulo, J, 30M 4:42:36
20632 Stijnman, M, 28M 4:42:36
20633 Kopp, J, 41M4:42:36
20634 Capozzi, D, 32M 4:42:36
20635 Small, T, 25M 4:42:37
20636 Stulbaum, M, 31M 4:42:37
20637 Simmons, M, 39M 4:42:37
20638 Eisenberg, H, 48M 4:42:37
20639 Wessel, J, 49M 4:42:38
20640 Belloni, R, 32M 4:42:38
20641 Winter, R, 37F 4:42:38
20642 Morgenbesser, A, 24M 4:42:38
20643 O'Connor 3rd, L, 33M 4:42:38
20644 Isaksson, T, 54F 4:42:39
20645 Tashdjian, G, 46M 4:42:39
20646 Altman, R, 30M 4:42:39
20647 Fernandez Sanchez, R, 44F 4:42:39
20648 Gomis Ribes, S, 47M 4:42:40
20649 Nordlund, B, 23M 4:42:40
20650 Rose, C, 45M 4:42:41
20651 Anderson, J, 29F 4:42:41
20652 Arndt, D, 58M 4:42:41
20653 Barbato, N, 40M 4:42:42
20654 Kraska, L, 30M 4:42:42
20655 Bland, J, 54M 4:42:43
20656 Finkelstein, R, 30M 4:42:43
20657 Clark, G, 53M 4:42:43
20658 Street, C, 50F 4:42:43
20659 Cornell, S, 49F 4:42:44
20660 Caruso, J, 47F 4:42:44
20661 Glickman, S, 30F 4:42:44
20662 Haragsim, A, 34M 4:42:44
20663 D'Andrade, J, 50F 4:42:44
20664 Kass, S, 42M 4:42:44
20665 Joergens, H, 31F 4:42:45
20666 Singer, D, 42M 4:42:45
20667 Celis Solorzano, E, 57M 4:42:45
20668 Relyea, N, 48F 4:42:45
20669 Youngs Jr, G, 44M 4:42:46
20670 Risch, H, 54M 4:42:46
20671 Bills, R, 44M 4:42:46
20672 Bills, R, 46M 4:42:46
20673 Broeseliske, J, 37M 4:42:47
20674 Ronner, R, 62M 4:42:47
20675 McHugh, J, 24M 4:42:48
20676 Ellerton, M, 53F 4:42:48
20677 Gurock, J, 44M 4:42:48
20678 Bourke, M, 42M 4:42:48
20679 De Nobel, H, 43F 4:42:49
20680 Kanarick, M, 26M 4:42:50
20681 Haber, B, 25M 4:42:50
20682 Elnick, B, 36M 4:42:50
20683 Wnek, T, 37F 4:42:50
20684 Voellinger, U, 40M 4:42:51
20685 Suzuki, S, 38M 4:42:51
20686 Fischer, M, 34M 4:42:51
20687 Molina, I, 34F 4:42:52
20688 Leo Jr., R, 27M 4:42:52
20689 Gould, B, 34M 4:42:53
20690 Zapata, F, 40M 4:42:53
20691 Leo, P, 25M4:42:53
20692 Klein, A, 41M 4:42:54
20693 Erskine, A, 32F 4:42:54
20694 McGregor, C, 32F 4:42:54
20695 Cohen, B, 45F 4:42:54
20696 Swavey, D, 46M 4:42:55
20697 Mathe Dumaine, H, 35M 4:42:55
20698 Shorten, S, 43M 4:42:56
20699 Campos Netto, P, 59M 4:42:56
20700 Perl De Paul, A, 34F 4:42:56
20701 Asakawa, T, 28M 4:42:56
20702 Kelly, V, 31F 4:42:57
20703 Adams, M, 37M 4:42:57
20704 Letissier, F, 33M 4:42:58
20705 Gordon, D, 36M 4:42:58
20706 Shomper, D, 39F 4:42:58
20707 Lang, M, 54M 4:42:59
20708 Sylvestre, C, 40F 4:42:59
20709 Phebus Jr, M, 25M 4:42:59
20710 Lowenbraun, H, 36M 4:42:59
20711 Phebus, J, 50M 4:42:59
20712 Loughman, J, 51M 4:42:59
20713 Berg, A, 25F 4:42:59
20714 Scheland, M, 36M 4:43:00
20715 Hoogenboezem, P, 40M 4:43:00
20716 Powers, C, 32F 4:43:00
20717Weiss, J, 26F 4:43:00
20718 Del Piano, P, 32M 4:43:00
20719 Ortega, A, 28M 4:43:01
20720 Vohs, A, 53M 4:43:01
20721 Mestari, A, 37F 4:43:01
20722 O'Connor, G, 50M 4:43:01
20723 Westeinde, J, 29F 4:43:01
20724 Borch, J, 25F 4:43:01
20725 Ramirez, B, 45F 4:43:01
20726 Borch, J, 31M 4:43:01
20727 Gonzalez, A, 47M 4:43:02
20728 Kusch, F, 40M 4:43:02
20729 Danis, R, 33M 4:43:02
20730 Correale, K, 26F 4:43:02
20731 Nackoul, A, 48M 4:43:02
20732 Morley, I, 28M 4:43:03
20733 Barachowitz, B, 49M 4:43:03
20734 Giove, A, 51M4:43:03
20735 Maguire, M, 25F 4:43:04
20736 Slahetka, R, 53M 4:43:04
20737 Bahmann, H, 54M 4:43:04
20738 Cohen, E, 29F 4:43:04
20739 Soicher, J, 28F 4:43:05
20740 Hujeux, P, 32F 4:43:05
20741Saunders, D, 38M 4:43:05
20742 Borrow, T, 46M 4:43:05
20743 Davlouros, A, 32M 4:43:06
20744 Bendixen, J, 62M 4:43:06
20745 Caporaso, T, 39M 4:43:06
20746 Hamill, D, 33F 4:43:07
20747 Laprel, J, 40M 4:43:08
20748 Bodeutsch, J, 40F 4:43:08
20749 Sunderkaemper, B, 27F 4:43:08
20750 Hanson, R, 25M 4:43:08
20751 Wolf, B, 36F 4:43:08
20752 Wenzel, S, 32M 4:43:09
20753 Arboleda, L, 33M 4:43:09
20754 Newman, A, 29F 4:43:09
20755 Damesek, L, 27F 4:43:09
20756McNamara, S, 39F 4:43:10
20757 Janetzki, A, 32F 4:43:10
20758 Van Der Eem, N, 52M 4:43:11
20759 Decesare, M, 47F 4:43:11
20760 Harangozo, P, 73M 4:43:11
20761 Konen, L, 38F 4:43:12
20762 Barrera Villar, J, 35M 4:43:12
20763 Quiroga, A, 34M 4:43:12
20764 Friedland, S, 38M 4:43:13
20765 Hegerman, M, 32M 4:43:13
20766 Spradley, S, 40F 4:43:13
20767 Cseffan, A, 21F 4:43:14
20768 Francois, B, 53F4:43:14
20769 Sabo, S, 40M 4:43:14
20770 Ganju, V, 45M 4:43:14
20771 Tibbetts, C, 40F 4:43:15
20772 Castillo Alcala, J, 48M 4:43:15
20773 Schatzberg, J, 37F 4:43:15
20774 Moore, A, 28F 4:43:15
20775 Stern, E, 32M 4:43:15
20776 Richardson, P, 43M 4:43:15
20777 Michel, J, 42M 4:43:15
20778 Bergman, R, 50M 4:43:16
20779 Kane III, J, 39M 4:43:16
20780 Morgentaler, R, 48M 4:43:16
20781 McGee, D, 46M 4:43:16
20782 Guida, G, 26M 4:43:16
20783 Madson, P, 50F4:43:16
20784 Kane, M, 44M 4:43:16
20785 San Segundo, J, 34M 4:43:16
20786 Nobile, P, 52M 4:43:17
20787 Durfee, C, 24M 4:43:17
20788 Freifelder, L, 45M 4:43:17
20789 Journois, M, 40F 4:43:18
20790 Vergara, C, 44F 4:43:19
20791 Hirsch, D, 25M 4:43:20
20792 Dunsmoor, K, 49M 4:43:20
20793 Hirsch, G, 60M 4:43:20
20794 Carter, D, 30M 4:43:20
20795 Hunt, E, 33F 4:43:20
20796 Manas, T, 35M 4:43:21
20797 Difede, C, 41F 4:43:21
20798 Marques, C, 51M 4:43:22
20799 Heins, R, 60M 4:43:22
20800 Cook, D, 29M 4:43:22
20801 Pattner, A, 52M 4:43:22
20802 Rivera, R, 51M 4:43:23
20803 Jakobsen, M, 47F 4:43:23
20804 Olijnyk, N, 25M 4:43:23
20805 Ware, T, 52M 4:43:23
20806 Haynes, C, 39F 4:43:23
20807 Wagenaar, R, 59M 4:43:24
20808 Garduno, S, 35M 4:43:24
20809 Thompson, C, 31F 4:43:24
20810 McCabe, W, 39M 4:43:24
20811 Siddiqui, S, 33M 4:43:26
20812 Prevost, J, 41M 4:43:26
20813 Joergensen, K, 36M 4:43:26
20814 Ebinger, H, 50M 4:43:26
20815 Sanchez, H, 49M 4:43:27
20816 Roulin, K, 30F 4:43:27
20817 Gentilello, L, 41M 4:43:27
20818 Ruette, J, 54M 4:43:27
20819 Groner, L, 39F 4:43:27
20820 Heneka, R, 44M 4:43:27
20821 Andre, M, 58F 4:43:28
20822 Muellerklein, J, 37F 4:43:28
20823 Gillen, M, 33F 4:43:28
20824 Anderson, J, 55M 4:43:28
20825 Walters, F, 40M 4:43:28
20826 Goldstein, S, 30F 4:43:28
20827 Denis, M, 43F 4:43:28
20828 Denis, D, 43M 4:43:29
20829 Prager, K, 21F 4:43:29
20830 Pugh, W, 20M 4:43:29
20831 Barrett, J, 48M 4:43:29
20832 Wu, E, 20F 4:43:30
20833 Van Staden, G, 36M 4:43:30
20834 Haas, G, 47F 4:43:30
20835 Rowe, G, 47F 4:43:30
20836 Duran Araya, M, 43M 4:43:30
20837 Abrams, T, 34M 4:43:30
20838Livingston, B, 34M 4:43:31
20839 Willkom, R, 56M 4:43:31
20840 Staubach, M, 26F 4:43:31
20841 Rasso, M, 46M 4:43:31
20842 Rood, J, 37F 4:43:31
20843 Elliott, J, 35M 4:43:31
20844 Landberg, G, 58M 4:43:32
20845 Synn, H, 29M 4:43:32
20846 Rohn, T, 40M 4:43:32
20847 Spiegel, P, 46M 4:43:33
20848 Henderson Jr, M, 42M 4:43:33
20849 Wezwick, A, 26F 4:43:33
20850 Wiacker, W, 44M 4:43:34
20851Skywalker, L, 40M 4:43:34
20852 Orsetti, G, 49M 4:43:34
20853 Wippich, H, 53M 4:43:34
20854 Millenaar, P, 47M 4:43:34
20855 Croney, W, 29F 4:43:34
20856 Luebbers, S, 41F 4:43:34
20857 Garbutt, D, 39F 4:43:34
20858 Hein, D, 45M 4:43:35
20859 Schear, M, 36M 4:43:35
20860 Outlaw, C, 48F 4:43:35
20861 Bender, J, 33M 4:43:35
20862 Gonzalez Menchaca, A, 40M 4:43:35
20863 Vormoor, J, 31M 4:43:35
20864 Ortega, A, 18M 4:43:36
20865 Goodman, L, 46M 4:43:36
20866 Skinner, K, 40F 4:43:36
20867 Martinez, E, 51M 4:43:37
20868 Waage Oestensjoe, G, 49F 4:43:37
20869 Douglas, D, 46M 4:43:38
20870Waage, K, 49M 4:43:38
20871 Seider, H, 40M 4:43:38
20872 Michelson, D, 50F 4:43:38
20873 Keresztes, P, 51M 4:43:38
20874 Morgan, M, 31F 4:43:38
20875 Harada, K, 25F 4:43:38
20876 Connaghton, J, 59M 4:43:38
20877 Morgan, P, 39M 4:43:39
20878 Demovqeot, R, 33F 4:43:39
20879 Murrell, P, 41F 4:43:39
20880 Lechner, M, 24M 4:43:39
20881 Quinn, D, 34M 4:43:39
20882 Slettenhaar, G, 37M 4:43:40
20883 Morales Ortega, G, 44M 4:43:42
20884 Aaltonen, T, 53M 4:43:42
20885 Cedillo Vela, F, 36M 4:43:43
20886 Adam, R, 41M 4:43:43
20887 Lelarge, C, 40M 4:43:43
20888 Randolph, H, 50M 4:43:43
20889 Kaminsky-Palmer, K, 41F 4:43:44
20890 Kerly, E, 44F 4:43:45
20891 Damjancevic, P, 37M 4:43:45
20892 Aulicino, E, 44F 4:43:47
20893 Lord, J, 30F 4:43:47
20894 McGowan, J, 49M 4:43:47
20895 Clapp, C, 42M 4:43:47
20896 Zavidow, M, 44F 4:43:47
20897 Loehrke, P, 44F 4:43:47
20898 Van Der Donk, A, 34M 4:43:48
20899 Loehrke, J, 45M 4:43:48
20900 Cohen, L, 29F 4:43:48
20901 Borenstein, A, 37M 4:43:49
20902 Wehner, H, 55M 4:43:49
20903 Vessberg, L, 51M 4:43:49
20904 Teague, B, 35M 4:43:49
20905 Rozzelle, J, 46M 4:43:49
20906Borlinghaus, M, 50F 4:43:49
20907 Chardavoyne, T, 35F 4:43:50
20908 Hall, G, 29M 4:43:51
20909 Fomin, Y, 37M 4:43:51
20910 Cohen, J, 58M 4:43:51
20911 Collins, S, 26M 4:43:51
20912 Greaves, C, 38M4:43:51
20913 Floyd, C, 41M 4:43:52
20914 Kilkenny, J, 45M 4:43:52
20915 Pellier, C, 35M 4:43:52
20916 Cunniff*, M, 30M 4:43:52
20917 Del Grande, P, 43M 4:43:53
20918 Gotthard, A, 38M 4:43:53
20919 Marshall, E, 34F 4:43:53
20920 Van Der Heijden, G, 30M 4:43:53
20921 Vogler, B, 45M 4:43:53
20922 Dehaarte, T, 37M 4:43:54
20923 Teasdale, J, 40F 4:43:54
20924 Ricks, P, 46M 4:43:54
20925 Martone, M, 44M 4:43:54
20926 Quint, D, 30M 4:43:55
20927 Ciravegna, P, 45M 4:43:57
20928 Hansen, K, 26F 4:43:57
20929 Trigiani, P, 30M 4:43:57
20930 Lucke, A, 30F 4:43:57
20931 Sweeney, J, 32F 4:43:58
20932 Whitehair, J, 37F 4:43:58
20933 Dandrea, A, 38M 4:43:58
20934 Kwasny, C, 37F 4:43:58
20935 Cerutti, A, 43M 4:43:59
20936 Kochman, J, 44M 4:44:00
20937 McKeon, R, 28M 4:44:00
20938 Giglia, S, 39M 4:44:00
20939 Somers, H, 39M 4:44:00
20940 Barker, C, 49M 4:44:01
20941 Nish, T, 33M 4:44:01
20942 Cerutti, M, 41F 4:44:01
20943 Cella, E, 43F 4:44:02
20944 Cella, G, 44M 4:44:02
20945 Dollinger, J, 45M 4:44:02
20946 Mochtar, A, 44F 4:44:02
20947Takeda, S, 28F 4:44:02
20948 Santos Junior, S, 48M 4:44:02
20949 Baffert, A, 41F 4:44:03
20950 Stites, S, 28F 4:44:03
20951 Ostrander, L, 30F 4:44:03
20952 Furshman, S, 37F 4:44:03
20953 Curry, K, 27F 4:44:04
20954 Korra, J, 37M 4:44:04
20955 Saretsky, K, 29M 4:44:04
20956 Belis, C, 50M 4:44:04
20957 Graham, G, 45M 4:44:05
20958 Manubens, J, 42M 4:44:05
20959 Hagura, A, 37M 4:44:05
20960 Baron, D, 39F 4:44:06
20961 Baer, P, 44M 4:44:06
20962 Peithman, J, 45M 4:44:06
20963 Brumm, J, 51M 4:44:07
20964 Barrot, F, 44M4:44:07
20965 Linderud, S, 34F 4:44:07
20966 Denig, F, 51M 4:44:08
20967 Metselaar, W, 52M 4:44:08
20968 Russel, V, 34F 4:44:08
20969 Eggesvik, T, 45M 4:44:08
20970 Snow, L, 64M 4:44:09
20971Williams, C, 60M 4:44:09
20972 Morrissey, B, 47F 4:44:09
20973 Peyres, F, 28F 4:44:09
20974 Piazzi, L, 48F 4:44:09
20975 Douard, H, 40M 4:44:10
20976 Bettini, R, 51M 4:44:10
20977 Aaronson, C, 23F4:44:11
20978 Holmstrom, S, 38M 4:44:11
20979 Knol, H, 38M 4:44:11
20980 Rafferty Jr, R, 41M 4:44:11
20981 Mains, A, 23M 4:44:12
20982 Mochizuki, K, 28M 4:44:12
20983 Cohen, L, 54M 4:44:13
20984 Loeffler, W, 42M 4:44:14
20985 Forster, B, 64F 4:44:14
20986 Bernitz, M, 34M 4:44:14
20987 Canonero, R, 51M 4:44:15
20988 Tolentino, S, 33M 4:44:15
20989 Falga, M, 34M 4:44:15
20990 Roof, K, 25F 4:44:15
20991 Lavin, R, 46M 4:44:15
20992 Mullen, P, 25M 4:44:15
20993 Sullivan, L, 33F 4:44:15
20994 Occhino, T, 35F 4:44:16
20995 Mikulak, A, 48F 4:44:16
20996 Sirin, C, 42M 4:44:16
20997 Taff, C, 45M 4:44:16
20998 Litwin, A, 37M 4:44:16
20999 Hogg, L, 45F 4:44:16
21000 Landry, D, 38F 4:44:16


Newmont Gold (NGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parking Rules
Because of Election Day, alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI AND CUOMO HIGHLIGHT MAIN THEMES
The leading New York gubernatorial candidates edged toward the finish line yesterday by doubling back to what each believes is his most potent theme: State Senator George E. Pataki argued once more that he is the candidate of tax cuts and change, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kept up questions about his rival's record and honesty on the litmus issue of abortion.
A1.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 1 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
1 Silva, G, 26M 2:11:21
2 Paredes, B, 33M 2:11:23
3 Barrios, A, 31M 2:11:43
4 Lelei, S, 30M 2:12:24
5 Castro, D, 30M 2:12:49
6 Jitsui, K, 25M 2:13:01
7 Beblo, L, 28M 2:13:12
8 Rico, I, 33M 2:13:22
9 Bettiol, S, 32M 2:13:44
10 Kapkiai, M, 25M 2:14:38
11 Tarazona, C, 29M 2:14:53
12 Peu, L, 28M 2:17:02
13 Koech, W, 32M 2:18:08
14 Osano, T, 24M 2:18:43
15 Pinheiro, J, 33M 2:18:45
16 Herbstri, V, 29M 2:19:26
17 Poli, G, 37M 2:19:27
18 Croce, L, 30M 2:20:06
19 Chauvelier, D, 38M 2:20:44
20 DaSilva, L, 29M 2:20:56
21 Ndeti, J, 21M 2:21:10
22 Duton, P, 34M 2:21:17
23 Olmedo, G, 31M 2:21:47
24 Szalkai, A, 24M 2:21:50
25 Thornton, T, 27M 2:21:55
26 Tagliaferri, G, 31M 2:22:16
27 McVeigh, J, 31M 2:22:25
28 Bimron, A, 35M 2:22:55
29 Temane, M, 33M 2:24:00
30 Makaba, P, 31M 2:24:25
31 Rivas, A, 32M 2:24:25
32 Nunez, B, 28M 2:24:52
33 Breard, J, 31M 2:25:00
34 Rachide, A, 34M 2:25:51
35 Ibrahim, I, 29M 2:25:55
36 Murray, T, 29M 2:25:57
37 Piveteau, P, 33M 2:25:58
38 Jiminez, S, 28M 2:26:14
39 Jaouane, H, 22M 2:26:16
40 Kolich, R, 30M 2:26:27
41 Rose, N, 42M 2:26:39
42 Dobler, K, 37M 2:26:46
43 Ramirez, J, 35M 2:26:49
44 Mtolo, W, 30M 2:27:06
45 Kurtis, D, 42M 2:27:29
46 Loroupe, T, 21F 2:27:37
47 Melendez Carrion, M, 40M 2:27:40
48 De Frutos, M, 29M 2:27:40
49 Vera Canelo, M, 43M 2:27:55
50 Askin, D, 40M 2:28:21
51 Hoop, L, 38M 2:28:29
52 Trifoi, J, 44M 2:28:34
53 De La Fuente, C, 35M 2:28:40
54 Morelli, G, 33M 2:28:56
55 Keohane, M, 29M 2:29:12
56 Macina, G, 30M 2:29:17
57 Wilson, M, 29M 2:29:20
58 Jones, S, 39M 2:29:33
59 Queret, G, 32M 2:29:34
60 Doll, K, 40M 2:29:42
61 Montuori Filho, A, 34M 2:29:44
62 Vanegas, E, 24M 2:29:52
63 Soguel, C, 32M 2:29:57
64 Biktagirova, M, 30F 2:30:00
65 Letko, A, 25F 2:30:19
66 Stanga, B, 32M 2:30:42
67 Giunta, A, 29M 2:30:47
68 Boujlid, H, 25M 2:30:51
69 Calandreau, A, 36M 2:30:51
70 Sloane, G, 27M 2:31:17
71 Henschel, M, 32M 2:31:20
72 Ferraz, A, 26M 2:31:25
73 Catuna, A, 26F 2:31:26
74 Puente, R, 29M 2:31:34
75Hummel, C, 34M 2:31:37
76 Damele, R, 41M 2:31:37
77 Miranda, I, 33M 2:31:40
78 Charette, R, 45M 2:31:41
79 Lokar, C, 30F 2:31:47
80 Parrado, H, 27M 2:32:10
81 Duprey Alamo, F, 28M 2:32:31
82 Appell, O, 31F 2:32:45
83 Hasegawa, M, 24M 2:33:03
84 Bunert, J, 40M 2:33:05
85 Jaspers, R, 31M 2:33:09
86 Lemettinen, R, 34F 2:33:11
87 Golob, I, 39M 2:33:26
88 Perthu, C, 33M 2:33:30
89 Leek, A, 36M 2:33:38
90 Silva, E, 39M 2:33:43
91 Garcia, J, 36M 2:33:50
92 Belot, L, 31M 2:33:52
93 Picazo, J, 46M 2:34:03
94 Dias, A, 29F 2:34:14
95 Dunlap, T, 37M 2:34:18
96 Voyticky, J, 27M 2:34:20
97 Innocentin, A, 38M 2:34:26
98 Camenzind, P, 43M 2:35:06
99 Obbih, M, 28M 2:35:24
100 Michel, U, 23M 2:35:35
101 Peterkova, A, 33F 2:35:43
102 Schuler, F, 26M 2:35:58
103 Verdugo, J, 36M 2:36:07
104 Pazello, G, 29M 2:36:12
105 Polania, A, 32M 2:36:17
106 Santamaria, G, 25M 2:36:28
107 Bohorquez, N, 44M 2:36:28
108 Nordgaard, H, 33M 2:36:33
109Allier, J, 36M 2:36:45
110 Morales, M, 30M 2:36:47
111 Marsalese, S, 29M 2:36:48
112 Devred, D, 34M 2:36:54
113 Barber, S, 37M2:36:57
114 Bossa Atmetllo, X, 24M 2:37:04
115 Belmar, V, 37M 2:37:10
116 Camacho, J, 35M 2:37:22
117 Aragoneses, J, 29M 2:37:26
118 Maire, P, 30M 2:37:27
119 Banning, R, 41M 2:37:37
120 Person, F, 41M 2:37:42
121 Arroyo, F, 37M 2:37:43
122 Douglas, A, 33M 2:37:48
123 Allen, P, 34M 2:37:49
124 Nolte, A, 33M 2:38:31
125 Hukkamaki, J, 29M 2:38:38
126 Wolfe, T, 31M 2:38:41
127 Ilyina, N, 30F 2:38:42
128 Poulard, B, 38M 2:38:42
129 Clavijo, H, 43M 2:38:45
130 Moreau, J, 31M 2:38:50
131 Rappoldt, H, 36M 2:39:01
132 Ruben, A, 37M 2:39:11
133 Tufte, S, 36M 2:39:20
134 Barbu, A, 33F 2:39:22
135 Rischl, P, 37M 2:39:25
136 Lacour, J, 30M 2:39:29
137 Svendsen, G, 26M 2:39:31
138 Arevalo, A, 38M 2:39:38
139 Lecomte, C, 30M 2:39:44
140 Stafficci, R, 41M 2:39:47
141 Root, T, 30M 2:39:48
142 Daluz, D, 35M 2:39:52
143 Voigt, D, 26M 2:39:53
144 Favre, G, 43M 2:39:57
145 Haegeman, W, 28M 2:39:57
146 Luff, J, 27M 2:39:59
147 Klein, P, 40M 2:40:06
148 Knutsson, A, 34M 2:40:11
149 Saby, D, 30M 2:40:17
150 Tsilibes, N, 27M 2:40:18
151 Bouteiller, J, 46M 2:40:22
152 Jaeggi, P, 35M 2:40:26
153 Yakowenko, T, 26M 2:40:28
154 Hackler, T, 36M 2:40:28
155 Harrison, J, 35M 2:40:31
156 Heimgartner, P, 25M 2:40:33
157 Robin, D, 34M 2:40:43
158 Krawitt, E, 25M 2:40:50
159 Valenzuela, E, 36M 2:40:53
160 Moya, J, 29M2:41:00
161 Paul, N, 41M 2:41:00
162 Gualandi, D, 32M 2:41:06
163 Lopes, M, 35M 2:41:15
164 Miolovic, S, 26M 2:41:33
165Sarci, H, 34M 2:41:44
166 Delcroix, M, 40M 2:41:47
167 Lundemo, H, 27M 2:41:49
168 Ricci, G, 46M 2:41:50
169 Parr, M, 28M 2:41:51
170 Scaunich, E, 40F 2:41:52
171 Bracamonte, G, 33M 2:42:05
172 Tienen, A, 36M 2:42:19
173 Vuorinen, P, 33M 2:42:20
174 Colin, O, 31M 2:42:27
175 Borel, C, 24M 2:42:31
176 Espigares, M, 31M 2:42:35
177 Kabacinski, E, 35M 2:42:36
178 Droguett, P, 29M 2:42:38
179 Berkowitz, H, 32M 2:42:45
180 Bax, K, 31M 2:42:50
181 Mauduit, E, 35M 2:42:51
182 Gomez, F, 34M 2:42:54
183 Perron, J, 36M 2:42:54
184 Kleinfeld, R, 40M 2:42:55
185 Huerta, P, 27M 2:42:55
186 Monnery, P, 36M 2:42:57
187 Reber, C, 26M 2:43:00
188 Puente, J, 32M 2:43:00
189 Strider, S, 35M 2:43:01
190 Kintzler, Y, 37M 2:43:06
191 Ferchichi, M, 40M 2:43:07
192 Chavez, M, 40M 2:43:07
193 Fonseca, R, 34M 2:43:09
194 Colado, F, 36M 2:43:10
195 Shimoda, T, 26M 2:43:10
196 Nacipucha, P, 28M 2:43:17
197 Obregon, R, 27M 2:43:24
198 Taborga, R, 37M 2:43:24
199 Kashiwagi, T, 25M 2:43:25
200 Yamazaki, T, 32M 2:43:27
201 Koyago, N, 37M 2:43:29
202 Correa, L, 35M 2:43:33
203 Gygax, M, 32M 2:43:38
204 Limaux, J, 33M 2:43:51
205 Morandi, M, 29M 2:44:04
206 Nagar, T, 44M 2:44:05
207 Vaitilingom, P, 31M 2:44:15
208 Jamtelid, P, 30M 2:44:19
209 Jensen, K, 38M 2:44:20
210 Quitkin, M, 27M 2:44:22
211 Harding, D, 34M 2:44:25
212 Jakobsen, P, 43M 2:44:34
213 Hoerth, R, 28M 2:44:38
214Cantwell, G, 36M 2:44:40
215 Sanchez, S, 41M 2:44:40
216 Bellini, A, 28M 2:44:41
217 Matthews, G, 34M 2:44:42
218 Szmodics, J, 34M 2:44:47
219 Kerckhofs, L, 42M 2:44:51
220 Newman, D, 25M 2:44:54
221 Esquivel Correa, F, 28M 2:44:56
222 Orasma, P, 33M 2:44:57
223 Lehtonen, E, 41M 2:44:58
224 Garcia, F, 27M 2:44:59
225 Bakin, A, 34M 2:45:06
226 Oman, A, 45M 2:45:09
227 De Nicolo', R, 31M 2:45:09
228 Scari, A, 35M 2:45:12
229 Janssen, H, 39M 2:45:12
230 Furuichi, I, 36M 2:45:15
231 Elsasser, M, 28M 2:45:16
232 Rama, N, 20M 2:45:16
233 Stickles, E, 26M 2:45:18
234 Le-Guillou, G, 51M 2:45:18
235 Croguennec, B, 38M 2:45:19
236 Mortimer, S, 32M 2:45:21
237 Bec, T, 36M 2:45:22
238 Brusorio, C, 35M 2:45:23
239 Briglio, R, 45M 2:45:27
240 Bakoulis, G, 33F 2:45:28
241 Dolan, E, 33M 2:45:29
242 Gaglio, N, 37M 2:45:31
243 Lopez Jimenez, V, 38M 2:45:40
244 Alvaro, J, 28M 2:45:42
245 Castel, T, 25M 2:45:50
246 Rolland, J, 43M 2:45:52
247 Smithberger, J, 25M 2:45:56
248 Frank, T, 33M 2:46:04
249 Vasquez, A, 33M 2:46:07
250 Ainegren, M, 31M 2:46:08
251 Artero Pardo, C, 29M 2:46:10
252 Nieves, D, 37M 2:46:12
253 Dobkowski, D, 36M 2:46:23
254 Schnoor, H, 40M 2:46:23
255 Diaz, F, 56M 2:46:26
256 Guillard, P, 28M 2:46:28
257 Stein, J, 28M 2:46:31
258 Tecchiato, B, 27M 2:46:32
259 Dugum, I, 34M 2:46:36
260 Domaille, M, 33M 2:46:36
261 Gallois, T, 31M 2:46:36
262 Brophy, R, 35M 2:46:38
263 Chariot, P, 32M 2:46:39
264 Tagliafico, L, 58M 2:46:40
265 Goncalves, A, 38M 2:46:44
266 Pedersen, T, 50M 2:46:44
267 Pompanon, J, 26M 2:46:44
268 Kitano, H, 36M 2:46:45
269 Carrot, M, 33M 2:46:54
270 Magne, S, 35M 2:46:54
271 Ommundsen, A, 50M 2:46:59
272 Isigkeit, V, 28M 2:47:07
273 Jende, P, 27M 2:47:07
274 Erixon, M, 36M 2:47:10
275 Serrano, M, 24M 2:47:14
276 Schlatter, S, 30M 2:47:18
277 Morales, F, 33M 2:47:18
278 Mrus, G, 34M 2:47:21
279 McDonnell, J, 33M 2:47:23
280 O'Hara, G, 30M 2:47:25
281 Willershausen, W, 45M 2:47:26
282 Wesenberg, W, 27M 2:47:27
283 Lefebvre, S, 44M 2:47:28
284 Hamel, C, 38M 2:47:29
285 Selwyn, M, 26M 2:47:31
286 Roze, G, 39M 2:47:37
287 Salin, E, 40M 2:47:37
288 Bentz, F, 58M 2:47:39
289Parmentier, H, 47M 2:47:41
290 Gammer, C, 26M 2:47:43
291 Munoz Palomares, F, 26M 2:47:44
292 McIntyre, P, 32M 2:47:45
293 Guelfi, B, 47M 2:47:46
294 Ingram, L, 50M 2:47:49
295 Hagemann, J, 42M 2:47:54
296 McShane, J, 42M 2:47:55
297 Waterland, R, 29M 2:47:56
298 Brennan, M, 40M 2:47:58
299 Cammisa, S, 27M 2:48:00
300 Lira, C, 36M 2:48:03
301 Starck, R, 33M 2:48:05
302 Chanin, J, 29M 2:48:12
303 Velazquez, C, 25M 2:48:14
304 Stravme, D, 29M 2:48:15
305 Ilarraza Figueroa, L, 35M 2:48:16
306 Reetz, R, 27M 2:48:17
307 Ballesteros, M, 42M 2:48:19
308 Melendez, A, 39M 2:48:20
309 Horovitz, G, 39F 2:48:24
310 Picher, C, 38M 2:48:26
311 Van Noten, O, 47M 2:48:29
312 Rivas Moreno, S, 27M 2:48:32
313 Dunne, D, 42M 2:48:35
314 Ivers, D, 30M 2:48:36
315 Muley, B, 35M 2:48:39
316 Gama, M, 42M 2:48:39
317 Baldini, T, 29M 2:48:40
318 McAra, D, 41M 2:48:45
319 Lacomme, J, 33M 2:48:47
320 Kreckl, G, 30M 2:48:47
321 Laughlin, S, 33M 2:48:52
322 Schagerstrom, L, 30M 2:48:53
323 McNamara, J, 31M 2:48:54
324 Martinez, N, 33M 2:48:59
325 Gross, R, 27M 2:49:02
326 Alexander III, J, 36M 2:49:03
327 Kaland, B, 38M 2:49:06
328 Pascual, M, 32M 2:49:09
329 Bobeau, D, 49M 2:49:12
330 Donot, G, 40M 2:49:14
331 Idris, M, 33M 2:49:17
332 Vanegas, L, 31M 2:49:19
333 Sica, R, 29M 2:49:20
334 Pless, P, 36M 2:49:21
335 Liebens, R, 30M 2:49:24
336 Lima, S, 39M 2:49:26
337 Mata, E, 48M 2:49:27
338 Couderc, G, 47M 2:49:29
339 Vander Groef, C, 41M 2:49:30
340 Widmer, K, 50M 2:49:31
341 Jensen, J, 25M 2:49:32
342 Assadi, M, 28M 2:49:32
343 Hopp, R, 25M 2:49:35
344 Makkonen, R, 52M 2:49:41
345 Shotts, D, 33M 2:49:41
346 Urena, M, 34M 2:49:45
347 Steiner, J, 32M 2:49:46
348 Martinez Guzman, L, 41M 2:49:50
349 Kautz, S, 33M 2:49:53
350 Plastinina, E, 31F 2:49:54
351 Foley, B, 27M 2:49:56
352 Samson, M, 28M 2:49:59
353 Tesselaar, D, 25M 2:50:00
354 Hoffmann, B, 41M 2:50:08
355 Roumeau, P, 34M 2:50:17
356 Kneer, F, 40M 2:50:18
357 Bertsch, S, 33M 2:50:20
358 Hunt, J, 30M 2:50:24
359 Azim, R, 28M 2:50:25
360 Spina, S, 28M 2:50:25
361 Miller, A, 46M 2:50:28
362 Pontes, J, 43M 2:50:29
363 Kasaoka, S, 34M 2:50:30
364 Smit, T, 43M2:50:36
365 Rodriguez, M, 37M 2:50:38
366 Srivatsa, J, 27M 2:50:41
367 Tauchner, J, 42M 2:50:43
368 Nishimoto, C, 38M 2:50:44
369 Naitza, R, 32M 2:50:45
370 Muhrcke, G, 54M 2:50:49
371Jukes, W, 42M 2:50:54
372 Foucault, D, 46M 2:50:57
373 Greenbarg, J, 33M 2:50:58
374 Aaberg, V, 42M 2:51:00
375 Bogdan, J, 22M2:51:03
376 Murphy, M, 33M 2:51:03
377 Hestvik, T, 37M 2:51:07
378 Speicher, G, 41M 2:51:09
379 Woodley, R, 29M 2:51:10
380 Zaldivar, F, 35M 2:51:11
381 Mendonca, N, 30M 2:51:13
382 McAllister, K, 32M 2:51:14
383 Campos, A, 36M 2:51:17
384 Hardman, N, 40M 2:51:17
385 Ashcraft, K, 33M 2:51:24
386 Martin, A, 35M2:51:25
387 Rovirosa Bosch, E, 29M 2:51:27
388 Hansson, K, 30M 2:51:27
389 Brucker, H, 31M 2:51:27
390 Nascimento, A, 34M 2:51:29
391 Scobey, C, 28F 2:51:31
392 Schmid, E, 40M 2:51:35
393 Gonzalez, S, 39M 2:51:37
394 Benatar, D, 43M 2:51:38
395 English, J, 40M 2:51:39
396 Tigani, M, 27M 2:51:40
397 Morancho Tomas, J, 30M 2:51:42
398 Young, T, 33M 2:51:44
399 Borik, M, 29M 2:51:45
400 Heer, H, 33M 2:51:45
401 Corpora, P, 38M 2:51:46
402 Augagneur, F, 30M 2:51:46
403 Sauvage, B, 25M 2:51:49
404 Comignani, F, 35M 2:51:49
405 Carrilho, M, 26M 2:51:52
406 Winterman, M, 27M 2:51:52
407 Valencia, I, 44M 2:51:54
408 Manda, M, 45M 2:52:00
409 Mignon, A, 29M 2:52:01
410 Gave, C, 40M 2:52:02
411 Rapin, M, 27F 2:52:02
412 Rizmann, E, 39M 2:52:02
413 O'Brien, J, 28M 2:52:04
414 Davidson, M, 31M 2:52:04
415 Muller, J, 32M 2:52:06
416 Ferraretto, G, 33M 2:52:07
417 Sanchez, T, 41M 2:52:08
418 Pontzeele, C, 43M 2:52:10
419 Del Frari, A, 32M 2:52:12
420 Good, I, 33M 2:52:14
421 Ducotte, G, 40M 2:52:15
422 Virano, A, 27M 2:52:15
423 Dalliere, G, 33M 2:52:16
424 Tabiasco, C, 44M 2:52:17
425 Moore, D, 34M 2:52:21
426 Steinert, D, 39M 2:52:21
427 Walsh, P, 44M 2:52:23
428 Abella-Leon, S, 38M 2:52:25
429 Piovan, P, 53M 2:52:27
430 Faure, M, 48F 2:52:27
431 Nuske, A, 32F 2:52:33
432 Cygan, J, 28M 2:52:37
433 Bryk, J, 32M 2:52:41
434 Celic, T, 36M 2:52:43
435 Vacirca, P, 32M 2:52:46
436 Puopolo, J, 36M 2:52:49
437 Rodriguez, M, 29M2:52:50
438 Jung, T, 31M 2:52:53
439 Izaguirre, S, 29M 2:52:54
440 Mee, S, 27M 2:52:56
441 Buikema, F, 28M 2:52:57
442 Lopez, D, 35M 2:52:59
443 Vrieno, C, 44M 2:53:02
444 Yamaguchi, H, 33M 2:53:04
445 Rivera Velez, J, 28M 2:53:07
446 Garcia, E, 35M 2:53:07
447 Kattwinkel, A, 27F 2:53:09
448 Samson, D, 35M 2:53:15
449 Medina, P, 24M 2:53:22
450 Diaz, F, 34M 2:53:23
451 Cornejo Tapia, G, 32M 2:53:24
452 Nishi, M, 31M 2:53:28
453 Heinz, T, 21M 2:53:30
454 Ramirez Garcia, M, 38M 2:53:31
455 Penn, R, 33M 2:53:33
456 Schwalb, J, 40M 2:53:34
457 Deegan Jr, W, 35M 2:53:39
458 Richardson, J, 24M 2:53:45
459 Davies, M, 23M 2:53:47
460 Cmralikov, V, 26M 2:53:47
461 Rendon, A, 22M 2:53:48
462 Hubner, W, 40M 2:53:49
463 Stratton, J, 34M 2:53:50
464 Joly, P, 41M 2:53:52
465 Graindorge, C, 34M 2:53:52
466 Hunter-Rowe, C, 30F 2:53:52
467 De Wilde, R, 31M 2:53:56
468 Lazo Elizondo, P, 24M 2:53:59
469 Petitgenet, M, 32M 2:53:59
470 Udiskey, F, 35M 2:54:01
471 Cardona, M, 31M 2:54:02
472 Sauvayre, P, 34M 2:54:03
473 Arismendi, F, 34M 2:54:04
474 Kasolter, J, 39M 2:54:05
475 Castillo Puebla, J, 43M 2:54:06
476 Miller, J, 42M 2:54:07
477 Fiering, M, 23M 2:54:09
478 Laguna Legorreta, A, 36M 2:54:09
479 Osterhus, A, 27M 2:54:10
480 Hurst, K, 34M 2:54:11
481 Vicedo, H, 36M 2:54:11
482 Lampen, A, 40M 2:54:14
483 Kennelly, J, 33M 2:54:16
484 Senior, A, 38M 2:54:19
485 Mead, D, 26M 2:54:20
486 Last, R, 32M 2:54:21
487 Bouvet, M, 42M 2:54:22
488 Zeghdane, S, 22M 2:54:22
489 Rawe, K, 26M 2:54:25
490Joly, C, 40M 2:54:25
491 McMonagle, N, 34M 2:54:26
492 Oele, M, 49M 2:54:26
493 Ulfvengren, C, 29M 2:54:27
494 Guichoux, N, 31F 2:54:28
495 Marcano, H, 45M 2:54:30
496 Pitte, B, 35M 2:54:30
497 Ross, A, 29M 2:54:30
498 Walvatne, B, 38M 2:54:31
499Verona, A, 37M 2:54:31
500 Deredec, J, 41M 2:54:31
501 Griffis, M, 34M 2:54:32
502 Kashiwagi, K, 36M 2:54:32
503 O'Driscoll, C, 33M 2:54:32
504 Orozco, R, 32M 2:54:33
505 Schoy, R, 39M 2:54:34
506 Lopez, G, 40M 2:54:35
507 Guillemain, P, 33M 2:54:35
508 Riou, J, 35M 2:54:36
509 Chollet, M, 35M 2:54:44
510 O'Shea, P, 28M 2:54:49
511 Mead, A, 28M 2:54:50
512 Schmidt, G, 47M2:54:52
513 Noire, M, 37M 2:54:53
514 Hernandez, R, 26M 2:54:54
515 Alvear, S, 34F 2:54:57
516 Trail, J, 26M 2:54:59
517Rintala, K, 34M 2:55:00
518 Gayman, J, 42M 2:55:01
519 Lodolo, G, 33M 2:55:03
520 Leitner, A, 32M 2:55:06
521 Sumner, S, 42M 2:55:08
522 Sauriol, D, 32M 2:55:10
523 Pulgar, T, 39M 2:55:10
524 Coughlin, K, 27F 2:55:12
525 Sebire, G, 40M 2:55:12
526Murphy, J, 47M 2:55:13
527 Schroeder, G, 42M 2:55:13
528 Heptner, L, 50M 2:55:17
529 Leonard Jr., J, 29M 2:55:20
530 Zapata, A, 33M 2:55:22
531 Lemesle, Y, 39M 2:55:24
532 Hantzsch, H, 47M 2:55:26
533 Stojanovic, S, 32M 2:55:27
534 Clark, D, 34M 2:55:29
535 Harreau, J, 36M 2:55:29
536 De La Llave, A, 37M 2:55:31
537 Wynne, J, 43M 2:55:31
538 Eckley, D, 37M 2:55:32
539 Veliz, E, 35M 2:55:39
540 Peterson, S, 36M 2:55:43
541 Nemezawa, S, 57M 2:55:45
542 Schuetz, H, 37M 2:55:46
543 Gulich, T, 33M 2:55:47
544 Dzioba, L, 31M 2:55:48
545 Brokaw, R, 34M 2:55:49
546 Deluy, S, 44M 2:55:49
547 Blom, L, 45M 2:55:52
548 Martinez, R, 28M 2:55:52
549 Bernhard, G, 42M 2:55:53
550 Baudron, P, 30M 2:55:54
551 Incerti, R, 31M 2:55:54
552 Ramirez, E, 35M 2:55:57
553 Aponte Sierra, A, 41M 2:55:59
554 Buser, G, 22M 2:56:00
555 Cespedes, J, 43M 2:56:00
556 Munoz-Del-Rio, A, 29M 2:56:01
557 Natter, J, 43M 2:56:10
558 Scache, P, 42M 2:56:11
559 Kvalfoss, E, 33M 2:56:12
560 Pireddu, E, 48M 2:56:12
561 Nasini, P, 35F 2:56:14
562 Jimenez-Mata, J, 41M 2:56:15
563 Badia, P, 33M 2:56:16
564 Garcia Franco, R, 43M 2:56:17
565 Luljak, D, 38M 2:56:18
566 Spada, S, 29M 2:56:19
567 Remme, P, 35M 2:56:21
568 Ronquist, P, 20M 2:56:23
569 Andersen, J, 49M 2:56:24
570Parmentier, E, 28M 2:56:25
571 Aiello, M, 28M 2:56:26
572 Herrmann, T, 36M 2:56:27
573 Hutchings, T, 35M 2:56:27
574 Hamedl, D, 25M 2:56:28
575 Ingebrigtsen, P, 32M 2:56:28
576 Ferrari, M, 31M 2:56:30
577 Scutti, A, 39M 2:56:31
578 Campoy, F, 44M 2:56:31
579 Lester, A, 41M 2:56:33
580 Arismendi, J, 44M 2:56:34
581 Mendoza, R, 41M 2:56:34
582 Riverain, A, 35M 2:56:35
583 Pena, L, 32M 2:56:38
584 Azevedo, N, 35M 2:56:39
585 Carosso, R, 34M 2:56:39
586 Sithole, M, 27M 2:56:39
587 Alvarado, R, 33M 2:56:40
588 Schaefer, J, 40M 2:56:41
589 Gill, C, 47M 2:56:42
590 Keating, R, 34M 2:56:43
591 Doyer, P, 40M 2:56:44
592 Johnson, H, 21M 2:56:44
593 Bokalic, M, 34M 2:56:46
594 Leven, E, 25M 2:56:46
595 Fujiwara, M, 29M 2:56:46
596 Kramer, P, 40M 2:56:47
597 Tymen, H, 30M 2:56:48
598 De Beer, J, 41M 2:56:49
599 Adam, A, 50M 2:56:49
600 Fitzgibbon, J, 38M 2:56:50
601 Fiammetti, P, 42M 2:56:50
602 Lachmann, H, 50M 2:56:53
603 Eckhart, S, 25M 2:56:53
604 Hueninghake, W, 49M 2:56:53
605 Tsunoda, M, 31M 2:56:54
606 Torres, J, 36M 2:56:55
607 Garcia, A, 32M 2:56:57
608 Ait-Elhadj, A, 39M 2:56:59
609 Meier, W, 46M 2:56:59
610 Tester, P, 33M 2:57:00
611 Dunke, A, 39F 2:57:02
612 Andersen, P, 26F 2:57:02
613 Morera, H, 27M 2:57:04
614 Finnegan, J, 27M 2:57:05
615 Dodemont, L, 30M 2:57:10
616 De Lange, M, 38M 2:57:11
617 Stein, M, 46M 2:57:12
618 Macmahon, T, 28M 2:57:14
619 Concepcion Martinez, F, 30M 2:57:14
620 Nystrom, S, 32M 2:57:15
621 Gieck, W, 37M 2:57:16
622 Micera, J, 33M 2:57:16
623 Martell, R, 36M 2:57:17
624 Cupelli, L, 37M 2:57:17
625 Fisher, S, 27M 2:57:18
626 Tortonese, M, 31M 2:57:20
627 Cos, M, 26M 2:57:23
628 Costa, J, 43M 2:57:25
629 Sitje, E, 29M 2:57:26
630 McCourt, B, 33M 2:57:26
631 Gomez, M, 40F 2:57:28
632 Rieger, A, 38M 2:57:28
633 McCauley, T, 36M 2:57:29
634 Sadoudi, L, 35M 2:57:30
635 Veronesi, B, 44M 2:57:31
636 Sanchez, J, 35M 2:57:33
637 Waesch, M, 29M 2:57:34
638 Aitkenhead, D, 29M 2:57:35
639 Larsen, H, 30M 2:57:35
640 Neger, J, 35M 2:57:36
641Schaefer, S, 28M 2:57:39
642 Leto, G, 35M 2:57:43
643 Sievener, J, 42M 2:57:45
644 Iniesta, J, 31M 2:57:45
645 Robinson, T, 25M 2:57:47
646 Hughes, T, 28M 2:57:47
647 Hernandez, L, 34M 2:57:48
648 Hikida, T, 31M 2:57:48
649 Goncalves, M, 31M 2:57:49
650 Vivian, S, 41M 2:57:49
651 Kuehne, G, 40M 2:57:51
652 Carmichael, J, 33M 2:57:53
653 Rojas, J, 33M 2:57:54
654 Luginger, M, 47M 2:57:55
655 Covey, D, 33M 2:57:56
656 Prunet, S, 36M 2:58:00
657 Alvarado Camacho, H, 33M 2:58:00
658 Acimovic, R, 39M 2:58:01
659 Torres-Santos, C, 28M 2:58:05
660 Loncto, D, 44M 2:58:06
661 Santos, C, 42M 2:58:07
662 Moro, S, 33M 2:58:10
663 Cumber, G, 47M 2:58:10
664 Montero, R, 43M 2:58:11
665 Cruz, E, 29M 2:58:11
666 Madigan, M, 33M 2:58:12
667 Farrell, M, 43M 2:58:15
668 Kasper, M, 26M 2:58:16
669 Jones, G, 50M 2:58:17
670 Sologuren, F, 36M 2:58:20
671 Urbain, D, 60M 2:58:21
672Homeyer, T, 46M 2:58:25
673 Schleitzer, H, 49M 2:58:26
674 White, J, 36M 2:58:27
675 Henninger, R, 47M 2:58:28
676 Kervevan, P, 32M 2:58:28
677 Ross, M, 25M 2:58:28
678 Rohl, H, 44M 2:58:29
679 Miao, J, 29M 2:58:30
680 Brown, K, 28F 2:58:30
681 Joly, M, 45M 2:58:31
682 Maldifassi, F, 29M 2:58:32
683 Malley, K, 38M 2:58:32
684 Sousa, L, 29M 2:58:34
685 Martinez, R, 44M 2:58:34
686 Yamamoto, S, 30M 2:58:35
687 Baldini, L, 26F 2:58:35
688 De Kleine, H, 32M 2:58:37
689 Marchese, B, 27M 2:58:37
690 Perez Herrera, R, 40M 2:58:38
691 Walker, J, 20M 2:58:38
692Claudez, H, 34M 2:58:39
693 McKillop, J, 32M 2:58:39
694 Alder, U, 39F 2:58:40
695 Guery, M, 47M 2:58:40
696 Strowig, G, 40M 2:58:40
697 Chisholm, T, 27M 2:58:41
698 Voehl, T, 27M 2:58:41
699 Garcia De Pablo, E, 30M 2:58:43
700 Ryffel, U, 44M 2:58:44
701 Multin, S, 35M 2:58:45
702 Mazuel, A, 38M 2:58:46
703 Damm, C, 44M 2:58:46
704 Tapia, A, 25M 2:58:47
705 Guennec, G, 46M 2:58:48
706 Polonini, A, 45M 2:58:50
707 Avila, M, 39M 2:58:51
708 Hudick, J, 49M 2:58:52
709 Cuttitta, D, 28F 2:58:53
710 Guerniou, B, 31M 2:58:53
711 Sengier, T, 32M 2:58:55
712 Cadet, P, 40M 2:58:55
713 Guichoux, P, 30M 2:58:56
714 Majaniemi, V, 26M 2:58:56
715 Goolman, H, 32M 2:58:58
716 Gugler, T, 35M 2:58:59
717 Scatoloni, V, 35M 2:58:59
718 Misner, M, 29M 2:58:59
719 Rollosson, M, 25M 2:59:01
720 Stoof, J, 44M 2:59:01
721 Millonig, D, 39M 2:59:03
722 Gorlier, C, 40M 2:59:08
723 Rennies, B, 41M 2:59:10
724 Phipps, K, 29M 2:59:11
725 Jones, M, 31M2:59:12
726 Grygiel, A, 31M 2:59:12
727 Behm, R, 42M 2:59:12
728 Rodriguez Ramos, J, 47M 2:59:12
729 Merk, J, 43M 2:59:14
730 De Carli, E, 36M 2:59:15
731 Santos, J, 30M 2:59:15
732 Burdi, D, 32M 2:59:18
733 Nacht, C, 45M 2:59:19
734 Lemoine, J, 40M 2:59:20
735 Lepretre, P, 30M 2:59:21
736 Apolinario, D, 37M 2:59:21
737 Stacey, K, 33M 2:59:21
738 George, E, 37M 2:59:22
739 Gonzalez Garcia, I, 45M 2:59:22
740 Natal, M, 30M 2:59:24
741 David, H, 39M 2:59:25
742 Savolainen, V, 26M 2:59:28
743 Soulie, S, 38M 2:59:28
744 Nunez, W, 38M 2:59:30
745 Sanchez, R, 44M 2:59:30
746 Sopp, M, 29M 2:59:31
747 Walsh, L, 29M 2:59:34
748 Vergara, A, 27M 2:59:35
749 McGillivray, D, 40M 2:59:35
750 Switzer, T, 30M 2:59:35
751 Walsh, K, 30M 2:59:35
752 Vignaroli, C, 38M 2:59:36
753 Berger, B, 45M 2:59:37
754 Mankopf, J, 32M 2:59:37
755 Stiefvater, L, 34M 2:59:38
756 Boehme, M, 29M2:59:39
757 Gomez, I, 35M 2:59:39
758 Robert, C, 29M 2:59:40
759 Valenzuela, T, 26M 2:59:42
760 Perez Loredo, C, 36M 2:59:43
761 Gerosa, M, 46M 2:59:44
762 Gigault, L, 38M 2:59:44
763 Whalen, C, 20M 2:59:44
764 Fuesselberger, J, 32M 2:59:44
765 Tateno, T, 37M 2:59:45
766 Vukas, S, 33M 2:59:45
767 Kost, H, 41M 2:59:45
768 Canaguacan, A, 24M 2:59:47
769 Lopez, J, 39M 2:59:48
770 Sanchez, P, 35M 2:59:49
771 Donatini, A, 27M 2:59:49
772 Breguet, E, 48M 2:59:50
773 Windle, M, 21M 2:59:50
774 Fernandez, J, 46M 2:59:52
775 Morvan, J, 39M 2:59:56
776 Abdelkrim-Karim, A, 31M 2:59:56
777 Rimsky, D, 37M 2:59:57
778 Roth, M, 32M 2:59:58
779 Andrist, C, 30M 2:59:59
780 Daugherty, B, 42M 2:59:59
781 Legouez, B, 31F 3:00:00
782 Medeiros, L, 44M 3:00:00
783 Lambert, A, 41M 3:00:00
784 Gill, P, 47M 3:00:01
785 Johnson, R, 38M 3:00:03
786 Halsey, G, 34M 3:00:03
787 Van Keymeulen, D, 31M 3:00:04
788 Grazina, A, 45M 3:00:04
789 Hahn III, E, 28M 3:00:05
790 Solli, G, 33M 3:00:09
791 Bortone, M, 42M 3:00:12
792 Grisoli, M, 45M 3:00:13
793 Skaalen, J, 41F 3:00:14
794 Gorman, R, 32M 3:00:15
795 Pavan, A, 33M 3:00:16
796 Muenzel, W, 41M 3:00:19
797 Lambert, L, 33M 3:00:20
798 Pointeau, M, 50M 3:00:21
799 Quoll, G, 50M 3:00:21
800 Hernandez, G, 32M 3:00:23
801 Nipon, A, 34M 3:00:24
802 Fontana, D, 32M 3:00:28
803 Garcia, A, 44M 3:00:29
804 Zentner, L, 41F 3:00:29
805 Moghini, F, 41M 3:00:30
806 Dubarry, M, 40M 3:00:30
807 Plessner, K, 57M 3:00:31
808 Gleixner, M, 34M 3:00:34
809 Murphy, C, 42M 3:00:35
810 Beverly, J, 30M 3:00:38
811 Van Der Helm, M, 34M 3:00:40
812 Wulwik, A, 44M 3:00:40
813 Daher, W, 30M 3:00:43
814 Yengo, S, 28M 3:00:45
815 Simko, J, 27M 3:00:47
816 Herrera, R, 28M 3:00:47
817 Tucker, J, 33M 3:00:49
818 Hallahan III, E, 33M 3:00:52
819 Creel, C, 32M 3:00:52
820 Pelletier, G, 37M 3:00:52
821 Griffith, D, 29M 3:00:53
822 Bos, R, 42M 3:00:54
823 Baer, D, 43M 3:00:55
824 Santos, J, 51M 3:00:55
825 Facci, G, 55M 3:00:56
826 Martins, R, 33M 3:00:58
827 Kern, C, 32M 3:00:58
828 Roman, A, 44M 3:00:58
829 Rodriguez, M, 35M 3:01:00
830 Fruehwald, H, 31M 3:01:01
831 Peters, S, 27M 3:01:02
832 Russo, C, 41M 3:01:03
833 McCarthy, M, 29M 3:01:04
834 Malnar, A, 47M 3:01:04
835 Sparfeld, M, 26M 3:01:05
836 Pihlajamak, I, 41M 3:01:05
837 Colemon, J, 36M 3:01:06
838 Manders, J, 37M 3:01:07
839 Sieg, W, 48M 3:01:11
840 Ortega-Sanchez, R, 41M 3:01:12
841 Tsigounis, T, 36M 3:01:15
842 Kockelbergh, T, 42M 3:01:16
843 Ingvardsen, O, 44M 3:01:18
844 Riksen, R, 31M 3:01:21
845 Carlsson, R, 50M 3:01:22
846 Polosa, P, 26M 3:01:26
847 Adorno, E, 50M 3:01:28
848 Garcia, M, 31M 3:01:29
849 Seara, J, 45M 3:01:29
850 Rivers, S, 25M 3:01:31
851 Jay, A, 42M 3:01:35
852 Brown, G, 34M 3:01:37
853 Niven, D, 37M 3:01:38
854 Gaines, J, 44M 3:01:39
855 Filtz, L, 40M 3:01:40
856 Piazza, L, 36M 3:01:42
857 Hernandez, A, 34M 3:01:43
858 Mellahn, B, 40M 3:01:43
859 Leahey, J, 28M 3:01:44
860 Zubiri, P, 35M 3:01:45
861Silva Gamboa, L, 33M 3:01:47
862 Matsushita, Y, 30M 3:01:50
863Van De Wijngaard, J, 34M 3:01:51
864 Colaiacovo, R, 38M 3:01:51
865 Morales, A, 51M 3:01:52
866 Erb, D, 38M 3:01:53
867 Remaud, L, 28M 3:01:53
868 Bini, C, 65M 3:01:54
869 Watson, H, 49M 3:01:54
870 White, K, 24M 3:01:54
871 Colmant, M, 19M 3:01:55
872 Newman, R, 36M 3:01:55
873 Norton, J, 41M 3:01:58
874 Norheim, B, 34M 3:01:59
875 Vaudron, P, 44M 3:01:59
876 Ojeda Santillan, J, 46M 3:02:00
877 White, M, 46M 3:02:02
878 Sanchez, J, 34M 3:02:02
879 Bakalor, C, 46M 3:02:03
880 Silva, N, 50M 3:02:04
881 Schuchert, P, 32M 3:02:06
882 Lopez Lopez, J, 44M 3:02:07
883 Baust, A, 26M 3:02:09
884 Horlait, D, 46M 3:02:12
885 Mayr, R, 48M 3:02:15
886 Mattio, L, 26M 3:02:16
887 Burrows, M, 51M 3:02:17
888 Nardi, M, 33M 3:02:18
889 Hjornevik, Y, 38M 3:02:19
890 Diaz, M, 38F 3:02:20
891 Mathis, A, 25M 3:02:22
892 Pierrevelcin, M, 34M 3:02:25
893 Dribben, R, 35M 3:02:25
894Dengler, W, 45M 3:02:26
895 Brunner, M, 38M 3:02:26
896 Moran, J, 39M 3:02:27
897 Sedlis, J, 28M 3:02:28
898 Hamilton, B, 26M 3:02:28
899 Thevenon, A, 40M 3:02:29
900 Aquino, M, 30M 3:02:29
901 Delort, G, 47M 3:02:30
902 Benatti, B, 32M 3:02:35
903 Cromier, C, 28M 3:02:35
904 Cellerier, M, 45M 3:02:37
905 Foray, G, 39M 3:02:40
906 Reinsch, A, 23M 3:02:41
907 Visser, E, 30M 3:02:41
908 Primeau, E, 31M 3:02:41
909 Elliott, R, 27M 3:02:41
910 Pandtle, B, 28M 3:02:42
911 Nugent, S, 38M 3:02:44
912 Flores, L, 52M 3:02:44
913 Jimenez, A, 34M 3:02:45
914 Townend, D, 36M 3:02:48
915 Walsh, H, 35M 3:02:49
916 Millot, A, 26F3:02:50
917 Mulzof, G, 19M 3:02:51
918 Wren, C, 36M 3:02:51
919 Colton, S, 31M 3:02:55
920 Brasiello, G, 46M 3:02:55
921Bernheim, R, 37M 3:02:55
922 De Silva, M, 33M 3:02:56
923 Ludwig, M, 35M 3:02:58
924 Moyes, H, 29M 3:02:58
925 Vandervalk, R, 33M 3:02:58
926 Di Sarno, G, 44M 3:02:59
927 Torres, D, 30M 3:03:00
928 Sanguino, A, 49M 3:03:00
929 Miguel, H, 44M 3:03:01
930 Bessette, H, 31F 3:03:03
931 Messina, G, 29M 3:03:04
932 Reslinger, J, 35M 3:03:05
933 De Simio, A, 44M 3:03:05
934 Slanina, J, 34M 3:03:05
935 D'Adamo, D, 28M 3:03:07
936 Johnson, W, 31M 3:03:07
937 Sanches, E, 44M 3:03:08
938 Urteaga, L, 33M 3:03:08
939 Fethers, J, 40M 3:03:08
940 Munoz, L, 40M 3:03:09
941 Blanchet, B, 32M 3:03:11
942 Simon, J, 37M 3:03:14
943 Geslin, G, 48M 3:03:15
944 Taylor, S, 37M 3:03:16
945 Dale, A, 44M 3:03:19
946 Schwam, M, 41F 3:03:19
947 Gut, W, 43M 3:03:20
948 Kessler, S, 37F 3:03:21
949 Espinosa Ron, O, 39M 3:03:24
950 Iljkic, I, 45M 3:03:26
951 Bambini, M, 42M 3:03:26
952 Helmer, R, 47M 3:03:26
953 Cabrera, C, 36M 3:03:27
954 Hoya, J, 33M 3:03:28
955 Geesen, M, 35M 3:03:29
956 Toelkes, E, 40M 3:03:30
957 Bedford, C, 29M 3:03:32
958 Wolf, P, 43M 3:03:33
959 Ribeiro, A, 42M 3:03:33
960 Baustert, M, 39M 3:03:35
961 Lupski, J, 42M 3:03:36
962 Hita, L, 36M 3:03:37
963 Nicolas, D, 42M 3:03:37
964 Bermudez, E, 38M 3:03:39
965 McIlwee, I, 24M 3:03:39
966 Wilsker, A, 35M 3:03:43
967 Bredt, C, 40M 3:03:43
968 Chetreff, F, 34M 3:03:43
969 Huylebroeck, M, 38M 3:03:45
970 Mulvihill, C, 26M 3:03:45
971 Steede, C, 35M 3:03:46
972 Doble, S, 26M 3:03:47
973 Martin, J, 39M 3:03:48
974 Hine, J, 45F 3:03:48
975 Macdonald, R, 38M 3:03:50
976 Silva, M, 37M 3:03:50
977 Myrvold, B, 38M 3:03:50
978 Johansson, L, 39M 3:03:51
979 Belard, J, 40M 3:03:52
980 Gouerec, J, 46M 3:03:56
981 Dickmann, G, 53M 3:03:56
982 Gumbinner, G, 38M 3:03:58
983 Fleureau, J, 44M 3:04:00
984 Norris-Ross, D, 37M 3:04:01
985 Smith, M, 34M 3:04:01
986 Maurice, P, 40M 3:04:02
987 Ihnen, J, 28M 3:04:05
988 Capuzzo, P, 21M 3:04:05
989 Villemin, N, 29M 3:04:05
990 Lamas, X, 31M 3:04:06
991 Jorgensen, L, 35F 3:04:07
992 LeBars, D, 31M 3:04:08
993 Bruno, M, 34M 3:04:08
994 Guilbert, D, 43M 3:04:09
995 Shatzky, J, 27M 3:04:10
996 Lamb, D, 33M 3:04:10
997 Brainerd, R, 31M 3:04:11
998 Nord, J, 36M 3:04:14
999 Chemin, I, 26F 3:04:14
1000 Lenoble, J, 45M 3:04:16
1001 Bergh Van Den, M, 41M 3:04:18
1002 Durand, M, 37M 3:04:19
1003 Valaranta, A, 33M 3:04:19
1004 Graziosi, M, 32M 3:04:20
1005 Slimani, A, 27M 3:04:22
1006 Lee, K, 25M 3:04:22
1007 Hadler, M, 43F 3:04:23
1008 Vargas Arce, L, 38M 3:04:23
1009 Rueth, G, 43F 3:04:24
1010 Rumon, K, 33M 3:04:24
1011 Meisch, K, 42M 3:04:26
1012 Berger, J, 30M 3:04:27
1013 Henry I, F, 29M 3:04:27
1014 Candelario, R, 34M 3:04:27
1015 Renard, A, 42M 3:04:28
1016 Kelly, C, 23M 3:04:29
1017Young, A, 33M 3:04:30
1018 Aquino, E, 34M 3:04:30
1019 Lee, R, 45M 3:04:31
1020 Rigo, P, 25M 3:04:36
1021 Bressieux, J, 49M 3:04:41
1022 Lombari, L, 37M 3:04:41
1023 Scheu, D, 35M 3:04:42
1024 Di Pasquale, S, 24M 3:04:43
1025 Cuerva, P, 49M 3:04:43
1026 Carino, F, 30M 3:04:43
1027 Flores, L, 28M 3:04:45
1028 Gautier, M, 35M 3:04:45
1029 Barga, C, 36M 3:04:47
1030 Metzger, L, 35F 3:04:47
1031 Liman, U, 29M 3:04:50
1032 Regan, R, 27M 3:04:51
1033 Vassaux, D, 25M 3:04:51
1034 Schrattenecker, J, 38M 3:04:53
1035DeAngelo, A, 42M 3:04:53
1036 Zeintl, H, 41M 3:04:54
1037 Plough, B, 39M 3:04:54
1038 Kragh, O, 41M 3:04:56
1039 Seneci, S, 31M 3:04:57
1040 McLaughlin, J, 39M 3:04:57
1041 Heinbockel, R, 51M 3:04:57
1042 Sorgi, P, 30M 3:04:58
1043 Lazaro, A, 41M 3:04:59
1044 Fernandez, L, 39M 3:05:00
1045 Follesoe, J, 36M 3:05:02
1046 Fernanez, A, 44M 3:05:03
1047 Dalchow, S, 29M 3:05:05
1048 Hirsch, S, 27M 3:05:06
1049 Menzel, T, 32M 3:05:07
1050 Rosario, R, 42M 3:05:07
1051 Grosbois, D, 33M 3:05:08
1052 Aguirre, J, 48M 3:05:09
1053 Verhille, J, 28M 3:05:09
1054 Morcrette, M, 48M 3:05:11
1055 Shaver, R, 42M 3:05:11
1056 Isabelle, R, 33M 3:05:11
1057 Schmidt, M, 33M 3:05:12
1058 Plascencia, M, 31M 3:05:13
1059 Kirk, D, 28M 3:05:14
1060 Yamada, K, 66M 3:05:14
1061 Rousseau, J, 51M 3:05:15
1062 Karl, E, 37M 3:05:15
1063 Gribaudi, P, 30M 3:05:15
1064 Mendoza, A, 42M 3:05:16
1065 Bezemer, C, 39M 3:05:16
1066 Delmeule, T, 28M 3:05:21
1067 Smith, G, 26M 3:05:22
1068 Kerschbaumer, F, 42M 3:05:23
1069 Gelpi, L, 40M 3:05:24
1070 Cohen, D, 24M3:05:26
1071 Ducrocq, P, 40M 3:05:27
1072 Pucher, F, 24M 3:05:28
1073 Saethre, F, 34M 3:05:29
1074 Wickremasinghe, S, 32M 3:05:29
1075 Hannaberry, R, 49M 3:05:29
1076 Platzgummer, C, 32M 3:05:29
1077 Quan, B, 40M 3:05:30
1078 Buergisser, U, 40M 3:05:31
1079Outsen, W, 43M 3:05:32
1080 Sanchez Sanchez, N, 46M 3:05:32
1081 McMains, M, 35M 3:05:32
1082 Hill, D, 36M 3:05:33
1083 Meehan, J, 41M 3:05:33
1084 Pastor, G, 45M 3:05:34
1085 Rocha, F, 44M 3:05:35
1086 Bartolomucci, F, 60M 3:05:37
1087 Lang, P, 27M 3:05:38
1088 Pacyna, W, 51M 3:05:38
1089 Cohn, J, 32M 3:05:44
1090 Harris, M, 28M 3:05:45
1091 Thramann, B, 33M 3:05:45
1092 Giberstein, D, 40M 3:05:46
1093 Bennett, G, 41M 3:05:47
1094 Petit, A, 45M 3:05:49
1095 Hill, D, 25M 3:05:50
1096 Espana, S, 45M 3:05:50
1097 Dubach, E, 45M 3:05:51
1098 Thurman, W, 22M 3:05:53
1099 Consiglio, J, 34M 3:05:53
1100 Seda, J, 38M 3:05:55
1101 Papeny, L, 28M 3:05:57
1102 Bevilacqua, C, 31M 3:05:57
1103 Colas, A, 37M 3:05:57
1104 Perez, J, 32M 3:05:58
1105 Folscheid, G, 47M 3:05:58
1106 Stanton, M, 36M 3:05:59
1107 Makita, K, 33M 3:05:59
1108 Neubueser, S, 51M 3:06:00
1109 Cerminaro, A, 58M 3:06:01
1110 Becker, U, 48M 3:06:01
1111 Sediri, K, 44M 3:06:01
1112 O'Neill, J, 28M 3:06:04
1113 Mueller, S, 54M 3:06:04
1114 Chaidez, J, 33M 3:06:05
1115 Hable, F, 33M 3:06:05
1116 Alaimo, D, 38M 3:06:06
1117 Hill, K, 32M 3:06:07
1118 Gomez, S, 46M 3:06:07
1119 Nelson, J, 34M 3:06:10
1120 Eidam, A, 23M 3:06:11
1121 Toothman, D, 36M 3:06:13
1122 Wenzel, C, 34M 3:06:15
1123 Pintos, L, 43M 3:06:17
1124 Rubio, J, 48M 3:06:17
1125 Roussel, P, 47M 3:06:18
1126 Goldstein, M, 25M 3:06:19
1127 Bermejo, G, 37M 3:06:19
1128 De Araujo Lacerda, L, 35M 3:06:21
1129 Pennell, T, 29M 3:06:22
1130 Vessiere, C, 25M 3:06:22
1131 Hedlund, R, 30M 3:06:22
1132 Saxer, A, 45M 3:06:23
1133 Singh, S, 28M 3:06:23
1134 Schmidt, G, 46M 3:06:24
1135 Aspholm, R, 26M 3:06:24
1136 Salon, G, 27M 3:06:24
1137 Bekkaoui, S, 42M 3:06:26
1138 Mele, S, 29M 3:06:27
1139 Braud, D, 39M3:06:27
1140 Becker-Feldman, D, 31M 3:06:28
1141 Lescarbotte, R, 42M 3:06:29
1142 Schneider, G, 30M 3:06:29
1143 Riebeling, L, 38F 3:06:29
1144 Andrade, R, 50M 3:06:29
1145 Wirthmann, F, 27M 3:06:30
1146 Reinoso Ducoing, J, 29M 3:06:30
1147 Terry, J, 39M 3:06:32
1148 Cea, A, 35M 3:06:34
1149 Quintanilla, D, 29M 3:06:34
1150 Madrazo, G, 35M 3:06:35
1151 Boukadour, H, 25M 3:06:36
1152 Bergholz, H, 54M 3:06:37
1153 Reinert, E, 37F 3:06:37
1154 Dubos, P, 44M 3:06:37
1155 Egeland, J, 39M 3:06:38
1156 Ryffel, M, 39M 3:06:38
1157 Sala, M, 20M 3:06:38
1158 Spagna, M, 28M 3:06:39
1159 Geske, M, 35M 3:06:40
1160 Holzbrecher, H, 37M 3:06:40
1161 Luker, T, 36M 3:06:41
1162 Van Zoeren, D, 36M 3:06:41
1163 Metreau, N, 28M 3:06:42
1164 Bassafontana, P, 26M 3:06:42
1165 Scanlan, P, 40M 3:06:43
1166 Beucher, D, 42M 3:06:43
1167 McHugh, C, 44M 3:06:43
1168 Tamayo, A, 23M 3:06:43
1169 Santos, C, 30M 3:06:43
1170 Bresser, L, 24M 3:06:43
1171 Peralta, P, 28M 3:06:44
1172 Castro, R, 28M 3:06:44
1173 Lemke, J, 27M 3:06:44
1174 Mouro, R, 38M 3:06:46
1175 Menichini, G, 36M 3:06:47
1176 Ekman, M, 48M 3:06:47
1177 Richard, G, 37M 3:06:49
1178 Rey, L, 30M 3:06:49
1179 Brandt, G, 56M 3:06:50
1180 Fountain, P, 38M 3:06:51
1181 Guggisberg, W, 41M 3:06:51
1182 Lerner, S, 39M 3:06:53
1183 De La Pena, J, 35M 3:06:53
1184 Siebke, A, 40M 3:06:55
1185 Kronmueller, V, 27M 3:06:55
1186 Clariot, J, 27M 3:06:56
1187 Morel, G, 47M 3:06:56
1188 Koka, J, 42M 3:06:57
1189 Jurjens, G, 40M 3:06:57
1190 Loiselet, E, 30M 3:06:58
1191 Mayforth Jr, G, 34M 3:07:00
1192 Perennou, L, 28M 3:07:00
1193 Steiner, K, 40M 3:07:02
1194 Tannuzzo, J, 23M 3:07:02
1195 Laguna, R, 39F 3:07:05
1196 Arbez, P, 27M 3:07:05
1197 Diaz, M, 53M 3:07:05
1198 Angeles, J, 34M 3:07:06
1199 Bercx, J, 33M 3:07:07
1200 Marronnier, E, 37M 3:07:07
1201 Falkenberg, A, 25F 3:07:07
1202 Appoy, A, 37M 3:07:08
1203 Bako, A, 36M 3:07:08
1204 Alves, I, 30M 3:07:09
1205 Moss, D, 27M 3:07:09
1206 Afanador, R, 36M 3:07:10
1207 Amato, J, 32M 3:07:10
1208 Mueller, G, 46M 3:07:11
1209 Inoue, R, 24M 3:07:11
1210 Turbe, B, 30M 3:07:11
1211 Marceron, D, 45M 3:07:11
1212 Wertsching, J, 43M3:07:11
1213 Lascaux, P, 33M 3:07:11
1214 Garcia, R, 50M 3:07:11
1215 Contarine Neto, L, 32M 3:07:11
1216 Virella, I, 36M 3:07:11
1217 Alessandrini, M, 36M 3:07:17
1218 Keogh, D, 43M 3:07:19
1219 Muijrers, P, 46M 3:07:20
1220 Flitton, T, 31M 3:07:21
1221 Augereau, B, 42M 3:07:21
1222 Blanks, V, 30M 3:07:22
1223 Hadorn, M, 53F 3:07:22
1224 Rodriguez, R, 35M 3:07:25
1225 Bertin, G, 43M 3:07:26
1226 Karsenti, J, 28M 3:07:27
1227 Jacobson, D, 21M 3:07:27
1228 Kiffe, M, 32M 3:07:28
1229 Kuoppala, M, 42M 3:07:29
1230 Perner, A, 29M 3:07:31
1231 Campbell, J, 34M 3:07:37
1232 Osten, C, 30M 3:07:42
1233 Pfeiffer Dr, R, 36M 3:07:44
1234 Sullivan, K, 43M 3:07:45
1235 Lopez Carmona, A, 32M 3:07:47
1236 Higgins, K, 35M 3:07:47
1237 Mueller, R, 36M 3:07:48
1238 Nau, D, 51M 3:07:48
1239 Zubia, F, 34M 3:07:48
1240 Di Bianco, U, 29M 3:07:49
1241 Lakew, Y, 25M 3:07:50
1242 Tavarez, C, 45M 3:07:51
1243 Shviro, A, 30F 3:07:51
1244 Guerrero, S, 27M 3:07:52
1245 Spector, F, 41M 3:07:53
1246 Callebaut, P, 39M 3:07:55
1247 Stumpe, D, 34M 3:07:55
1248 Coene, A, 43M 3:07:57
1249 Podda, A, 31M 3:07:59
1250 Barmentloo, R, 36M 3:08:00
1251 Diaz Toyens, R, 42M 3:08:01
1252 Riley, M, 33M 3:08:01
1253 Rodriguez Marquez, R, 23M 3:08:01
1254 Kreuzeder, E, 29M 3:08:02
1255 Velden, E, 50M 3:08:03
1256 Moreno, R, 46M 3:08:03
1257 Edris, D, 48M 3:08:04
1258 Berrada, T, 43M3:08:07
1259 Bellal, S, 38M 3:08:09
1260 Nissen, H, 36M 3:08:09
1261 Weber, J, 56M 3:08:11
1262 Waitz, J, 46M 3:08:12
1263 Rouissi, D, 35M 3:08:12
1264 Diaz, I, 34M 3:08:13
1265 Saito, S, 43M 3:08:14
1266 Van Den Hengel, H, 32M 3:08:14
1267 Lucas, K, 26F 3:08:15
1268 Meixner, H, 38M 3:08:16
1269 Trejo Arreguin, M, 42M 3:08:16
1270 Darche, P, 35M 3:08:19
1271 Kocar, T, 26M 3:08:19
1272 Scheuer, J, 40M 3:08:19
1273 Castets, J, 47M 3:08:22
1274 Linton, J, 24M 3:08:22
1275 Shimizu, I, 41M 3:08:23
1276 Cribelier, J, 50M 3:08:24
1277 Kockelkoren, C, 30M 3:08:24
1278 Riviere, D, 27M 3:08:25
1279 Wadley, R, 47M 3:08:25
1280 Groenendijk, J, 37M 3:08:26
1281 Bianchi, R, 31M 3:08:26
1282 Leodori, P, 37M 3:08:27
1283 Cohin, R, 34M 3:08:28
1284 Carpintero, E, 30M 3:08:29
1285 Bauduin, C, 42M 3:08:29
1286 Pizzorno, G, 21M 3:08:29
1287 Mueller, J, 34M 3:08:29
1288 Pane, B, 38M 3:08:29
1289 Talbott, G, 40M 3:08:30
1290 Broutin, M, 38M 3:08:30
1291 Namiki, S, 40M 3:08:30
1292 Alonso, L, 36M 3:08:31
1293 O'Connor, P, 23M 3:08:32
1294 Sikora, J, 42M 3:08:32
1295 DePompo, G, 32F 3:08:33
1296 Brendel, U, 29M 3:08:33
1297 Rekkebo, T, 61M 3:08:34
1298 Stark, C, 38M 3:08:35
1299 Haenel, G, 54M 3:08:36
1300 Gueraud, P, 23M 3:08:37
1301 Campos, J, 38M 3:08:37
1302 Lancaster, J, 32M 3:08:38
1303 Pedroni, G, 36M 3:08:39
1304 Kolankowski, J, 40M 3:08:40
1305Forest, T, 26M 3:08:40
1306 Carillo, A, 31M 3:08:42
1307 Lehmann, B, 40M 3:08:42
1308 Vanhoek, P, 25M 3:08:42
1309 Clancey, J, 49M3:08:43
1310 Davers, T, 50M 3:08:44
1311 Wasserstrom, G, 55M 3:08:45
1312 Andrade, G, 20M 3:08:45
1313 Gendre, C, 49M 3:08:45
1314 Redlinger, E, 33M 3:08:47
1315 Edelman, S, 70M 3:08:47
1316 Murphy, T, 23M 3:08:48
1317 Byrne, K, 31M 3:08:48
1318 Gruber, A, 29M 3:08:49
1319 Fuchs, J, 33M 3:08:50
1320 Gautier, M, 44M 3:08:52
1321 Perez Juarez, M, 33M 3:08:53
1322 Gerard, C, 35F 3:08:53
1323 Cuadrado, M, 25M 3:08:53
1324 Takahashi, K, 40M 3:08:54
1325 Osten, P, 29M 3:08:54
1326 Schneider, K, 36M 3:08:56
1327 Kueppers, H, 26M 3:08:56
1328 McKie, A, 52M 3:08:57
1329 Doll, F, 36F 3:08:57
1330 Cassai, E, 30M 3:08:57
1331 Coates, D, 37M 3:08:58
1332 Bandini, F, 45M 3:08:58
1333 Joire, J, 50M 3:08:59
1334Braehler, J, 26M 3:09:01
1335 Beyer, J, 31M 3:09:01
1336 Soriano, R, 44M 3:09:01
1337 Hawley, A, 40M 3:09:01
1338 Clark, E, 29M 3:09:02
1339 Ireland, M, 29M 3:09:03
1340 Pinto, R, 29M 3:09:03
1341 Nachef, G, 50M 3:09:03
1342 Thurman, L, 25M 3:09:03
1343 Hudick, M, 49M 3:09:04
1344 Pfund, N, 33M 3:09:05
1345 Zahn, U, 28M3:09:06
1346 Schiller, D, 57M 3:09:07
1347 Brecht III, G, 37M 3:09:08
1348 Lueck, G, 47M 3:09:09
1349 Clenin, B, 42M 3:09:09
1350 Negron, J, 33M 3:09:10
1351 Bufka, Z, 37M 3:09:12
1352 Konig, M, 48M 3:09:13
1353 Rallo, V, 30M 3:09:13
1354 Doyle, L, 28M 3:09:15
1355 Cote, J, 51M 3:09:15
1356 Purpura, T, 43M 3:09:16
1357 Weston, S, 42M 3:09:16
1358 Schmoekel, W, 43M 3:09:18
1359 Szustka, A, 39M 3:09:19
1360 Preislerova, J, 46F 3:09:19
1361 Lenski, C, 41M 3:09:20
1362 Del Toro Lopez, J, 42M 3:09:22
1363 Burchett, R, 55M 3:09:23
1364 Caron, P, 37M 3:09:23
1365 Van Sambeek, J, 37M 3:09:23
1366 Hauch, T, 34M 3:09:25
1367 Aviles, G, 28M 3:09:25
1368 Zapponi, M, 33M 3:09:25
1369 Jimenez, C, 35F 3:09:26
1370 Luthringer, A, 46M 3:09:28
1371 Panopoulos, J, 37M 3:09:29
1372 Woods, J, 33M 3:09:31
1373 Barreto, N, 26F 3:09:31
1374 Groothuyse, J, 43M 3:09:32
1375 Waack, R, 34M 3:09:33
1376 Hayashi, T, 46M 3:09:35
1377 Sabatino, J, 27M 3:09:36
1378 Calvo, J, 48M 3:09:36
1379 McOwen, K, 26M 3:09:36
1380 Corneli, A, 48M 3:09:38
1381 Perkins, M, 42M 3:09:38
1382 Michon, J, 31M 3:09:38
1383 Musselwhite, J, 44M 3:09:39
1384 Melenzani, S, 48M 3:09:39
1385 Hughes, A, 32F 3:09:40
1386 Andron, R, 47M 3:09:42
1387 Guillemin, P, 29M3:09:43
1388 Degener, P, 42M 3:09:43
1389 Letschert, D, 42M 3:09:43
1390 Takesaki, T, 53M 3:09:44
1391 Sipos, I, 34M 3:09:45
1392 Pommier, J, 38M 3:09:46
1393 Linn, T, 37M 3:09:46
1394 RUNNER NO. 9946, 35M 3:09:47
1395 Buerklein Dr., H, 46M 3:09:48
1396 Arnold, D, 30M 3:09:48
1397 De Peiza, C, 44M 3:09:48
1398 Black, T, 28M 3:09:48
1399 O'Leary, C, 40F 3:09:50
1400 Gustafson, K, 32M 3:09:50
1401 Vannier, D, 30M 3:09:50
1402 Lazar, L, 30M 3:09:50
1403 Gosse, L, 43M 3:09:51
1404 Timpka, T, 36M 3:09:51
1405 Laxton, S, 46F 3:09:51
1406 Sung, K, 31M 3:09:51
1407 Reindertsen, C, 35M 3:09:51
1408 Dubie, G, 36M 3:09:52
1409 Graebner, U, 28M 3:09:53
1410 Urdinola, S, 31M 3:09:54
1411 Wagstaff, M, 32M 3:09:54
1412 Catron, K, 38M 3:09:54
1413 Maldonado, H, 39M 3:09:54
1414 Hernandez, G, 34M 3:09:55
1415 Dolan, T, 26M 3:09:55
1416 Bollini, M, 44M 3:09:55
1417 Cruz-Olivares, A, 36M 3:09:56
1418 Rosario, A, 32M 3:09:57
1419 Schwam, J, 37M 3:09:58
1420 Hammond, R, 34M 3:09:58
1421 Grzegorczyk, L, 50M 3:09:59
1422 Derksen, R, 31M 3:09:59
1423 Lefevre, M, 35M 3:09:59
1424 Plasmans, B, 33M 3:10:00
1425 Kipperer, P, 35M 3:10:00
1426 Karavites*, K, 35M 3:10:01
1427 Menger, P, 52M 3:10:03
1428 Schelling, A, 37M 3:10:03
1429 Smith, C, 33M 3:10:04
1430 Sommer, R, 44M 3:10:06
1431 Lerval, A, 41M 3:10:06
1432 Offel, D, 35M 3:10:06
1433 Littman, A, 38M 3:10:07
1434 Mignon, M, 30M 3:10:07
1435 Berger, K, 41M 3:10:08
1436Senechal, B, 23F 3:10:08
1437 Johnson, D, 54M 3:10:09
1438 Konrad, G, 23M 3:10:10
1439 Jarvis, J, 34M 3:10:11
1440 Forrester, D, 36M 3:10:11
1441 Lacout, P, 31M 3:10:12
1442 Chabrie, J, 36M 3:10:12
1443 Thostrup, J, 36M 3:10:14
1444 Loeffen, R, 29M 3:10:15
1445 Wong, R, 48M 3:10:18
1446 Encio, F, 30M 3:10:20
1447 Kervarec, D, 40M 3:10:20
1448 Pecqueur, J, 38M 3:10:22
1449 De La Vega, F, 34M 3:10:22
1450 Buckley, D, 30F 3:10:23
1451 Dolecki, B, 47M 3:10:23
1452 Thareau, G, 44M 3:10:26
1453 Vial, M, 34M 3:10:28
1454 Knuchel, B, 34M 3:10:29
1455 Rodriguez, M, 37M 3:10:30
1456Negrete Gamboa, F, 62M 3:10:30
1457 O'Donnell, E, 40M 3:10:31
1458 Hervo, D, 32M 3:10:31
1459 Ryan, T, 35M 3:10:31
1460 Colon, P, 37M 3:10:32
1461 Galbo, T, 32M 3:10:33
1462 Ramsdal, D, 33M 3:10:34
1463 Agledal, O, 24M 3:10:34
1464 Riveros, A, 35M 3:10:35
1465 Sucre, F, 29M 3:10:35
1466 Melville, B, 24M 3:10:36
1467 Gilmore, K, 27F 3:10:36
1468 Mariaca, A, 34M 3:10:37
1469 Wizeman, M, 26M 3:10:38
1470 Pini, S, 40M 3:10:38
1471 Stewart, J, 26F 3:10:39
1472 Lenormand, D, 31M 3:10:39
1473 Flores Montiel, J, 44M 3:10:40
1474 Kentner, P, 33F 3:10:40
1475 Nold, S, 31M 3:10:41
1476 Wellenberg, T, 33M 3:10:45
1477 Guerrero, A, 43M 3:10:45
1478 Pocci, A, 24M 3:10:46
1479 Wolfe, L, 25F 3:10:47
1480 Morales Hernandez, R, 54M 3:10:47
1481 Mas, J, 36M 3:10:47
1482 Weir, S, 33M 3:10:48
1483 Delga, P, 45M 3:10:48
1484 Perez, C, 24M 3:10:50
1485 Seldomridge, A, 24M 3:10:50
1486 Currlin, K, 34M 3:10:51
1487 Zettel, M, 22M 3:10:52
1488 Louradoux, D, 31M 3:10:53
1489 Kim, B, 52M 3:10:54
1490 Stein, J, 24M 3:10:55
1491 Cimarusti, K, 35M 3:10:55
1492 Van Rooy, F, 41M 3:10:56
1493 Espinosa, J, 26M 3:10:56
1494 Ballos, C, 22M 3:10:57
1495 Knapp, M, 31M 3:10:57
1496 Makarski, F, 29M 3:10:58
1497 Ellis, K, 29M 3:10:58
1498 Jennings, R, 44M 3:11:01
1499 Barno, P, 33M 3:11:02
1500 Kelly, S, 46M 3:11:02
1501 McCutcheon, D, 34M 3:11:03
1502 Woo, J, 27M 3:11:03
1503 Sardo, M, 30M 3:11:05
1504 Whitney, D, 26M 3:11:06
1505 Maddox, J, 46M 3:11:06
1506 Moreau, G, 50M 3:11:07
1507 Renken, B, 39M 3:11:08
1508 Benedetto, C, 33M 3:11:08
1509 Kraemer, S, 30F 3:11:08
1510 Canon, A, 49M 3:11:13
1511 Renken, L, 37M 3:11:14
1512 Ringtaro, T, 27M 3:11:14
1513 Barjenbruch, B, 52M 3:11:15
1514 Pochobradsky, P, 48M 3:11:15
1515 Lugo, J, 52M 3:11:15
1516 Tagesen, J, 31M 3:11:17
1517 Rapharin, A, 31M 3:11:17
1518 Riesle, W, 28M 3:11:18
1519 Bunting, M, 23M 3:11:21
1520 Beijer, K, 31M 3:11:21
1521 Prueske, J, 46M 3:11:22
1522 Giraldo, J, 32M 3:11:24
1523 Heivers, J, 33M 3:11:24
1524 Reyes, W, 38M 3:11:27
1525 Picard, H, 43M 3:11:27
1526 Van Mierlo, F, 47M 3:11:27
1527 Plunkett, J, 39M 3:11:28
1528 Buzzetti, A, 34M 3:11:28
1529 Renzi, R, 29M 3:11:29
1530 Rieger, M, 38M 3:11:30
1531 Bieuzent, E, 33M 3:11:32
1532 Cutler, C, 23F 3:11:34
1533 McKelligan, J, 35M 3:11:34
1534 Tymowicz, T, 38M 3:11:36
1535 Strickland, M, 37M 3:11:37
1536 Frey, U, 59M 3:11:39
1537 De Carne, E, 31M 3:11:39
1538 Dufau, M, 35M 3:11:40
1539 Coughlin, D, 29M 3:11:40
1540 Farrey, P, 34M 3:11:43
1541 Guilmart, M, 43M 3:11:43
1542 Baumann, M, 40M 3:11:43
1543 Kerbaol, P, 36M 3:11:43
1544 Kronick, B, 34M 3:11:43
1545 Campiglia, P, 25M 3:11:44
1546 Usnik Jr., W, 31M 3:11:46
1547 Reis, M, 28M 3:11:46
1548 Williams, J, 33M 3:11:47
1549 Rochemont, P, 37M 3:11:48
1550 Knop, J, 33M 3:11:48
1551 Prins, G, 48M 3:11:49
1552 Feldmann, M, 36M 3:11:49
1553 Pecoraro, L, 26M 3:11:50
1554 Giraudeau, J, 35M 3:11:51
1555 L'Her, F, 55M 3:11:52
1556Karch, R, 22M 3:11:52
1557 Ferre, H, 41M 3:11:52
1558 Konrad, M, 55M 3:11:53
1559 Semmelhack, B, 47M 3:11:53
1560 Liberato, L, 39M3:11:54
1561 Sunneborn, S, 29M 3:11:54
1562 Gilet, D, 39M 3:11:55
1563 Wells, T, 40M 3:11:55
1564 Doulman, G, 35M 3:11:56
1565 Manceau, L, 51M 3:11:56
1566 Berlanga, J, 49M 3:11:56
1567 Glue, P, 37M 3:11:57
1568 Callinan, J, 28M 3:11:57
1569 Cohen, A, 35M 3:11:57
1570 Van Den Burg, P, 44M 3:11:57
1571 Ritaccio, L, 30F 3:11:58
1572 Estes, W, 34M 3:11:58
1573 Samuel, D, 53M 3:11:59
1574 Street, J, 27M 3:12:00
1575 DeVellis, J, 28M 3:12:01
1576 Torne, B, 39M 3:12:01
1577 Conran, T, 33M 3:12:02
1578 Turrentine, B, 30M 3:12:02
1579 Volard, N, 29F 3:12:03
1580 Rolen, P, 36M 3:12:05
1581 Matias, E, 42M 3:12:05
1582 Simon, P, 38M 3:12:08
1583 Ramos, J, 29M 3:12:08
1584 Cordero De Benito, J, 42M 3:12:08
1585 Legrand, M, 38M 3:12:08
1586 Simons, M, 37M 3:12:09
1587 Van De Steeg, R, 32M 3:12:10
1588 Dunleavy, F, 38M 3:12:11
1589 Saari, D, 52M 3:12:12
1590 Gandellini, R, 23M 3:12:12
1591 Erbsland, G, 38M 3:12:12
1592 Normann, J, 41M 3:12:12
1593 Pellegri, C, 35M 3:12:13
1594 Czak, P, 55M 3:12:13
1595 Nerhagen, O, 36M 3:12:13
1596 Tesdell, K, 36M 3:12:13
1597 Mouchet, F, 32M 3:12:14
1598 Perez, G, 30M 3:12:14
1599 Thonfeld, L, 55M 3:12:14
1600 Rahmanim, N, 28M 3:12:14
1601 Kruegel, H, 55M 3:12:15
1602 Flaire, M, 43M 3:12:15
1603 Junge, N, 25M 3:12:15
1604 Nolan Jr, E, 42M 3:12:16
1605 Fowler, J, 35M 3:12:17
1606 McGrath, T, 35M 3:12:18
1607 Durazno, J, 23M 3:12:18
1608 McCall, M, 32M 3:12:19
1609 De Cubber, D, 31M 3:12:20
1610 Olden, D, 43M 3:12:22
1611 Carbones, J, 25M 3:12:22
1612 Nordmann, K, 47M 3:12:22
1613 Siah, J, 40M 3:12:23
1614 Mills, I, 38M 3:12:23
1615 Brown, P, 38M 3:12:24
1616 Madsen, L, 32M 3:12:24
1617 Formo, B, 45M 3:12:24
1618 Desmo, C, 40M3:12:25
1619 Biemans, R, 35M 3:12:25
1620 Vinci, P, 42M 3:12:25
1621 Rinshofer, M, 27M 3:12:26
1622 Dias, F, 49M 3:12:28
1623Schum, J, 41M 3:12:29
1624 Veniel, J, 48M 3:12:30
1625 Tucker, F, 35M 3:12:31
1626 Golub, A, 37M 3:12:34
1627 Kerrigan, J, 34M 3:12:34
1628 Zehr, W, 27M 3:12:34
1629 Locraft, F, 34M 3:12:37
1630 Couvreur, P, 38M 3:12:37
1631 DeLong, D, 29M 3:12:38
1632 Caron, L, 35M 3:12:38
1633 Metcalf, E, 29M 3:12:39
1634 Brymer, L, 38F 3:12:41
1635 Shane, S, 37M 3:12:41
1636 Guzman, S, 49M 3:12:42
1637 Panke, K, 48M 3:12:43
1638 Simola, E, 57M 3:12:43
1639 Vernizeau, J, 47M 3:12:44
1640 Shoemaker, D, 42M 3:12:44
1641 Hassel, E, 49M 3:12:45
1642 Blackburn, S, 34M 3:12:45
1643 Ryan, M, 29M 3:12:46
1644 Frixe, E, 44M 3:12:46
1645 Bendl, F, 40M 3:12:46
1646 Peralta, R, 46M 3:12:47
1647 Hartikalnen, S, 38M 3:12:48
1648 Townsend, D, 40M 3:12:49
1649 Guderyon-Goetz, K, 40F 3:12:50
1650 Medina, H, 38M 3:12:51
1651 Benhenna, J, 43M 3:12:51
1652 Cabral, E, 45M 3:12:52
1653 Stolz, H, 55M 3:12:52
1654 Moulin, M, 41M 3:12:52
1655 Oikawa, S, 45M 3:12:53
1656 Piquet, B, 36M 3:12:54
1657 Rapini, R, 36M 3:12:54
1658 Speer, R, 41M 3:12:54
1659Andre, J, 41M 3:12:55
1660 Jakobsen, K, 32M 3:12:55
1661 Larsen, G, 35M 3:12:56
1662 Witte, J, 30M 3:12:59
1663 Perry, C, 42M 3:12:59
1664 Banke, F, 42M 3:12:59
1665 Boellaard, R, 36M 3:13:00
1666 Alvarez, J, 41M 3:13:00
1667 Maillet, M, 41M 3:13:01
1668 Chauvin, B, 46M 3:13:04
1669 Carol, B, 45M 3:13:04
1670 Grenier, G, 48M 3:13:05
1671 Nieto, A, 27M 3:13:06
1672 Mackenzie, K, 36F 3:13:07
1673 Young, D, 29M 3:13:08
1674 Alicea, S, 41M 3:13:08
1675 Barrero, A, 45M 3:13:08
1676 Retter, R, 25M 3:13:09
1677 Loison, J, 53M 3:13:10
1678 Lorenz, F, 55M 3:13:10
1679 Quinlan, P, 31M 3:13:12
1680 Denti, M, 33M 3:13:13
1681 Peek, B, 36M 3:13:14
1682 Pellekooren, A, 40M 3:13:17
1683 Rydberg, C, 32M 3:13:17
1684 Barroso Zarzoza, J, 39M 3:13:19
1685 McHenry, A, 37M 3:13:20
1686 Goeschl, P, 33M 3:13:21
1687 MacDonald, M, 40F 3:13:22
1688 Burns, E, 32M 3:13:23
1689 Besson, C, 24M 3:13:23
1690 Palmquist, J, 35M 3:13:24
1691 Metzger, F, 27M 3:13:25
1692 Sastre, P, 30M 3:13:26
1693 Caroff, R, 46M 3:13:26
1694 Jones, M, 39M 3:13:26
1695 Leventhal, J, 50M 3:13:27
1696 Gaston, W, 37M 3:13:28
1697 Woolley, M, 30M 3:13:28
1698 Ward, K, 32M 3:13:29
1699 Jurenas, V, 51M 3:13:31
1700 Peterson, J, 35M 3:13:33
1701 Viscio, L, 30M 3:13:34
1702 Boenninghausen, H, 50M 3:13:36
1703 Paccasassi, B, 30M 3:13:38
1704 Wagner, J, 40M 3:13:38
1705 Koot, D, 39M 3:13:39
1706 Plibersek, S, 32M 3:13:42
1707 Mercero, J, 55M 3:13:42
1708Savoy, C, 40M 3:13:43
1709 Pelletier, P, 43M 3:13:43
1710 Ramos, R, 33M 3:13:43
1711 Kley, M, 31M 3:13:43
1712 Ensch, P, 46M 3:13:44
1713 Lynch, E, 49M 3:13:44
1714 Lemort, J, 46M 3:13:45
1715 Mancini, P, 31M 3:13:45
1716 Dauvet, P, 35M 3:13:45
1717 Stender, E, 57M 3:13:46
1718 Schneekloth Sr, C, 44M 3:13:47
1719 Cramer, M, 50M 3:13:47
1720 Delhagen, K, 31F 3:13:47
1721 Kotta, P, 28M 3:13:48
1722 Fleischer, U, 39M 3:13:49
1723 Skinner, S, 52M 3:13:50
1724 Halgren, S, 42F 3:13:50
1725 Slodden Jr., H, 41M 3:13:51
1726 Kelly, T, 46M 3:13:51
1727 Boyd, M, 44M 3:13:52
1728 Dogliotti, R, 34M 3:13:53
1729 Balestrini, G, 27M 3:13:54
1730 Burger, G, 28M 3:13:54
1731 Hill, S, 42M 3:13:55
1732 Compa, D, 25M 3:13:55
1733 Schmeits, T, 47M 3:13:56
1734 Van Haaren, M, 35M 3:13:56
1735 Hughes, D, 37M 3:13:57
1736 Breidenstein, J, 46M 3:13:58
1737 Churyk, W, 27M 3:13:58
1738 Bertot, L, 26M 3:13:59
1739 Roget, J, 44M 3:14:00
1740 Lightwood, G, 32M 3:14:00
1741 Jordan, D, 41M 3:14:00
1742 Knedler, W, 43M 3:14:01
1743 Oehrlein, W, 30M 3:14:03
1744 Laffage, J, 35M 3:14:04
1745 Olsson, O, 30M 3:14:04
1746 Mendoza Vazquez, J, 34M 3:14:04
1747 Santana, P, 33M 3:14:04
1748 Henke, V, 50M 3:14:05
1749 Commandre, R, 43M 3:14:05
1750 Block, J, 25M 3:14:05
1751 Davidson, C, 40M 3:14:07
1752 Rosso Jr., T, 29M 3:14:07
1753 Emond, B, 35M 3:14:08
1754 Hurley, D, 37F 3:14:08
1755 Roach, M, 22M 3:14:09
1756 Fontana, M, 31M 3:14:09
1757 Martinez, T, 35M 3:14:10
1758 Bachy, D, 49M 3:14:10
1759 Hare, B, 30M 3:14:10
1760 Ryan, H, 40M 3:14:11
1761 Stengs, H, 44M3:14:11
1762 De Gooijer, R, 28M 3:14:12
1763 Reback, J, 24M 3:14:13
1764 Beldarrain, G, 39M 3:14:14
1765 Ferrara, J, 35M 3:14:14
1766 Monteiro, J, 36M 3:14:15
1767 Lo Maglio, C, 32M 3:14:15
1768 Solomon, B, 36M 3:14:16
1769 Nutsch, E, 56M 3:14:17
1770 Franzen, E, 48M 3:14:19
1771 Geldof, R, 34M 3:14:20
1772 Marino, G, 33F 3:14:21
1773 Jadoul, B, 45M 3:14:21
1774 Christensen, A, 47M 3:14:21
1775 Casten, S, 22M 3:14:21
1776 Arboireau, P, 28M 3:14:22
1777 Rubenstein, M, 21M 3:14:22
1778 Vroomen, L, 50M 3:14:22
1779 Prichard, J, 37M 3:14:22
1780 Ryan, S, 39M 3:14:23
1781 Ostgren, K, 30M 3:14:24
1782 Nobukuni, H, 21M 3:14:24
1783 Silbermann, C, 47F 3:14:25
1784 Quijand, A, 44M 3:14:25
1785 Weber, U, 34M 3:14:25
1786 Goodman, S, 34M 3:14:26
1787 Dos Santos, H, 42M 3:14:26
1788 Justiniano Rivera, M, 57M 3:14:26
1789 Nagasaki, R, 44M 3:14:27
1790 Bischof, M, 36M 3:14:27
1791 Lamby, P, 46M 3:14:28
1792 Gat, F, 37M 3:14:28
1793 Allais, G, 39M 3:14:28
1794 Fellmann, T, 30M 3:14:28
1795 Bachmeier, K, 52M 3:14:28
1796 Malone, W, 39M 3:14:29
1797 Wagner, L, 43M 3:14:29
1798 Mueller, H, 44M 3:14:29
1799 Richards, A, 35M 3:14:30
1800 Lindholm, J, 24M 3:14:30
1801 Santoni, M, 31M 3:14:30
1802 Simon, J, 27M 3:14:31
1803 Lama, P, 34M 3:14:32
1804 Bracero, G, 35M 3:14:32
1805 Claps, P, 32M 3:14:32
1806 Schmidt, H, 56M 3:14:33
1807 Tower, R, 32M 3:14:34
1808 Lazarus, R, 37M 3:14:34
1809 White, C, 45M 3:14:35
1810 Tarara, H, 52M 3:14:35
1811 Treanor, T, 42M 3:14:35
1812 Thies, J, 30M 3:14:37
1813 Arsenault, G, 30M 3:14:37
1814 Ploetzl, F, 45M 3:14:38
1815 Moore, A, 35M 3:14:38
1816 Urrejola, E, 45M 3:14:38
1817 Papst, P, 43M 3:14:39
1818 Thomas, R, 37M 3:14:40
1819 Montalto, S, 39M 3:14:41
1820 Janki, R, 37M 3:14:42
1821 Beyer, L, 50M 3:14:43
1822 Rivadeneyra, R, 40M 3:14:43
1823 Montecucco, E, 33M 3:14:43
1824 Wolters, M, 33M 3:14:44
1825 Schodrowski, M, 28M 3:14:45
1826 Karchawer, P, 46M 3:14:45
1827 MaGee, T, 30M 3:14:46
1828 Saito, T, 29M 3:14:47
1829 Perry, G, 27M 3:14:47
1830 Krosch, G, 46M 3:14:47
1831 Gallo, M, 43M 3:14:48
1832 Scortecci, G, 30M 3:14:49
1833 Ehrlich, M, 31M 3:14:50
1834 Rousselle, A, 41M 3:14:53
1835 Malec, B, 31M 3:14:53
1836 Grossi, G, 35M 3:14:54
1837 Anguiano Ibarra, C, 40F 3:14:55
1838 Paredez, V, 34M 3:14:56
1839 Eluchans, R, 41M 3:14:57
1840 Tagami, K, 46M 3:14:58
1841 Bernier, J, 35M 3:14:58
1842 Anson III, A, 34M 3:14:59
1843 Tschohl, R, 33M 3:15:01
1844 Geilert, L, 38M 3:15:03
1845 Bebi, P, 57M 3:15:04
1846 Brown, A, 36M 3:15:05
1847 Van Mierlo, J, 29M 3:15:06
1848 Haller, R, 51M 3:15:07
1849 Preininger, R, 43M 3:15:09
1850 Sonnhueter, E, 58M 3:15:11
1851 Limprevil, S, 26M 3:15:12
1852 Tomlinson, K, 28F 3:15:12
1853 Francavilla, E, 35M 3:15:14
1854Fereyre, M, 45M 3:15:16
1855 Lieblein, A, 28F 3:15:16
1856 Anderson, E, 32M 3:15:16
1857 Kleinjan, P, 31M 3:15:17
1858 Estrup, C, 39M 3:15:19
1859 Wanner, D, 44M 3:15:21
1860 McGrath, P, 32M 3:15:21
1861 Maebe, B, 35F 3:15:22
1862 Cassignol, E, 27M 3:15:22
1863 Guerra, H, 37M 3:15:23
1864 Furhoff, B, 34M 3:15:23
1865 Del Barrio Gauxachs, A, 44M 3:15:24
1866 Sole, S, 22M 3:15:24
1867 Capdevila, P, 46M 3:15:25
1868 Oppeneiger, M, 55M 3:15:25
1869 Van Rensbergen, W, 53M 3:15:25
1870 Rathbun, J, 42M 3:15:26
1871 Copin, M, 50M 3:15:26
1872 Toet, S, 29M 3:15:27
1873 Berry, R, 42M 3:15:27
1874 Pape, J, 51M 3:15:27
1875 Canning, T, 33M 3:15:27
1876 Camele, J, 28M 3:15:28
1877 Platek, J, 27M 3:15:29
1878 Moussay, B, 41M 3:15:30
1879 Roche, P, 42M 3:15:30
1880 Quist, P, 32M 3:15:30
1881 Delivet, J, 48M 3:15:31
1882 Scott, G, 45M 3:15:31
1883 Balian, A, 31M 3:15:32
1884 Gnerre, J, 40M 3:15:33
1885 Gay, J, 36M 3:15:34
1886 Fjeld, T, 28M 3:15:34
1887 Olsson, U, 34M 3:15:34
1888 Mossiah, E, 32M 3:15:34
1889 Phillips, B, 46M 3:15:35
1890 Cistulli, J, 29M 3:15:35
1891 Gomez, E, 50M 3:15:36
1892 Perez, G, 38M 3:15:36
1893 Roman, D, 33M 3:15:36
1894 Croce, C, 38M 3:15:36
1895 Helliwell, P, 49M 3:15:37
1896 Ventura, S, 22M 3:15:37
1897 Kennedy, J, 37M 3:15:37
1898 Cosentino, M, 29M 3:15:38
1899 Smeal, G, 46M 3:15:38
1900 Braun, F, 48M 3:15:39
1901Hitzel, F, 40M 3:15:39
1902 Bart, L, 42M 3:15:39
1903 Luff, K, 29M 3:15:40
1904 Metais, D, 42M 3:15:40
1905 Cotto Nieves, J, 45M 3:15:41
1906 Benkhaled, H, 30M 3:15:41
1907 Soderstrom, M, 33M 3:15:41
1908 Hand, L, 30M 3:15:42
1909 Luijten, A, 40F 3:15:43
1910 Cauger, A, 47M 3:15:43
1911 Loose, W, 40M 3:15:43
1912 Fossel, S, 26M 3:15:44
1913 Sterental, B, 34M 3:15:45
1914 Crispi, G, 32M 3:15:45
1915 Chillemi, A, 34M 3:15:46
1916 Van Ophem, P, 36M 3:15:47
1917 Diaz, O, 38M 3:15:47
1918 Sheridan, M, 41M 3:15:47
1919 Rodriguez, L, 44M 3:15:47
1920 Allain, J, 50M 3:15:48
1921 Hardy, B, 24M 3:15:48
1922 Cooijmans, I, 35M 3:15:48
1923 Sbrighi, P, 41M 3:15:48
1924 Schulze, K, 41M 3:15:49
1925 Meyer, J, 43M 3:15:50
1926 Eugene, D, 31M 3:15:51
1927 Raquin, C, 24M 3:15:52
1928 Panzer, K, 35M 3:15:53
1929 Paz, M, 61M 3:15:53
1930 Santen, D, 49M 3:15:54
1931 Hardesty, M, 29M 3:15:54
1932 Hardy, B, 39M3:15:55
1933 Beier-Remy, U, 39M 3:15:55
1934 Magnin, A, 45M 3:15:55
1935 Reeh, K, 55M 3:15:55
1936 Brito, S, 34M 3:15:58
1937Quintanilla, M, 25M 3:15:58
1938 Caulifield, M, 32F 3:15:58
1939 Inniss*, T, 38M 3:15:58
1940 Katagi, S, 44M 3:15:59
1941 Silva, R, 25F 3:16:00
1942 Gonzalez, J, 47M 3:16:00
1943 Weber, A, 38M 3:16:01
1944 Leon, J, 42M 3:16:01
1945 Stevens, K, 43M 3:16:01
1946 Vermeulen, P, 25M 3:16:02
1947 Bucan, S, 42F 3:16:02
1948 Ghuile, J, 44M 3:16:03
1949 Nash, R, 29M 3:16:04
1950 Guyomar, Y, 44M 3:16:07
1951 Phillips, L, 33M 3:16:07
1952 Luparia, L, 23M 3:16:08
1953 Griffin, S, 41M 3:16:08
1954 Van Dijk, R, 28M 3:16:09
1955 Paier, M, 27M 3:16:09
1956 Leonard, C, 32M 3:16:10
1957 Escobar, W, 33M 3:16:11
1958 Markiewicz, D, 32M 3:16:12
1959 Kuebel, E, 26M 3:16:13
1960 Handzo, R, 43M 3:16:14
1961 Koster, M, 32M 3:16:15
1962 Vigot, G, 30M 3:16:15
1963 Ramirez, J, 40M 3:16:15
1964 Huyskens, L, 44M 3:16:15
1965 Koch, E, 37M 3:16:16
1966 Gabert, B, 29M 3:16:17
1967 Kashiwa, M, 45M 3:16:18
1968 Vanmerode, J, 53M 3:16:18
1969 Hegelstad, O, 50M 3:16:19
1970 Estevez, A, 27M3:16:21
1971 Andersen, M, 41M 3:16:21
1972 Gertz, J, 34F 3:16:22
1973 Mark, M, 36M 3:16:22
1974 Tineo, W, 40M 3:16:23
1975 Berre, J, 50M 3:16:23
1976 Stockler, D, 42M 3:16:24
1977 Duff, P, 36M 3:16:24
1978 Karliner, S, 29M 3:16:26
1979 Gobrecht, E, 40M 3:16:27
1980 Mooney, E, 38M 3:16:27
1981 Clarkson, S, 39M 3:16:27
1982 Tetreault, D, 40M 3:16:28
1983 Hansen, J, 29M 3:16:28
1984Sprayregen, N, 31M 3:16:28
1985 Bortolotti, G, 36M 3:16:29
1986 Morales, M, 33M 3:16:29
1987 Pfeiffer, A, 42M 3:16:30
1988 Peddle, R, 34M 3:16:30
1989 Van Marcke De Lummen, F, 29M 3:16:32
1990 Keller, J, 36M 3:16:32
1991 Rueppel, H, 33M 3:16:33
1992 Dutalloir, J, 44M 3:16:34
1993 Webb, K, 33M 3:16:35
1994 Fusco, G, 38M 3:16:35
1995 Allen, M, 33M 3:16:36
1996 Faye, S, 39M 3:16:37
1997 Bullis, K, 28M 3:16:37
1998 Van Haaren, C, 28M 3:16:37
1999 Doherty, M, 37M 3:16:37
2000 Sato, K, 52F 3:16:38
2001 Matter, K, 35M 3:16:40
2002 Yamada, K, 33M 3:16:40
2003 Rorholt, I, 42F 3:16:41
2004 Leal Cervantes, B, 37M 3:16:41
2005 Luethi, E, 50F 3:16:41
2006 Ehlen, D, 41M 3:16:42
2007 Roy, D, 42M 3:16:42
2008 Fung, P, 39M 3:16:42
2009 Casale, A, 49M 3:16:44
2010 Farsoe Rasmussen, L, 21M 3:16:44
2011 Gillessen, G, 36M 3:16:44
2012 Martinez, J, 41M3:16:45
2013 Denver, T, 36M 3:16:45
2014 Wexler, A, 31M 3:16:45
2015 Pruvost, B, 41M 3:16:46
2016 Luz, L, 40M 3:16:46
2017 Steidinger, J, 39F 3:16:47
2018 Takahara, N, 22M 3:16:47
2019 David, J, 22M 3:16:47
2020 Heinl, G, 35M 3:16:48
2021 Lucas, C, 43M 3:16:48
2022 Ajaha, H, 39M 3:16:49
2023 Connelly, J, 31M 3:16:50
2024 Wortley, R, 28M 3:16:50
2025 Cerone, C, 34M 3:16:51
2026 Molina, J, 34M 3:16:51
2027 Catapano, R, 43M 3:16:51
2028 Richter, P, 42M 3:16:51
2029 Barriere, A, 50M 3:16:51
2030 Scheidt, D, 23M 3:16:52
2031 Curran, L, 27M 3:16:52
2032 Koeslag, A, 40M 3:16:52
2033 Gonzalez, H, 23M 3:16:53
2034 Hanssen, B, 51M 3:16:53
2035 Dutoit, R, 45M 3:16:53
2036 Donner, O, 32M 3:16:54
2037 Mangan, J, 41M 3:16:55
2038 Christie, C, 33M 3:16:57
2039 Almandoz, J, 28M 3:16:57
2040 Evans, M, 35F 3:16:57
2041 Gonzalez, J, 38M 3:16:59
2042 Babashak, F, 27M 3:16:59
2043 Ozkan, C, 21M 3:17:01
2044 Lamotte, A, 41M 3:17:02
2045 Cartellier, L, 29M 3:17:02
2046 Sauer, B, 56M 3:17:03
2047 Aguiar, C, 40M 3:17:03
2048 Loscher, S, 36M 3:17:03
2049 Charon, E, 42M 3:17:04
2050 Tucker, M, 33M 3:17:04
2051 Vinci, D, 29F 3:17:04
2052 Mazur, R, 23M 3:17:04
2053 Gallegos, E, 48M 3:17:04
2054 Lara Gomez, P, 35M 3:17:05
2055 Neubohn, L, 26M 3:17:05
2056 Lueer, R, 50M 3:17:08
2057 Takeuchi, T, 52M 3:17:10
2058 Delval, D, 40M 3:17:11
2059 Heimdal, A, 43M 3:17:11
2060 Clark, C, 30M 3:17:13
2061 Barillon, G, 36M 3:17:13
2062 Ihde, B, 48M 3:17:15
2063 Sandes, C, 45F 3:17:16
2064 Janssens, J, 36M 3:17:16
2065 Sole, A, 43M 3:17:19
2066 Allaoui, E, 44M 3:17:19
2067 Roberson, B, 46M 3:17:19
2068 Olvera Rincon, J, 29M3:17:19
2069 Battistella, E, 38F 3:17:22
2070 Brodusch, G, 38M 3:17:23
2071 King, I, 35M 3:17:24
2072 Kirner, S, 26M 3:17:25
2073 Roehr, S, 28M 3:17:25
2074 Rivers, D, 43M 3:17:26
2075 Fassett, L, 27M 3:17:27
2076 Robles, G, 48M 3:17:27
2077 Gertz, S, 40M 3:17:28
2078 Brison, S, 27M 3:17:29
2079 Schlutius, R, 48M 3:17:29
2080 Hyz, H, 44M 3:17:32
2081 Honemann, J, 48M 3:17:32
2082Magnotta, R, 28M 3:17:32
2083 Vallot, P, 32M 3:17:33
2084 Bianco, G, 50M 3:17:34
2085 McHugh, D, 27M 3:17:34
2086 Meunier, C, 34M 3:17:34
2087 Locher, H, 29M 3:17:35
2088 Smyth, R, 37M 3:17:36
2089 Libres, M, 47M 3:17:36
2090 Van Essen, L, 37M 3:17:37
2091Teasdale, W, 30M 3:17:37
2092 Pronk, M, 32M 3:17:38
2093 Millet, C, 35M 3:17:38
2094 Baldauf, H, 48M 3:17:38
2095 Atchison, A, 43M3:17:38
2096 Blanco Mancero, F, 33M 3:17:39
2097 Rijsenbrij, H, 39M 3:17:39
2098 Lemoine, G, 45M 3:17:39
2099 Kloosterman, W, 47M 3:17:40
2100 Diez, C, 31M 3:17:40
2101 Roesner, T, 46M 3:17:40
2102 Verfuerth, P, 40M 3:17:41
2103 Villanueva, P, 26F 3:17:41
2104 Amberge, J, 31M 3:17:42
2105 Albuquerque, C, 46M 3:17:42
2106 Aldinger, B, 25M 3:17:42
2107 Aalvik, T, 37M 3:17:43
2108 Bengoetxea, V, 31M 3:17:43
2109 Zanti, E, 29M 3:17:45
2110 Corwin, P, 31M3:17:47
2111 Klinetop, R, 41M 3:17:47
2112 Crunaire, B, 45M 3:17:48
2113 Bordignon, M, 29F 3:17:49
2114 Coleman, D, 27M 3:17:50
2115 Sabin, K, 58M 3:17:50
2116 Calix, J, 24M 3:17:50
2117 Commes, S, 31M 3:17:50
2118 Rossmann, D, 24M 3:17:50
2119 Bartelle, D, 26M 3:17:51
2120 Gentile, I, 26F 3:17:53
2121 Navarre, R, 43M 3:17:54
2122 Smulders, S, 42M 3:17:54
2123 Langley, G, 38M 3:17:54
2124 Kuser, J, 33F 3:17:54
2125 Antoine, J, 42M 3:17:55
2126 Miller, D, 25M 3:17:55
2127 Mangold, P, 31M 3:17:55
2128 Ziegler, P, 50M 3:17:56
2129 Nash, J, 33M 3:17:57
2130 Shockey, J, 28M 3:17:57
2131 Desentis, R, 40M 3:17:57
2132 Giambra, S, 38M 3:17:58
2133 Buttet, R, 33M 3:17:58
2134 Penney, D, 38M 3:17:58
2135 Jullien, G, 48M 3:17:59
2136 Hill, T, 42M 3:18:00
2137 Sutin, D, 42M 3:18:00
2138 Cabirol, P, 30M 3:18:01
2139 Bouab, K, 27M 3:18:02
2140 Douzou, B, 39M 3:18:02
2141 Niven, S, 40M 3:18:03
2142Zimmerli, M, 36M 3:18:03
2143 Baret, J, 40M 3:18:04
2144 Martini, I, 36M 3:18:05
2145 Lapomme, P, 33M 3:18:05
2146 Benavides, M, 28M 3:18:06
2147 McGurk, M, 34M 3:18:09
2148 Krause, P, 26M 3:18:09
2149 Roullet, P, 36M 3:18:09
2150 Wentz, J, 33M 3:18:09
2151 Stockert, T, 28M 3:18:09
2152 Kristensen, G, 46M 3:18:10
2153 Levesque, A, 32M 3:18:10
2154 McDonough, E, 33M 3:18:11
2155 Oliveira, S, 35M 3:18:11
2156 Walsh, J, 44M 3:18:11
2157 Tershakovec, A, 36M 3:18:12
2158 Sinnott, D, 45M 3:18:12
2159 Briffaut, F, 38M 3:18:13
2160 Iio, K, 33M 3:18:13
2161 Martinez, A, 45M 3:18:14
2162 Santana, I, 34M 3:18:15
2163 Gregorio, J, 29M 3:18:15
2164 Grissault, D, 39M 3:18:16
2165 Gilbert, B, 42F 3:18:18
2166 Turkoz, M, 38M 3:18:19
2167 Barbosa, V, 34M 3:18:19
2168 McGee, T, 51M 3:18:20
2169 Sommer, S, 30M 3:18:20
2170 Cohen, D, 27M 3:18:22
2171 Vega Mata, M, 31M 3:18:22
2172 Flodin, P, 31M 3:18:22
2173 Eipper, E, 40M 3:18:22
2174 Rudolf, S, 33M 3:18:23
2175 Geldof, W, 29M 3:18:23
2176 Chollet, G, 37M 3:18:23
2177 Syvertsen, G, 36M 3:18:23
2178 Ramberg, B, 31M 3:18:24
2179 Milne, J, 46M 3:18:24
2180 Dobol, J, 46M 3:18:24
2181 Soto, G, 37M 3:18:25
2182 Ambrosini, G, 33F 3:18:26
2183 Komar, E, 44M 3:18:26
2184 Cappon, J, 41M 3:18:26
2185 Porter, H, 42M 3:18:27
2186 Escajadillo, H, 43M 3:18:27
2187 McNiff, J, 37M 3:18:28
2188 Munz, K, 50M 3:18:28
2189 Schleicher, P, 31M 3:18:28
2190 Petroni, A, 25M 3:18:28
2191Zizzi, D, 29M 3:18:29
2192 Joss, U, 36M 3:18:29
2193 Sharp, N, 38M 3:18:30
2194 Sena, A, 44M 3:18:30
2195 Kerromen, A, 40F 3:18:31
2196 Calce, G, 38M 3:18:31
2197 Dupont, M, 45M 3:18:31
2198Laziou, M, 40M 3:18:31
2199 Farbstein, A, 31M 3:18:31
2200 Exbrayat, J, 30M 3:18:32
2201 Schmidt, T, 30M 3:18:33
2202 Muehlberg, J, 44M 3:18:33
2203 Lewis, K, 34M 3:18:33
2204 Meyer, R, 32M 3:18:34
2205 Leary, M, 50M 3:18:34
2206 Bunert, W, 37M 3:18:35
2207 Meier, R, 40M 3:18:36
2208 Skare, B, 52M 3:18:37
2209 Luethi, B, 44M 3:18:38
2210 Vandermark, K, 47M 3:18:38
2211 Turner, K, 34M 3:18:39
2212 Boutin, C, 30M 3:18:39
2213 Boerman, B, 19M 3:18:40
2214 McKibben, D, 44M 3:18:41
2215 Vasquez, A, 37M 3:18:42
2216 Burns, A, 33M 3:18:43
2217 Ruospo, M, 30M 3:18:43
2218 Wevers, G, 42M 3:18:44
2219 Desbiaux, M, 34M 3:18:44
2220 Romeri, D, 35M 3:18:44
2221 Rubenstein, J, 32M 3:18:44
2222 Cassidy, R, 52M 3:18:45
2223 Friedman, F, 41F 3:18:45
2224 Lang, J, 54M 3:18:46
2225 Bellermann, M, 29M 3:18:47
2226 Kvernberg, A, 36F 3:18:48
2227Machado, M, 32M 3:18:49
2228 Seitz, P, 45M 3:18:50
2229 Galfano, A, 47M 3:18:50
2230 Cunningham, D, 36F 3:18:50
2231 Romme, A, 33M3:18:50
2232 Vialle, J, 33M 3:18:51
2233 Sekulo, M, 37M 3:18:51
2234 Kaplan, J, 48M 3:18:52
2235 Aarthun, N, 49M 3:18:52
2236RUNNER NO. 9974, 35M 3:18:53
2237 Duhaubois, D, 41M 3:18:54
2238 Almodovar, R, 48M 3:18:54
2239 Bonham, M, 22M 3:18:54
2240 Lueders, T, 43M 3:18:54
2241 Hassan, S, 29M 3:18:55
2242 Roselin, P, 36M3:18:55
2243 Carrillo, A, 30M 3:18:55
2244 Lagain, A, 38M 3:18:56
2245 Wien, R, 42M 3:18:56
2246 Downes, S, 31M 3:18:56
2247 Kozik, P, 45M 3:18:56
2248 Serrano, R, 28M 3:18:57
2249 Lynch, J, 49M 3:18:57
2250 Lilli, P, 40M 3:19:00
2251 Rosinus, A, 44F 3:19:00
2252 Strawn, K, 28M 3:19:00
2253 Nakayama, T, 47M 3:19:00
2254 Rueda, V, 31M 3:19:01
2255 Leffler, S, 47M 3:19:01
2256 Carreau, Y, 33M 3:19:01
2257 Blindenbacher, F, 40M 3:19:01
2258 Diab, A, 28M 3:19:01
2259 Vecchiattini, L, 33M 3:19:02
2260 Koppers, J, 39M 3:19:03
2261 Piccioli, S, 30M 3:19:03
2262 Wagner, H, 40M 3:19:04
2263 Silva, L, 47M 3:19:04
2264 Flaswinkel, P, 40M 3:19:04
2265 Bolger Jr, R, 39M 3:19:05
2266 Worseling, H, 41M 3:19:06
2267 Duivenvoorde, R, 27M 3:19:06
2268 Van Lieshout, J, 43M 3:19:07
2269 Caetano, F, 36M 3:19:08
2270 Bennett, K, 35F 3:19:08
2271 Prutsman, G, 43M 3:19:09
2272 Furman, B, 42M 3:19:09
2273 Friedli, E, 61M 3:19:09
2274 Sawa, M, 25M 3:19:10
2275 Froehlich, J, 34M 3:19:11
2276 Nabec, S, 24M 3:19:11
2277 Mier, V, 45M 3:19:12
2278 Undeutsch, G, 39M 3:19:13
2279 Medvecky, M, 27M 3:19:14
2280 Renou, P, 35M 3:19:14
2281 McLaughlin, M, 25M 3:19:15
2282 Van Leenen, C, 28M 3:19:15
2283 Studer, H, 45M 3:19:17
2284 Olivieri, M, 35F 3:19:17
2285 Smith, I, 45F 3:19:18
2286 Hernandez Batlle, A, 29M 3:19:20
2287 Ellis, M, 30F 3:19:20
2288 Doran, J, 39M 3:19:22
2289 Meier, W, 35M 3:19:23
2290 Soreau, D, 39M 3:19:23
2291 Barney, K, 32M 3:19:24
2292 Haverland, G, 42M 3:19:24
2293 Steffen, P, 39M 3:19:25
2294 Brandenburg, A, 40M 3:19:26
2295 Nouacria, M, 18M 3:19:26
2296 Frahlia, M, 20M 3:19:26
2297 Gwyn, P, 33M 3:19:27
2298 Cejudo, R, 35M 3:19:27
2299 Stiack, D, 31M 3:19:28
2300 Kato, H, 29M 3:19:29
2301 Foucault, J, 47M 3:19:30
2302 Knoph, E, 55M 3:19:31
2303 Loupy, R, 42M 3:19:31
2304 Ermann, J, 39M 3:19:32
2305 Rolland, L, 50M 3:19:32
2306 Di Feo, T, 29F 3:19:32
2307 Spencer, J, 39M 3:19:32
2308 Rumo, B, 49M 3:19:33
2309 Farraro, T, 36M 3:19:34
2310 Colunga, F, 44M 3:19:34
2311 Eschalier, A, 44M 3:19:34
2312 Cattoni, J, 47M 3:19:34
2313 Raeymakers, F, 46M 3:19:35
2314 Koopman, D, 31M 3:19:35
2315 Delannoy, E, 39M 3:19:35
2316 Schoenenberger, T, 32M 3:19:37
2317 Doherty, T, 37M 3:19:37
2318 Burriesci, A, 34M 3:19:37
2319 Wasko, D, 41M 3:19:37
2320 Perez, M, 31M 3:19:37
2321 Reinowski, J, 24F 3:19:38
2322 Goldman, S, 32F 3:19:39
2323 Lindsay, D, 47M 3:19:41
2324 Priego Alvarez, E, 41M 3:19:42
2325 Booth, P, 44M 3:19:42
2326 Rodriguez, J, 40M 3:19:43
2327 Lagger, P, 35M 3:19:43
2328 Denenberg, S, 34M 3:19:44
2329 Rogantini, G, 38M 3:19:44
2330 Sprenghers, F, 45M 3:19:45
2331 Fernig, R, 33M 3:19:46
2332 Stephans, G, 50M 3:19:46
2333 Blaschke, D, 29M 3:19:47
2334 Sieper, J, 45M 3:19:47
2335 Luniewski, D, 46M 3:19:47
2336 Bonnet, P, 32M 3:19:48
2337 Fugitt, R, 39M 3:19:48
2338 Dorigo, O, 31M 3:19:48
2339 Della Serra, R, 33M 3:19:48
2340 Brown, B, 30M 3:19:50
2341 Dorigo, C, 28M 3:19:50
2342 Dansfield, G, 40M 3:19:51
2343 Gregersen, J, 29M 3:19:52
2344 Pellino, P, 30M 3:19:53
2345 Porcaro, J, 45M 3:19:54
2346 Johnson, R, 42M 3:19:55
2347 Fuirst, K, 30M 3:19:55
2348 Stevens, P, 43M 3:19:55
2349 Paul, R, 38M 3:19:55
2350 Willi, B, 34F 3:19:55
2351 Berkvens, J, 36M 3:19:56
2352 Martin, C, 44M 3:19:56
2353 Tovar, T, 46M 3:19:56
2354 Falcucci, E, 33F 3:19:57
2355 Brunetto, T, 35M 3:19:57
2356 Mitchell, R, 58M 3:19:57
2357 Folscheid, B, 19M 3:19:57
2358 Reglitzky, A, 58M 3:19:58
2359 Martini, G, 30M 3:19:58
2360 Manthey, P, 42M 3:19:59
2361 Dobies, M, 33M 3:19:59
2362 Davies, M, 30M 3:20:00
2363 Eads, S, 33M 3:20:00
2364 Hansen, J, 40M 3:20:01
2365 Schacke, B, 57M 3:20:03
2366 Bertoli, F, 23M 3:20:04
2367 Schutz, G, 38M 3:20:05
2368 Geppert, U, 40M3:20:05
2369 Pujol Quinones, F, 42M 3:20:05
2370 Peters, R, 52M 3:20:05
2371 Bohnengel, A, 45M 3:20:05
2372 Nycz, M, 35M 3:20:07
2373 Baroni, G, 34M 3:20:07
2374 Vaeisaenen, M, 30M 3:20:07
2375 Jensen Skuldboel, B, 33M 3:20:08
2376 Kerese, A, 31M 3:20:09
2377 Frier, A, 36M 3:20:09
2378 Hufschmid, L, 41M 3:20:09
2379 Donnelly, T, 42M 3:20:11
2380 Tussing, W, 39M 3:20:11
2381 Volkmar, W, 39M 3:20:12
2382 Laine, A, 38M 3:20:12
2383 Burton, L, 44M 3:20:13
2384 Daehne, A, 30M 3:20:13
2385 Roque, P, 46M 3:20:14
2386 Maroto, R, 34M 3:20:15
2387 McKegg, C, 33M 3:20:16
2388 Voest, C, 39M 3:20:16
2389 Borel, A, 25M 3:20:16
2390 Fitzpatrick, T, 31M3:20:17
2391 Arvati, A, 34M 3:20:18
2392 Kurz, M, 35M 3:20:18
2393 Opsanger, E, 36M 3:20:18
2394 Kirchmann, A, 34M 3:20:19
2395 Langlois, M, 42M 3:20:19
2396 Castellano, A, 46M 3:20:21
2397 RUNNER NO. 5762, 35M 3:20:21
2398 Balmaseda, J, 29M 3:20:22
2399 Ernst, F, 30M 3:20:22
2400 Hernandez Delgadillo, D, 40M 3:20:22
2401Giovannini, S, 40M 3:20:22
2402 Kelly, J, 38M 3:20:23
2403 Bixler, R, 25M 3:20:23
2404 Coutts, J, 40M 3:20:23
2405 Luettschwager, U, 51M 3:20:25
2406 Saviano, G, 33M 3:20:25
2407 Vanlerberghe, P, 50M 3:20:26
2408 Puppo, H, 34M 3:20:26
2409 De Santis, M, 29M 3:20:26
2410 Lyngmo, H, 42M 3:20:27
2411 Denicola, D, 30M 3:20:28
2412 Newmeyer, C, 26F 3:20:28
2413 Desaulniers, R, 41M 3:20:28
2414 Gavelle, A, 47M 3:20:30
2415 Gomez, A, 45M 3:20:31
2416 Felli, P, 35M 3:20:31
2417 Tiano, D, 36M 3:20:31
2418 Renaud, N, 27M 3:20:31
2419 Lopatka, R, 34M 3:20:32
2420 Vernet, T, 23M 3:20:33
2421 Rodriguez, J, 40M 3:20:33
2422 Hoellmann, W, 49M 3:20:33
2423 Mahrassi, A, 30M 3:20:34
2424 Koehoorn, A, 29M 3:20:34
2425 Watanabe, M, 47M 3:20:35
2426 Palfrey, D, 30M 3:20:35
2427 Marshall, A, 49M 3:20:35
2428 Raaholt, P, 38M 3:20:36
2429 Rognstad, S, 31M 3:20:36
2430 Tsujimura, E, 45M 3:20:37
2431 Theys, G, 43M 3:20:37
2432 Janelle, E, 37M 3:20:37
2433 Valerin, R, 40M 3:20:38
2434 Kveberg, T, 31F 3:20:39
2435 Okabe, T, 27M 3:20:41
2436 Gascouin, J, 45M 3:20:42
2437 Jones, K, 64M 3:20:44
2438 Scheffer, K, 39M 3:20:44
2439 Reyes, C, 53M 3:20:45
2440 Kruss, P, 34M 3:20:45
2441 Proni, G, 45M 3:20:45
2442 Weier, H, 44M 3:20:45
2443 Fechter, M, 30M 3:20:46
2444 Faure, R, 35M 3:20:47
2445 Millspaugh, C, 41M 3:20:47
2446 Wallis, D, 45M 3:20:48
2447 O'Brien*, G, 29F3:20:49
2448 Wolters, A, 31M 3:20:49
2449 Staples, R, 38M 3:20:49
2450 Grande, R, 40M 3:20:49
2451 Colkitt, G, 38M 3:20:49
2452 Wollins, M, 27F 3:20:50
2453 Frew, C, 29M 3:20:50
2454 Riedel, G, 44M 3:20:50
2455 Wiren, H, 37M 3:20:50
2456 Juras, J, 18M 3:20:50
2457 Fernandez, J, 32M 3:20:50
2458 Schuman, A, 34M 3:20:52
2459 Naerland, O, 27M 3:20:53
2460 Springhorn, J, 32M 3:20:53
2461 Barrett, K, 28M 3:20:54
2462 Avina Zepeda, J, 39M 3:20:54
2463 Gugerli, H, 45M 3:20:54
2464 Grassi, G, 37M 3:20:55
2465 Palacios Prieto, R, 20M 3:20:55
2466 Cramer, C, 30F 3:20:56
2467 Laurent, L, 37M 3:20:57
2468 Dabe, A, 27M 3:20:58
2469 Creditor, R, 55M 3:20:58
2470 Becker, R, 46M 3:20:59
2471 Kaplan, D, 31M 3:21:00
2472 Detsch, G, 33M 3:21:01
2473 Diols, W, 25M 3:21:01
2474 Chabot, H, 38M 3:21:01
2475 Bargiel, W, 39M 3:21:02
2476 Hernandez, L, 31M 3:21:02
2477 Da-Silva, A, 46M 3:21:02
2478 Leturgie, A, 33M3:21:02
2479 Wolz, L, 53M 3:21:03
2480 Niesser, M, 40M 3:21:03
2481 Gruenenwald, A, 43M 3:21:03
2482 McCarthy, G, 37M 3:21:05
2483 Feather, M, 42M 3:21:06
2484 Mangat, P, 39M 3:21:07
2485 Petit, D, 46M 3:21:07
2486 Bentum, S, 42M 3:21:08
2487 Heer, M, 44M 3:21:08
2488 Raima, A, 54M 3:21:09
2489 Sironi, F, 42M 3:21:09
2490 Goycoolea, P, 39M 3:21:09
2491 Cutler, R, 26M 3:21:10
2492Glogger, T, 37M 3:21:11
2493 Oberg, J, 40M 3:21:11
2494 Bordier, J, 43M 3:21:12
2495 Zarate, F, 38M 3:21:12
2496 Surribas, J, 40M 3:21:13
2497 Hansen, U, 52M 3:21:13
2498 Schwab, D, 30F 3:21:13
2499 Willemsen, T, 36M 3:21:14
2500 Hermanto, U, 23M 3:21:15
2501 Isaac, A, 53M 3:21:15
2502 Jaubert, C, 36M 3:21:16
2503 Duncan, J, 34M 3:21:17
2504 Talureau, M, 46M 3:21:17
2505 De Pauw, G, 52M 3:21:18
2506 Einmahl, R, 35M 3:21:19
2507 Berger, L, 29M 3:21:19
2508 Yurgel, S, 47M 3:21:19
2509 Borgen, D, 36M 3:21:19
2510 Bardot, P, 40M 3:21:20
2511 Reback, P, 53M 3:21:20
2512 Zwanzer, W, 34M 3:21:21
2513 Brackenier, M, 35M 3:21:21
2514 Benjamin, S, 40M 3:21:21
2515 RUNNER NO. 18850, 35M 3:21:21
2516 Zupanic, F, 35M 3:21:22
2517 Glass, E, 32M 3:21:22
2518 Paire, J, 37M 3:21:22
2519 Braun, M, 34M 3:21:23
2520 Melou, J, 32M 3:21:23
2521 Mendoza, A, 41M 3:21:24
2522 Botha, A, 28M 3:21:24
2523 Bonneville, E, 40M 3:21:25
2524 Eichholzer, P, 45M 3:21:25
2525 Abe, Y, 26M 3:21:25
2526 Overgaard, H, 37M 3:21:25
2527 Fisch, E, 30F 3:21:26
2528 Albarran Campillo, M, 32M 3:21:27
2529 Lenormand, P, 34M 3:21:28
2530 Christophersen, H, 30M 3:21:28
2531 Harrison, S, 40M 3:21:28
2532 Nilsen, N, 65M 3:21:28
2533 Smallman, T, 28M 3:21:28
2534 Britt, A, 30F 3:21:31
2535 Nosal, M, 29M 3:21:31
2536 Hormigos, J, 46M 3:21:31
2537 Hunt, N, 34M 3:21:32
2538 Dahl, P, 32M 3:21:32
2539 Millar, B, 33M 3:21:32
2540 Stelkens, A, 44F 3:21:32
2541 Gunnarsson, I, 41M 3:21:33
2542 Webb, B, 31F 3:21:33
2543 Roestvik, L, 33F 3:21:34
2544 Bratvold, R, 39M 3:21:34
2545 Nakashima, A, 19M 3:21:34
2546 Bergermann, F, 45M 3:21:36
2547 Lopez, M, 43M 3:21:36
2548 Schinschik, U, 35M 3:21:37
2549 Halluska, R, 47M 3:21:37
2550 Waelti, P, 33M 3:21:38
2551 Connors, P, 31M 3:21:38
2552 Silva, C, 31M 3:21:40
2553 Miserandino, A, 47M 3:21:41
2554 Santoro, D, 31M 3:21:41
2555 Elmer, T, 29M 3:21:42
2556 Aitken, D, 45M 3:21:42
2557 Gardner, M, 32M 3:21:44
2558 Ketterer, R, 32M 3:21:45
2559 Custer, G, 46M 3:21:45
2560 Kabbaj, M, 45M 3:21:45
2561 Lahbabi, A, 41M 3:21:46
2562 Kemper, W, 46M 3:21:47
2563 Feuz, U, 40M 3:21:48
2564 Clarke, J, 29M 3:21:48
2565 Prankl, E, 38M 3:21:49
2566 Kostal, G, 25M 3:21:51
2567 Irazusta, F, 44M 3:21:52
2568 Basterra, J, 46M 3:21:52
2569 Cislaghi, R, 36M 3:21:53
2570 Salducci, J, 31M 3:21:53
2571 Muia, D, 48M 3:21:53
2572 Guilleron, G, 41M 3:21:54
2573 Gougeon, D, 37M 3:21:55
2574 Mosenthal, S, 41M 3:21:55
2575 Khoury, J, 32M 3:21:55
2576 Birot, M, 43M 3:21:55
2577 Hannema, W, 45M 3:21:55
2578 Coleman, M, 33M 3:21:56
2579 Schwab, J, 52M 3:21:57
2580 Giulem, T, 46M 3:21:57
2581 Luehr, H, 54M 3:21:58
2582 Puig, A, 35M 3:21:58
2583 Joye, G, 44M 3:21:58
2584 Torres, L, 35M 3:21:59
2585 MacDonald, D, 36M 3:21:59
2586 Knaggs, K, 30M 3:22:00
2587 Fernandez, J, 29M 3:22:00
2588 Jonsson, R, 32M 3:22:00
2589 Gautron, F, 31M 3:22:00
2590 Amato, R, 44M 3:22:01
2591 Trocelier, R, 46M 3:22:01
2592 Gomez, A, 37M 3:22:01
2593 Pollul, A, 30F 3:22:01
2594 Remy, J, 36M 3:22:01
2595 Cockerell, W, 20M 3:22:01
2596 Weiss, B, 37M 3:22:02
2597 Zweifel, T, 32M 3:22:03
2598 Aquino, A, 25M 3:22:03
2599 Cortez Mendez, M, 48M 3:22:04
2600 Rosa, L, 43M 3:22:06
2601 Prukalski, M, 33M 3:22:06
2602 Chassagnard, M, 37M 3:22:06
2603 Kundurian, P, 47M 3:22:07
2604 Ferris, P, 39M 3:22:07
2605 Kozloski, M, 29F 3:22:07
2606 Dechichi, M, 29F 3:22:07
2607 Davies, A, 48F 3:22:08
2608 Crist, D, 29M 3:22:08
2609 McGee, J, 32M 3:22:08
2610 Sandoval, E, 47M 3:22:08
2611 Rogne, J, 40M 3:22:08
2612 Pucciarelli, N, 35M 3:22:08
2613 Bouman, C, 40M 3:22:09
2614 Bole, R, 36M 3:22:09
2615 Brown, R, 22M 3:22:09
2616 Tol, F, 48M 3:22:09
2617 Tucker, M, 33M 3:22:10
2618 Maycock, A, 27M 3:22:10
2619 Barcenas Franco, A, 51M 3:22:11
2620 Intrator, M, 25M 3:22:11
2621 Linsell, P, 46M 3:22:13
2622 Lavaure, A, 50M 3:22:13
2623 Close, M, 43M 3:22:14
2624 McNickle, R, 41M 3:22:14
2625 Regan, M, 33M 3:22:14
2626 Slayton, G, 40M 3:22:15
2627 Bandelli, F, 33M 3:22:15
2628 Van Eck, R, 38M 3:22:15
2629 Tiffany, T, 29M 3:22:16
2630 Garraud, M, 35M 3:22:16
2631 Koplin, R, 31M 3:22:17
2632 Kemperman, A, 50M 3:22:17
2633 Mintz, J, 45M 3:22:18
2634 Hernandez Escalona, J, 47M 3:22:19
2635 Marino, R, 30M 3:22:21
2636 Dixon, K, 23F 3:22:21
2637 Lerner, A, 39M 3:22:22
2638 Leinen, M, 50M 3:22:22
2639 Magruder Jr., R, 35M 3:22:22
2640 Pouw, G, 44M 3:22:23
2641 Gould, C, 27F 3:22:23
2642 Lund, P, 46M 3:22:23
2643 Yoder, B, 28M 3:22:23
2644 Deroy, A, 35M 3:22:24
2645 Trapp, M, 22M 3:22:24
2646 Mollaret, B, 34M 3:22:24
2647 Garnett, S, 25M 3:22:27
2648 Creighton, J, 42M 3:22:27
2649 Castro, J, 33M 3:22:28
2650 Kofranek, M, 34M 3:22:28
2651 Owens, J, 45M 3:22:29
2652 Foster, C, 36M 3:22:29
2653 Bodenmann, A, 37M 3:22:29
2654 Nieri, S, 32M 3:22:29
2655 Perez Acuna, M, 47M 3:22:29
2656 Charles, M, 26F 3:22:30
2657 Bourse, E, 37M 3:22:31
2658 Neuhoerl, U, 22M 3:22:31
2659 Steele, K, 31M 3:22:32
2660 Tanaka, H, 23M 3:22:33
2661 Jarry, J, 37M 3:22:34
2662 Guyonnet, V, 31M 3:22:35
2663 Kreindl, O, 31M 3:22:35
2664 Gretarsson, H, 29M 3:22:36
2665 Pinheiro, M, 36M 3:22:36
2666 Witting, H, 33M 3:22:36
2667 McKee, P, 45M 3:22:37
2668 Carmona, A, 25M 3:22:37
2669 Boswell, A, 27F 3:22:38
2670 Silva, S, 39M 3:22:38
2671 Gerlach, S, 26M 3:22:39
2672 Henkel, A, 31M 3:22:39
2673 Fournel, R, 38M 3:22:39
2674 Duffy, T, 34M3:22:40
2675 Springborn, P, 57M 3:22:40
2676 Galle, R, 50M 3:22:41
2677 Serigstad, S, 46M 3:22:42
2678 Chauvin, P, 31M 3:22:42
2679 Levine, S, 43M 3:22:42
2680 Kass, W, 60M 3:22:43
2681 Silverstein, W, 40F 3:22:43
2682 Foster, N, 29M 3:22:43
2683 Quintana, J, 40M 3:22:43
2684 Mallon, M, 27M 3:22:44
2685 Hessek, D, 37M 3:22:44
2686 Meier, M, 28M 3:22:45
2687 Mendez, J, 56M 3:22:45
2688 Robles, H, 29M 3:22:45
2689 Uhlenkotte, D, 29M 3:22:46
2690 Flanderijn, A, 33M 3:22:46
2691 Little, J, 34M 3:22:47
2692 Freilich, A, 29M 3:22:47
2693 Pelletier, R, 36M 3:22:47
2694 Anderson, B, 51M 3:22:47
2695 Karelse, R, 29M 3:22:48
2696 Deckers, W, 47M 3:22:49
2697 Posch, P, 39M 3:22:49
2698 Gerard, M, 38M 3:22:50
2699 Mathieu, J, 50F 3:22:50
2700 Le Prunennec, D, 36M 3:22:52
2701 Giannelli, N, 44M 3:22:53
2702 Chimento, T, 38M 3:22:53
2703 Biehler, J, 39M 3:22:54
2704 Alba, J, 35M 3:22:54
2705 Joncquet, C, 32M 3:22:54
2706 Oley, E, 27M 3:22:54
2707 Ellsworth, L, 31F 3:22:55
2708 Tillet, J, 45M 3:22:55
2709 Rauch, H, 33M 3:22:56
2710 Kleinert, D, 37M 3:22:56
2711 Hellmuth, M, 44M 3:22:56
2712 Spina, G, 53M 3:22:57
2713 Platek, R, 30M 3:22:57
2714 Natishan, D, 40F 3:22:57
2715 Simpson, G, 27M 3:22:58
2716 Capello, V, 28M 3:22:59
2717 Maurice, V, 48M 3:23:00
2718 Foresti, M, 25M 3:23:02
2719 Franks, W, 46M 3:23:02
2720 Miller, C, 39M 3:23:03
2721 Haney, R, 29M 3:23:03
2722 Morton, A, 45M 3:23:03
2723 Lannan, T, 29M 3:23:05
2724 Dunleavy, P, 34M 3:23:05
2725 Spendlove, T, 37M 3:23:05
2726 Delfosse, B, 42M 3:23:07
2727 Meunier, P, 31M 3:23:07
2728 Beckerman, R, 41M 3:23:08
2729 Wurfel, M, 28M 3:23:09
2730 Marker, A, 45M 3:23:09
2731 Warmenhoven, R, 36M 3:23:10
2732 Hartl, R, 29M 3:23:11
2733 Loughran, J, 50M 3:23:11
2734 Levine, M, 48M 3:23:12
2735 Gordon, S, 53M 3:23:12
2736 Haugen, A, 24M 3:23:12
2737 Coulomb, E, 33M 3:23:12
2738 Perez, R, 40M 3:23:12
2739 Ortiz, E, 36M 3:23:12
2740 Reibel, O, 30M 3:23:12
2741 Lelevet, J, 48M 3:23:13
2742 Van Dyk, S, 44M 3:23:13
2743 Avoledo, R, 30M 3:23:14
2744 Blanchard, K, 32F 3:23:14
2745 Armito, D, 21M 3:23:15
2746 Hannah, S, 25M 3:23:15
2747 Cohen, D, 28F 3:23:15
2748 Schneider, U, 50M 3:23:15
2749 Feinsod, J, 27M 3:23:16
2750 Hiatt, B, 25F 3:23:16
2751 Rohling, T, 32M 3:23:16
2752 Machner, W, 40M 3:23:17
2753 McCabe, J, 42M 3:23:17
2754 Blondiaux, P, 29M 3:23:18
2755 Seyfferth, B, 60M 3:23:18
2756 Hernandez, C, 49M 3:23:18
2757 Monahan, R, 23M 3:23:19
2758 Magnat, D, 43M 3:23:19
2759 Betancourt, C, 32M 3:23:19
2760 Riple, A, 41M 3:23:19
2761 Hutchins, T, 34M 3:23:19
2762 Jurine, C, 29M 3:23:19
2763 Muenzer, A, 41M 3:23:20
2764 Schneider, B, 50M 3:23:20
2765 Hall, B, 44M 3:23:20
2766 Desroches, Y, 47M 3:23:21
2767 Poussineau, J, 57M 3:23:22
2768 Ley, H, 48M 3:23:22
2769 McGlinn, T, 25M 3:23:22
2770Kelly, B, 28M 3:23:22
2771 Muenzel, K, 40M 3:23:22
2772 Journet, M, 45M 3:23:23
2773 Postman, A, 33M 3:23:23
2774 Mizukami, T, 35M3:23:23
2775 Batista Da Cruz, A, 39M 3:23:23
2776 Latimer, D, 34M3:23:24
2777 Carrier, J, 31M 3:23:24
2778 Conger, B, 28M 3:23:24
2779 Yull, J, 44M 3:23:24
2780 Adelson, L, 28F 3:23:25
2781 Mixon, J, 42M 3:23:25
2782 Ena, M, 26M 3:23:26
2783 Davies, J, 34M 3:23:27
2784 Holey, B, 34M 3:23:27
2785 Marchand, P, 41M 3:23:28
2786 Brooks, D, 24M 3:23:28
2787 Ortmann, M, 35M 3:23:29
2788 Johnston, S, 38M 3:23:29
2789 Upton, D, 51M 3:23:29
2790 Warren, A, 24F 3:23:30
2791 Peron, P, 53M 3:23:30
2792 Privat, C, 32M 3:23:32
2793 Majenski, Y, 47M 3:23:32
2794 Emmerig, R, 39M 3:23:32
2795 Beston, D, 36M 3:23:33
2796 Collazo, C, 41M 3:23:33
2797 Schildhaus, D, 61M 3:23:34
2798 Wilson, C, 32M 3:23:34
2799 Franz, E, 29M 3:23:35
2800 Provencio, M, 35M 3:23:36
2801 Desaleux, T, 31M 3:23:36
2802 Bauer, Y, 43M 3:23:37
2803 Froehlich, H, 41M 3:23:39
2804 Ribe, E, 39F 3:23:39
2805 Van Dusen, M, 32M 3:23:39
2806 Fajardo, E, 37M 3:23:39
2807 Heinen, D, 39M 3:23:40
2808 Toscano, D, 29M 3:23:41
2809 Corno, G, 40M 3:23:42
2810 Coggins, J, 35M 3:23:43
2811 Martinez Granados, F, 39M 3:23:44
2812 Grogg, W, 36M 3:23:44
2813 Lhomme, S, 22M 3:23:44
2814 Schlichtig, T, 34M 3:23:45
2815 Mueller, C, 22M 3:23:45
2816 Torres Cordova, H, 30M 3:23:45
2817 Camacho Omana, R, 34M 3:23:46
2818 Miranda, E, 44M 3:23:46
2819 Batens, M, 34M 3:23:46
2820 Grundei, T, 53M 3:23:47
2821 Kaminskas, J, 37M 3:23:48
2822 Sainsbury, C, 52M 3:23:49
2823 Nilsson, K, 27M 3:23:49
2824 Anken, F, 35M 3:23:49
2825 Sonntag, F, 49M 3:23:49
2826 Barbotin, F, 28M 3:23:50
2827 Leterrier, C, 42M 3:23:50
2828 Newman, N, 31F 3:23:50
2829 Rizzo, J, 59M 3:23:50
2830 Emerique, P, 47M 3:23:50
2831 Moirano, E, 40M 3:23:51
2832 Hennessy, G, 30M 3:23:51
2833 Gautun, L, 30M 3:23:52
2834 Thomas, L, 34F 3:23:52
2835 Ordonez, M, 24M 3:23:52
2836 Podbressnik, P, 49M 3:23:52
2837 Castro, F, 32M 3:23:52
2838 Saenger, M, 23M3:23:52
2839 Lanman, H, 26M 3:23:52
2840 Rulleau, P, 29M 3:23:53
2841 Heller, D, 39M 3:23:53
2842 Ramos, A, 34M 3:23:53
2843 Guttmann, R, 36M 3:23:53
2844 Chinon, J, 35M 3:23:53
2845 Caneda, J, 27M 3:23:54
2846 Mills, M, 27M 3:23:54
2847 Slevin-Boyle, D, 29F 3:23:54
2848 Springer, H, 50M 3:23:55
2849 Gautheret, J, 45M 3:23:56
2850 Hole, C, 30M 3:23:56
2851 Dettwiler, A, 26M 3:23:57
2852 Finkelstein, J, 30F 3:23:58
2853 Lazreg, R, 33M 3:23:58
2854 Gathmann, H, 52M 3:23:59
2855 Gallup-Black, A, 34F 3:23:59
2856Galambos, N, 27M 3:23:59
2857 Howe, D, 36M 3:24:00
2858 Borthwick, A, 26M 3:24:00
2859 Pratt, W, 32F 3:24:00
2860 Duvall, D, 36M 3:24:00
2861 Jalbert, W, 29M 3:24:01
2862 Scarlett, S, 32F 3:24:01
2863 Tallichet, J, 44F 3:24:02
2864 Smulders, B, 45M 3:24:02
2865 Wojciechowski, L, 30M 3:24:02
2866 Heron, K, 33M 3:24:02
2867 Cronin, X, 35M 3:24:02
2868 Prevost, P, 30M 3:24:03
2869 Wierum, G, 53M 3:24:03
2870 Martinez Guel, R, 39M 3:24:03
2871 Friconneau, J, 43M 3:24:05
2872 Bamert, D, 46F 3:24:05
2873 Marcel, E, 34M 3:24:07
2874 Aerts, P, 46M 3:24:07
2875 Prues, H, 46M 3:24:08
2876 Gunn, J, 30F 3:24:08
2877 Schlegel, D, 32M 3:24:10
2878 Fallas, S, 56M 3:24:11
2879 Guillard, C, 23F 3:24:11
2880 Kebbel, A, 46M 3:24:11
2881 Lapides, P, 31M 3:24:11
2882 Fernandez, M, 41F 3:24:12
2883 Lai, P, 43M 3:24:12
2884 Mathieu, J, 36M 3:24:12
2885 Cappella, E, 22F 3:24:13
2886 Graviloff, S, 35M 3:24:13
2887Scheiwiller, M, 53F 3:24:13
2888 Michaux, S, 29M 3:24:14
2889 Perez, N, 43M 3:24:14
2890 Ryyppo, L, 48M 3:24:14
2891 Dorr, A, 31M 3:24:14
2892 Valentin, J, 37M 3:24:14
2893 Rewijk, G, 39M 3:24:15
2894 Hernandez, R, 45M 3:24:16
2895 Gallagher, T, 30F 3:24:16
2896 Oellermann, J, 35M 3:24:16
2897 Rheinlaender, P, 55M 3:24:16
2898 Maxwell-Porter, C, 39F 3:24:16
2899 Russell, C, 36M 3:24:17
2900 Vander Biest, D, 40M 3:24:17
2901 Collins, K, 28F 3:24:18
2902 Palacios, I, 44M 3:24:18
2903 Roether, H, 39M 3:24:20
2904 Bruin De, W, 34M 3:24:21
2905 Sills, J, 46M 3:24:21
2906 De Angelis, P, 31M 3:24:22
2907 Bruus, H, 31M 3:24:22
2908 Roth, M, 39M 3:24:22
2909 Van Wijk, O, 26M 3:24:23
2910 Ratte, C, 47M 3:24:23
2911 Van Der Grift, G, 29M 3:24:24
2912 Ganun, J, 46M 3:24:24
2913 Blochet, J, 32M 3:24:24
2914 Ribou, J, 35M 3:24:24
2915 Madsen, M, 46M 3:24:25
2916 Asbeck, P, 47M 3:24:26
2917 Hammarskjold, E, 40M 3:24:27
2918 Fisher, A, 36M 3:24:28
2919 Fruehwein, G, 55M 3:24:28
2920 Romanchuck, A, 46M 3:24:28
2921 Kemppi, N, 40M 3:24:29
2922 De Cooman, R, 42M 3:24:29
2923 Martin, P, 32M 3:24:29
2924Lembo, J, 31M 3:24:30
2925 Carvalho, W, 35M 3:24:30
2926 Alvarado, M, 46M 3:24:31
2927 Tabarini, C, 41M 3:24:31
2928 Coutant, L, 32F 3:24:32
2929 Roncaglione, R, 43M 3:24:32
2930 Lala, M, 29M 3:24:34
2931 Serrano, C, 38M 3:24:34
2932 Schoedler, S, 36M 3:24:35
2933 Rastoul, F, 33M 3:24:36
2934 Wickham, M, 39F 3:24:36
2935MaCauley, B, 30M 3:24:39
2936 Ploch, K, 39M 3:24:40
2937 Sciberras, B, 43M 3:24:40
2938 Kern, S, 57M 3:24:43
2939 Ascioti, J, 46M 3:24:44
2940 Baudron, V, 38F 3:24:44
2941 Reinsch, U, 54M 3:24:45
2942 Luna, F, 22M 3:24:45
2943 Bateman, J, 42M 3:24:45
2944 Milano, L, 37M 3:24:45
2945 Iwasa, T, 43M 3:24:46
2946 Pena Martinez, S, 48M 3:24:46
2947 Wisniewski, D, 34M 3:24:46
2948 Ekins, B, 33M 3:24:46
2949 Lopez, E, 37M 3:24:48
2950 Keane, D, 32M 3:24:48
2951 Taylor, G, 38M 3:24:49
2952 Law, A, 33M 3:24:49
2953 Saccomanni, C, 38M 3:24:49
2954 Piredda, L, 26M 3:24:49
2955 Omvlee, J, 32M 3:24:50
2956 McQuaid, P, 32M 3:24:50
2957 De Heij, R, 44M 3:24:50
2958 Zumpe, M, 29M 3:24:50
2959 Louis, P, 35M 3:24:50
2960 Crouvezier, C, 37M 3:24:50
2961 Franzoni, S, 24M 3:24:51
2962 Short, P, 44M 3:24:52
2963 Rivera, L, 39M 3:24:52
2964 Farmer, P, 24M 3:24:52
2965 Bates, R, 42M 3:24:52
2966 Dewally, J, 24M 3:24:53
2967 Shriner, D, 51M 3:24:53
2968 Grizzetti, J, 31M 3:24:54
2969 Rindt, W, 48M 3:24:55
2970 Loenders, A, 36M 3:24:55
2971 Fontaine, R, 44M 3:24:55
2972 Maiolino, C, 35M 3:24:56
2973 Jesus, E, 38M 3:24:56
2974 Maturi, L, 37M 3:24:56
2975 Philkill, R, 28M 3:24:57
2976 Cappadona, R, 30M 3:24:57
2977 Kuca, D, 44M 3:24:57
2978 Vignaud, P, 46M 3:24:58
2979 Barre, A, 28M 3:24:58
2980 Rippert, J, 34M 3:24:59
2981 Berrondo, L, 44M 3:25:00
2982 Van Helden, J, 50M 3:25:01
2983 Midorikawa, M, 44F 3:25:01
2984 Barraco, J, 43M 3:25:01
2985 Frieler, J, 52M 3:25:02
2986 Aronson, C, 36M 3:25:02
2987 Conseil, D, 40M 3:25:03
2988 Zires Ortiz, R, 39F3:25:03
2989 Vallone, P, 29M 3:25:04
2990 Fonovich, F, 35M 3:25:05
2991 Putrim, T, 26M 3:25:05
2992 Handgraaf, L, 45M 3:25:05
2993 Guillaume, G, 39M 3:25:05
2994 Johnson, S, 30M 3:25:05
2995 Krause, H, 57M 3:25:06
2996 Jacobs, L, 37M 3:25:07
2997 Smith III, R, 30M 3:25:08
2998 Cotter, J, 35M 3:25:08
2999 Forst, A, 31M 3:25:08
3000 Cunningham, L, 42M 3:25:08


World Economies


From the Andes, Indians Spread the Word: They're Argentine and Proud of It
Some 12,300 feet above sea level in the Andes Mountains, Coya Indians were laughing, waving, pointing and jumping for joy the other day as a tourist train pulled into the station of this isolated mining village.
The Indians, whose ancestors established the village more than 300 years ago to escape Spanish domination, come to the train station every Saturday to sell their handicrafts, receive donations of food and clothing, and read old newspapers that have been left on the train.


Pool Energy Services Co.(PESC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooks Brothers Account in Review
The advertising and marketing account of Brooks Brothers, with billings estimated at $1 million to $2 million, has been placed in review after the retailer and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York agreed to part company after 17 months.


Voter Information
Election Day is Tuesday.
Polling places will be open in New York State from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.; in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M., and in Connecticut from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Information on polling places in New York City is available from the Board of Elections, (212) 868-3692, or the New York Public Interest Research Group, (212) 349-6986.
The line for the hearing-impaired is (212) 487-5496.


Legal Euthanasia Imperils Medical Integrity; Evading the Guidelines
To the Editor:
In citing alleged Catholic support for the "morphine drip" as a covert method of euthanasia for the terminally ill ("Killing Pain, Ending Life," Op-Ed, Nov. 1), Thomas A. Preston skews Catholic teaching in order to support his own political agenda.


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P.(PFR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Legal Euthanasia Imperils Medical Integrity
To the Editor:
Thomas A. Preston's critique of physicians' use of the "morphine drip" to alleviate the suffering of terminally ill patients ("Killing Pain, Ending Life," Op-Ed, Nov. 1) is misleading.
It is clear that Dr.
Preston's agenda is to desensitize society to euthanasia by equating this practice with the legitimate use of morphine in dying patients.


It Seems the Finish Rate Is Up, Up and Away
Two years after a surge of runners led marathon organizers to adopt stringent controls to keep the race manageable, the controls evaporated in the November heat yesterday as participation in the 25th New York City Marathon shattered all previous records.
Based on unofficial preliminary tallies subject to revision, a total of 29,543 runners had crossed the finish line by the new 10-hour cutoff.
Among other things, that is 1,746 more than the 1992 record of 27,797, a 6 percent increase, and almost 3,000 more than the 26,597 who finished last year.


Republican Leader Practices Nonchalance in Tough Campaign
He has never been accused of being at a loss for words, but Newt Gingrich needs only two to respond to speculation that his race for Congress in suburban Atlanta may not be the cakewalk that had been anticipated.
"Who cares?" Mr.
Gingrich said before addressing the pumped-up Republicans checking out T-shirts and bumper stickers reading "Bill Lied," "Visualize No Liberals" and "Rush for President" inside Vittle's Restaurant here on Saturday.


Tilting East
President Clinton's theme of putting the economy first takes him this week to Indonesia for the second annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting.
APEC is an 18-member group of Pacific Rim countries that includes China and Japan.
On the agenda is a proposal to create by 2020 the world's largest free-trade and investment zone -- a dramatic symbol of America's tilt toward soaring opportunities in Asia and away from the enervated economies of Western Europe.
Mr.
Clinton pushed Nafta, the accord with Mexico and Canada, through Congress over the opposition of important Democratic constituencies.
He also signed, along with more than 100 trading partners, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- which Congress will vote on after the elections.
An APEC accord is an enticing next step.
APEC members account for about half of the world's economic output; yet the U.S. share of trade and investment in the group is falling.
A trade agreement would guarantee fair access, a key to U.S. growth.


Holocaust Heroine Recalled
The stage of the Producer's Club Theater is cramped.
Nevertheless, Linda Diamond's "Secret Annex" would have seemed claustrophobic even at the Metropolitan Opera House.
This solo for Lois Silk, inspired by "The Diary of Anne Frank," successfully conveyed a sense of confinement.
It was the only work on the program that Linda Diamond &amp; Company offered on Friday night that had any impact.
Ms.
Diamond's other pieces involved little more than self-conscious posing.


As Rostenkowski's Challenger Shows a Surge, a Sleepy Campaign Stirs
Lost in the flutter over big-name politicians fighting for their lives in Texas and California and Virginia has been a nearly forgotten campaign that got into gear only a few days ago, amid murmurs of something that few people thought possible.
Dan Rostenkowski, the wounded general, could be in a race after all.
In this overwhelmingly Democratic city, the 18-term Congressman and former chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee was thought to have survived his biggest test by winning the Democratic primary in a three-way fight under a cloud of impending corruption charges.


NVR Inc.(NVR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patents; A Jet-Powered Disk With Added Lift From Helium Can Take Off Straight Up, Float and Carry 800 Passengers
A RETIRED aerospace engineer has designed an aircraft that can take off straight up -- even from water -- float and carry up to 800 passengers.
It looks remarkably like a flying saucer.
The engineer, George Neumayr, retired a few years ago after 20 years as a design engineer for the Bell Aerospace Company in New York and moved to Lake Worth, Fla.
For the last couple of years he has spent most of his time designing his flying disk at a small drafting table and typewriter at home.


Iran Fires Missiles At Rebel Base in Iraq
Iran carried out a missile attack against a military base of the exiled People's Mujahedeen near Baghdad, Iraq, early today after the rebels tried to attack Iranian oil installations, the Teheran radio said.
The radio reported heavy casualties, adding that two guerrillas were pursued into Iraq.


Look! The Runners Are Coming! The Runners Are Coming!
Staten Island  40,000 Enough In Norway
Among the masses at Fort Wadsworth readying themselves for the 26-mile journey ahead was a woman who is used to crowds of runners like these.
Mona Amlo of Norway was limbering up for her third marathon, and second in New York, and talking of the 5-kilometer run that she organizes back in Oslo.


Syncor Int'l. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Starter Corp.(STA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Texas Race, A Bush Avoids Father's Errors
When he talks about his effort to unseat Gov.
Ann W. Richards, George W. Bush refers a lot to a campaign two years ago in which a relative came a cropper.
"Bill Clinton drove the agenda against my father," Mr.
Bush said the other day as he stumped across the plains of western Texas.
"My father let Bill Clinton decide what issues the two of them were going to talk about. That was a major mistake, and I wasn't going to let it happen to me this year."


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON: Sports of The Times; In All the Boroughs, the Crowds Came Out to Honor Lebow
THERE is a place in Brooklyn where Fred Lebow used to shout in Yiddish.
He would see the Hasidic Jews standing on the sidewalk and he would stand up in the pace car and exhort them to cheer, to clap, to support the runners.
The crowds were sparse in Williamsburg back then, and the Hasidic men in their suits and long black coats mostly stared back at Lebow.
What was a man who looked just like them doing in a gaudy track outfit, standing up in an open car, shouting at them?


CUOMO AND PATAKI STRESSING THEMES DOWN TO THE WIRE
The leading New York gubernatorial candidates edged toward the finish line yesterday by doubling back to what each believes is his most potent theme: State Senator George E. Pataki argued once more that he is the candidate of tax cuts and change, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kept up questions about his rival's record and honesty on the litmus issue of abortion.
With both camps sensing a close and volatile race, the candidates relied on last-minute help from -- and contrasting appeals to -- the biggest group of undecided voters: women.
Mr.
Pataki wrapped himself in the Republican tax-cutting credentials of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey on a walking tour of Little Italy, while Mr.
Cuomo basked in the embrace of a bipartisan group, including Donna Hanover Giuliani, who questioned Mr.
Pataki's commitment to abortion rights.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Small movie, small budget, big hopes. It's a situation that really calls for a full-court press.
STATISTIC ONE: The typical advertising budget for a major Hollywood film is $15 million or more.
Statistic Two: the advertising budget for "Hoop Dreams," an independent film that has won rave reviews and a cult following, is $500,000.
"That represents what the major studios might spend on just one day of advertising," said Ira Deutchman, president of Fine Line Features, the film's distributor in Manhattan.
Mr.
Deutchman, who distributed "The Player," "Barcelona" and "My Own Private Idaho," is wringing every penny of value from his budget for "Hoop Dreams," trying to make a small film into a big phenomenon.


No Headline
"I saw the faces and I knew I had made a mistake. I didn't have to ask anybody." -- GERMAN SILVA, who won the New York City Marathon despite making a wrong turn near the finish.  [ D1:4. ]


At Least 32 Die as Rainstorms Pummel Northern Italy
The rains came and the river banks broke, and by tonight, there were at least 32 people dead and more than a dozen missing in the fastest-rising floods to strike northern Italy in eight decades.
The freak rain that pummeled southern Europe and northern Africa hit hardest in the Piedmont region of northwestern Italy.
In the area around Turin, the torrents flowed unchecked through homes and across fields, bringing down telephone and power lines, blocking highways and buckling bridges.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 8 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
21001 Rincon Saucedo, J, 40M 4:44:16
21002 Jaros, S, 53F 4:44:16
21003 Fay, R, 53M 4:44:16
21004 Fay Jr, R, 27M 4:44:16
21005 Daelken, J, 38M4:44:16
21006 Campbell, G, 36M 4:44:16
21007 Schrager, S, 45M 4:44:17
21008 Mercado MD, M, 37M 4:44:17
21009 Van Galen, J, 43M 4:44:18
21010 Maturana Rodriguez, E, 30M 4:44:18
21011 Butler, M, 39M 4:44:18
21012 Adkins, N, 38F 4:44:18
21013 Alvarado, C, 37M 4:44:18
21014 Stark, C, 49M 4:44:19
21015 Wilder, J, 39M 4:44:19
21016 Stephens, C, 30F 4:44:19
21017 Bouchard, A, 47M 4:44:19
21018Friedman, R, 34M 4:44:19
21019 Huff, R, 46M 4:44:19
21020 Godard, A, 58M 4:44:20
21021 Weiss , G, 55M 4:44:20
21022 Coughlin, C, 29F 4:44:20
21023 Coughlin, P, 30M 4:44:20
21024 Mahoney, B, 41M 4:44:21
21025 Elias, H, 32M 4:44:21
21026 Vermearen Jones, M, 44F 4:44:21
21027 Bolanis, P, 64M 4:44:22
21028 Levine, H, 50M 4:44:22
21029 Anderson, R, 45M 4:44:22
21030 Cich, E, 29F 4:44:23
21031 Gooding, J, 29M 4:44:24
21032 Sassi, A, 43M 4:44:24
21033 Defronzo, E, 58M 4:44:25
21034 Gesten, S, 32M 4:44:25
21035 Snickare, K, 56M 4:44:26
21036 Husby, T, 31M 4:44:26
21037 Macneil, D, 29M 4:44:26
21038 Brookner, L, 46M 4:44:27
21039 Operman, C, 46F 4:44:27
21040 Van Lieshout, W, 53M 4:44:28
21041 Moerkerk, J, 46M 4:44:28
21042 Tam, D, 27M 4:44:28
21043 Postol, C, 30M 4:44:28
21044 Loof, C, 39M 4:44:28
21045 Burns, J, 45F 4:44:28
21046 Duprey, N, 38M 4:44:28
21047 Wester, R, 41M 4:44:29
21048 Perosa, F, 50M 4:44:29
21049 Vogel, N, 59F 4:44:29
21050 Edelkoort, T, 40M 4:44:29
21051 Mai, A, 49M 4:44:29
21052 Orth-Demczyszyn, M, 27F 4:44:29
21053 De Roy, F, 43M 4:44:30
21054 Rubin, S, 32M 4:44:30
21055 Clarke, R, 34F 4:44:30
21056 Nichols, G, 53M 4:44:31
21057 Letalon, J, 47M 4:44:31
21058 Soule, J, 43M 4:44:32
21059 Daniel, W, 47M 4:44:32
21060 Lagarde, J, 57M 4:44:32
21061 Powrie-Bosse, K, 30F 4:44:32
21062 Jenvey, R, 41M 4:44:32
21063 Rueckemann, M, 54M 4:44:32
21064 Riedel, A, 22F 4:44:32
21065 Herrera Munoz, S, 37F 4:44:33
21066 Malmann, H, 56M 4:44:33
21067 Meganck, R, 49F 4:44:33
21068 Angervo, M, 35F 4:44:33
21069 De Beer, M, 47M 4:44:33
21070 Fox, M, 31M 4:44:33
21071 Levine, J, 32F 4:44:33
21072 Cacciatore, F, 37M 4:44:33
21073 Zils, G, 53M 4:44:33
21074 Paris, C, 31M 4:44:34
21075 Whittingham, S, 26M 4:44:35
21076 De Gaster, Z, 68M 4:44:35
21077 Canina, D, 34F 4:44:35
21078 McCaffrey, P, 29M 4:44:36
21079 Cariello, P, 52M 4:44:36
21080 Keymer, C, 38F 4:44:36
21081 Caterino, J, 40M 4:44:37
21082 Motta, C, 37M 4:44:37
21083 Klein, C, 30F 4:44:37
21084 Perez, R, 33M 4:44:38
21085 Murru, C, 26M 4:44:38
21086 Bachy, R, 18M 4:44:38
21087 Hannigan, B, 35F 4:44:38
21088 Adam, R, 37M 4:44:38
21089 Thumm, J, 27F 4:44:39
21090 Graham, W, 45M 4:44:39
21091 Aiken, J, 39M 4:44:39
21092 Adam, U, 37M 4:44:39
21093 Berry, J, 38M 4:44:40
21094 Murphy, E, 34F 4:44:40
21095 Clavaud, B, 53M 4:44:40
21096 Ervin, L, 45F4:44:41
21097 Siligoni, J, 43M 4:44:42
21098 Samra, B, 39F 4:44:42
21099 Grabel, J, 48M 4:44:42
21100 Rice, N, 28F 4:44:42
21101 Willis, C, 41M 4:44:42
21102 Messina, L, 26M 4:44:43
21103 Siligoni, E, 53M 4:44:43
21104 Fleury, S, 40F 4:44:43
21105 Haddon, R, 27M 4:44:43
21106 Offenhartz, S, 28M 4:44:44
21107 Skattum, C, 27M 4:44:44
21108 McLeish, J, 43F 4:44:44
21109 Brooks, D, 42M 4:44:45
21110 Offenhartz, A, 31M 4:44:45
21111 Salinas, R, 32M 4:44:45
21112 Snider, M, 42M 4:44:46
21113 Meriaux, P, 58M 4:44:46
21114 Dhaussy, A, 38F 4:44:46
21115 Preuvot, E, 40F 4:44:47
21116Koike, M, 41M 4:44:47
21117 Stamberg, M, 50F 4:44:47
21118 Lacau, W, 48M 4:44:48
21119 Deredec, C, 32F 4:44:48
21120 Lawson, M, 29M 4:44:48
21121 Munroe, M, 32M 4:44:48
21122 Felder, K, 25F 4:44:48
21123 Le Brusq, A, 41M 4:44:50
21124 Beasley, J, 51M 4:44:51
21125 Philippe, M, 56M 4:44:51
21126 Kawamura, T, 27M 4:44:51
21127 Pereira Filho, A, 35M 4:44:51
21128 Uchida, Y, 32M 4:44:51
21129 Copley, J, 38M 4:44:52
21130 Battel, J, 37M 4:44:52
21131 Shannon, M, 38M 4:44:52
21132 Mulligan, J, 50M 4:44:53
21133 White Jr., J, 54M 4:44:53
21134 Goldsamt, L, 31M 4:44:53
21135 Kahan, P, 40M 4:44:53
21136 St Jean, B, 33F 4:44:53
21137 Bueno, M, 33F 4:44:54
21138 Hunsinger, B, 37M 4:44:56
21139 Witt, M, 50M 4:44:56
21140 Leibowitz, J, 34F 4:44:57
21141 Mueller, C, 54F 4:44:57
21142 Stuart, T, 48M 4:44:58
21143 Crager, M, 35F 4:44:58
21144 Hernandez, J, 40M 4:44:58
21145 Doucet, G, 48M 4:44:59
21146 Urbach, K, 34F 4:44:59
21147 Thiry, H, 41M 4:44:59
21148 Parisot, D, 29M 4:44:59
21149 Swearingen, N, 23F 4:44:59
21150 Jordan, P, 41M 4:45:00
21151 Baretti, R, 50M 4:45:00
21152 Rappaport, A, 42M 4:45:00
21153 Frangi, C, 60M 4:45:00
21154 Grover, R, 50M 4:45:00
21155 Rowe, L, 42F 4:45:00
21156 Dietrich, B, 50F 4:45:00
21157 Hebert, M, 50M 4:45:00
21158 Tokayer, D, 43M 4:45:01
21159 Prokop, E, 61M 4:45:01
21160 Jehl, H, 50M 4:45:01
21161 Stevens, J, 48M 4:45:01
21162 Kranian, R, 36F 4:45:01
21163 Tytler, K, 38F 4:45:02
21164 Deronzier, L, 39F 4:45:02
21165 Puro, N, 45M 4:45:02
21166Pollard, S, 42M 4:45:02
21167 Zuchman, S, 39M 4:45:03
21168 Lederman*, R, 29F 4:45:03
21169 Esquivel Hernandez, R, 42F 4:45:04
21170 Breunesse, C, 41F 4:45:04
21171 Pairaudeau, J, 49M 4:45:04
21172Graff, W, 33F 4:45:04
21173 Sidan, B, 31F 4:45:04
21174 Davis, R, 52M 4:45:04
21175 Burdett, R, 26M 4:45:04
21176 Bannon, L, 22M 4:45:04
21177 Smevog, H, 29F 4:45:04
21178 Bang-Andreasen, L, 32F 4:45:05
21179 Skattum, L, 33F 4:45:05
21180 Vetrano, B, 55M 4:45:05
21181 O'Brien, L, 29F 4:45:05
21182 Hiddleson, K, 28F 4:45:05
21183 Baldwin, C, 28F 4:45:05
21184 Houssais, J, 34M 4:45:05
21185 Van Der Linden, T, 43M 4:45:06
21186 Koide, Y, 36F 4:45:07
21187 Stansbury, P, 28M 4:45:08
21188 Korenjak, A, 29M 4:45:09
21189 Tveter, L, 43M 4:45:10
21190 Vindegg, A, 39F 4:45:10
21191 Friedman, L, 57M 4:45:10
21192 Salter, A, 57M 4:45:11
21193 Bloom, E, 37F 4:45:12
21194 Boyle, B, 33M 4:45:12
21195 Paw, S, 45M 4:45:12
21196 Ragonese, R, 43M 4:45:13
21197 Coronado, E, 46M 4:45:14
21198 Gort, R, 29M 4:45:14
21199 Heidinga, S, 26M 4:45:14
21200 Broaddus, W, 41M 4:45:14
21201 Viruega, S, 41M 4:45:15
21202 Brossard, D, 35M 4:45:15
21203 Pasetto, G, 56M 4:45:15
21204 Furbo, S, 50M 4:45:15
21205 Koizumi, S, 57M 4:45:15
21206 Nicora, M, 39F 4:45:15
21207 Nicora, A, 39M 4:45:16
21208 Chapman, W, 45M 4:45:16
21209 Cummings, A, 40F 4:45:16
21210 Van Der Marel, S, 52M 4:45:16
21211 Klubok, M, 37M 4:45:17
21212 Irving, L, 25F 4:45:17
21213 Nelson, J, 28M 4:45:17
21214 Murray, K, 39F 4:45:17
21215 Crossed, D, 28M 4:45:18
21216 Feld, M, 43M 4:45:18
21217 Adames, J, 31M4:45:18
21218 Siligoni, E, 43F 4:45:19
21219 Simon, M, 45F 4:45:19
21220 Van Loon, M, 69M 4:45:20
21221 Sgubbi, F, 39F 4:45:20
21222 Sullivan, T, 43M 4:45:20
21223 Stokvis, S, 31M 4:45:21
21224 Saldana Perez, J, 34M 4:45:21
21225 Seid, N, 41M 4:45:21
21226 Falco, S, 30F 4:45:21
21227 Sanchez, J, 49F 4:45:22
21228 Dieveney, T, 26M 4:45:22
21229 Alarid, M, 36F 4:45:22
21230 Harju, S, 31F4:45:23
21231 Artaki, M, 38M 4:45:23
21232 Zapata-Arboleda, A, 31M 4:45:24
21233 Jensen, R, 45M 4:45:24
21234 McCarthy, P, 26F 4:45:24
21235 Kalmon, T, 49M 4:45:24
21236 Preven, D, 65M 4:45:24
21237 Vannier, J, 49F 4:45:24
21238 Burrus, A, 30F 4:45:25
21239Camp, D, 33M 4:45:25
21240 Tannenbaum, J, 47M 4:45:26
21241 Yvon, J, 44M 4:45:26
21242 Blake, C, 37F 4:45:26
21243 Malan, M, 35F 4:45:26
21244 Bennett, S, 36F 4:45:26
21245 Yanez, A, 34F 4:45:26
21246 Verwey-Van Kampenhout, A, 50F 4:45:26
21247 Hughes, R, 35M 4:45:27
21248 MaGee, P, 41M 4:45:27
21249 Maher, D, 27F 4:45:28
21250 Sampson, J, 48M 4:45:28
21251 Keenan, J, 32F 4:45:29
21252Horiuchi, K, 27F 4:45:29
21253 Busseni, G, 37M 4:45:29
21254 Fairries, B, 30M 4:45:29
21255 Lendemeijer, B, 31M 4:45:29
21256 Lenman, R, 63M 4:45:30
21257 Clarke, P, 38M 4:45:30
21258 Abramson, S, 26M 4:45:30
21259 Visentin, M, 34M 4:45:30
21260 Wakulchik, N, 30F 4:45:30
21261 Knuvers, H, 48M 4:45:31
21262 Hagafors, R, 40M 4:45:31
21263 Smith, D, 34M 4:45:31
21264 Croke, M, 32F 4:45:31
21265 Hybholt, M, 20M 4:45:32
21266 Kushner, G, 44M 4:45:32
21267Schulman, P, 44M 4:45:32
21268 Olsen, G, 36F 4:45:32
21269 Vedomsky, M, 45M 4:45:32
21270 Noguchi, F, 30M 4:45:33
21271 Mioc, A, 26M 4:45:33
21272 Moreira, A, 44M 4:45:33
21273 Pendery, R, 33F 4:45:33
21274 Hall, B, 52M 4:45:34
21275 Mendoza, F, 54M 4:45:34
21276 Garcia Bermea, A, 45M 4:45:34
21277 Hayden, D, 44M 4:45:35
21278 Reyes Rosado, F, 44M 4:45:36
21279 Boyko Jr, N, 29M 4:45:36
21280 O'Brien Ahlers, K, 26F 4:45:36
21281 Wiggins, G, 41M 4:45:36
21282 Quinn, C, 32F 4:45:36
21283 Lippin, R, 31M 4:45:37
21284 Maendly, M, 47F 4:45:37
21285 Rizzo, G, 34M 4:45:37
21286 Lynne-Davies, J, 33M 4:45:38
21287 Bonny-Bardet, R, 50F 4:45:38
21288 Shaw, M, 39F 4:45:39
21289 Herzog, J, 25M 4:45:39
21290 Fineman, S, 46M 4:45:39
21291 Broll, C, 25M 4:45:39
21292 Coen, M, 31F 4:45:40
21293 Smith, H, 26M 4:45:41
21294 Ollins, R, 48M 4:45:41
21295 Alonso, M, 44F 4:45:41
21296 Cuney, B, 55M 4:45:41
21297 Erdos, D, 43F 4:45:42
21298 Robinson, R, 60M 4:45:42
21299 Gonzalez, R, 31M 4:45:42
21300 Shiraki, K, 29M 4:45:42
21301 Frost, T, 40M 4:45:42
21302 Harrity, J, 47M 4:45:42
21303 Faust, C, 47M 4:45:43
21304 Noble, S, 31M 4:45:43
21305 Burley, S, 36M 4:45:43
21306 Martschenko, A, 26M 4:45:43
21307 Rohan, W, 39M 4:45:44
21308 Varga, R, 47M 4:45:44
21309 Del Val Gutierrez, A, 31M 4:45:45
21310 Midbrod, T, 63M 4:45:45
21311 Blumberg, M, 46M 4:45:45
21312 Gilabert, B, 29M 4:45:46
21313 Sergent, J, 38M 4:45:46
21314 Castrovinci, L, 34F 4:45:47
21315 Ford, S, 57M 4:45:47
21316 Van Brunt, T, 23F4:45:47
21317 Branum, R, 42M 4:45:47
21318 Touati, A, 44M 4:45:48
21319 Wong, L, 34M 4:45:48
21320 Durand, B, 41M 4:45:48
21321 Saha, S, 45M 4:45:48
21322 Binet, P, 31M 4:45:49
21323 Hanley, R, 56M 4:45:49
21324 Ledergerber, N, 57M 4:45:49
21325 Burefalk, A, 45M 4:45:49
21326 Coy, L, 27F 4:45:49
21327 Birne, B, 59F 4:45:50
21328 Hedegaard, L, 40M 4:45:50
21329 Batchelor, J, 49M 4:45:50
21330 Alfano, J, 28M 4:45:50
21331 Gregory, D, 40M 4:45:50
21332 Cone, T, 21F 4:45:51
21333 Contreras, S, 37F 4:45:51
21334 Woehrle, H, 57M 4:45:51
21335 Madson, E, 50M 4:45:52
21336 Groner, J, 49M 4:45:52
21337 Nasoff, L, 33F 4:45:53
21338 Sackett, A, 34M4:45:53
21339 Langdon, K, 24F 4:45:54
21340 Langdon, M, 43F 4:45:54
21341 Anschuetz, P, 43M 4:45:54
21342 Arena, O, 42M 4:45:55
21343 Alauzet, J, 42M 4:45:55
21344 Sharp, B, 51M 4:45:55
21345Yamasawa, M, 24M 4:45:55
21346 Dorn, J, 41M 4:45:55
21347 Jacoby, A, 27F 4:45:56
21348 Davenport, J, 42F 4:45:56
21349 Alauzet, A, 47F 4:45:56
21350 Tolmos, M, 41F 4:45:56
21351 Sekiya, M, 44M 4:45:57
21352 Costantin, M, 47F 4:45:57
21353 Fontyn, A, 40M 4:45:58
21354 Puckart, J, 45M 4:45:58
21355 McCormick, M, 40M 4:45:59
21356 Endo, H, 56M 4:45:59
21357 Tamborrino, M, 37M 4:45:59
21358 Fried, A, 47M 4:45:59
21359 Crossed, R, 55M 4:46:00
21360 Sieradzki, R, 48M 4:46:00
21361 Stocker, G, 56M 4:46:00
21362 Halper, S, 60M 4:46:01
21363 Sieradzki, K, 45M 4:46:01
21364 Claflin, L, 30F 4:46:01
21365 Montiel Castellanos, A, 48M 4:46:01
21366 Schneider, E, 47F 4:46:01
21367 Levitt, B, 28M 4:46:02
21368 Schneider, O, 57M 4:46:02
21369 Romero Vizcarra, A, 58M 4:46:02
21370 Shomberg, J, 39M 4:46:03
21371 Bradley, K, 30F 4:46:03
21372 Heyser, R, 50M4:46:04
21373 Dorman, H, 35M 4:46:04
21374 Tschofen, J, 36M 4:46:04
21375 Badalfmente, J, 29M 4:46:05
21376 Napoles Reyes, J, 35M 4:46:06
21377 Marmoreo, J, 52F 4:46:06
21378 Murnen, P, 32M 4:46:08
21379 Hamilton, R, 24M 4:46:08
21380 Copin, B, 56M 4:46:09
21381 Collier, L, 43M 4:46:09
21382 Padva, M, 55M 4:46:10
21383 Dorsey, J, 38M 4:46:10
21384 Henkel, W, 50M 4:46:10
21385 Soraruf, L, 46M 4:46:10
21386 Walsh, R, 37F 4:46:10
21387 Reichmuth, J, 52M4:46:10
21388 Collins, E, 35M 4:46:11
21389 Haas, L, 52M 4:46:11
21390 Acocella, D, 37F 4:46:12
21391 Schmidt, J, 44F 4:46:12
21392 Van Vark, J, 60M 4:46:13
21393 Hetherington, D, 46M 4:46:13
21394 Feige, D, 47M 4:46:14
21395 Boegeman, S, 33F 4:46:15
21396 Kent, D, 41M 4:46:15
21397 Comandini, E, 35M 4:46:15
21398 Mancastroppa, L, 37F 4:46:15
21399 Olesen, K, 48M 4:46:15
21400 Wedeen, D, 37M 4:46:15
21401 Cofino, I, 39F 4:46:16
21402 Saltet, J, 34M 4:46:16
21403 Colonna D'Istria, J, 31M 4:46:16
21404 Murphy, D, 27F4:46:17
21405 Epifanio, G, 46F 4:46:18
21406 Maxwell, H, 35M 4:46:18
21407 Brix, B, 43F 4:46:18
21408 Holman, S, 47F 4:46:18
21409 Michelena, L, 58M 4:46:18
21410 Obbo, G, 42M 4:46:19
21411 Klingebiel, M, 43M 4:46:19
21412 Geraci, S, 38M 4:46:19
21413 Thomas, J, 43M 4:46:19
21414 Boulanger, J, 42M 4:46:21
21415 Decter, M, 35M 4:46:22
21416 Doenges, C, 31F 4:46:22
21417 Elias Pessah, R, 41M 4:46:22
21418 Kreth, G, 38M 4:46:23
21419 Lombroso Meshoulam, B, 32M 4:46:23
21420 Gandin, M, 56M 4:46:23
21421 Tomlin, J, 38M 4:46:23
21422 Farber, R, 34F 4:46:24
21423 Kettemann, A, 28F 4:46:24
21424 Barbier, C, 28F 4:46:24
21425 Clarke, K, 47F 4:46:24
21426 Oneill, G, 38M 4:46:25
21427 Engels, E, 43F 4:46:25
21428 Dixon, J, 48M 4:46:25
21429 Cowen, P, 52M 4:46:25
21430 Van Loon, J, 33F 4:46:26
21431 Freund, E, 38M 4:46:26
21432 Seetahal, D, 39F 4:46:26
21433 Ollander, E, 33M 4:46:26
21434 Ossa, J, 35M 4:46:27
21435 Gomez, H, 34M 4:46:27
21436 Thoegersen, A, 58M 4:46:28
21437 Stiffler, R, 46M 4:46:28
21438 Samyn, C, 55F 4:46:28
21439 Weinrich, C, 30M 4:46:28
21440 Butwin, R, 35M 4:46:28
21441 Lang, K, 36M 4:46:28
21442 Greenberg, D, 49M 4:46:28
21443 DeMartine, S, 32M 4:46:29
21444 Acaron, F, 21F 4:46:29
21445 Litchko, S, 33F4:46:29
21446 Pellizzari, L, 21M 4:46:29
21447 McCarthy, W, 37M 4:46:29
21448 Malkowsky, B, 56M 4:46:30
21449 Pica, J, 38F 4:46:30
21450 Liang, A, 42F 4:46:30
21451 Ehlen, U, 48F 4:46:31
21452 Werneiwski, R, 37M 4:46:32
21453 Sherbet, M, 30F 4:46:32
21454 Condello, S, 31F 4:46:32
21455 Obrien, E, 47M 4:46:33
21456 Amma, M, 64M 4:46:34
21457 Wagstaff, H, 32F 4:46:35
21458 Gaetjens, E, 32M 4:46:35
21459 Boris, J, 26M 4:46:35
21460 Harrison, G, 34M 4:46:35
21461 Niemi, T, 49M 4:46:35
21462 Cohen, D, 47M 4:46:35
21463 Rivera, E, 59M 4:46:35
21464 Rowe Jr, R, 48M 4:46:35
21465 Gicquere, J, 48M 4:46:35
21466 Simmons, J, 40M 4:46:36
21467 Arreguin, J, 34M 4:46:36
21468 Striegl, F, 41M 4:46:36
21469 Radeloff, J, 46M 4:46:36
21470 Storegjerde, T, 60M 4:46:37
21471 DeLaura, C, 27F 4:46:38
21472 Botter, M, 39M 4:46:38
21473 Judas, R, 41F 4:46:38
21474 Tierney, J, 22F 4:46:39
21475 Morton, A, 62M 4:46:39
21476 Menendez, R, 36M 4:46:39
21477 Tierney, M, 52M 4:46:39
21478 Porras, J, 36F 4:46:39
21479 Bennett, D, 48M 4:46:39
21480 Trevett, A, 47M 4:46:40
21481 Rojas, R, 44M 4:46:40
21482 Black, S, 47F 4:46:41
21483 Salomon, H, 60M 4:46:41
21484 Rodriguez De Barrio, J, 32M 4:46:42
21485 Krause Dr, H, 46M 4:46:42
21486 Fischer, K, 33M 4:46:43
21487 Filis, Z, 37M 4:46:43
21488 Khayat, D, 36F 4:46:43
21489 Koning De, C, 28M 4:46:43
21490 Konvalin, U, 48F 4:46:43
21491 Johansen, B, 49F 4:46:44
21492 Scott, S, 49F 4:46:44
21493 Hoffman, L, 55M 4:46:44
21494 Cale, A, 41M 4:46:44
21495 Malek, I, 53M 4:46:45
21496 McMahon, P, 29M 4:46:45
21497 Bueringer, B, 39F 4:46:45
21498 Forster, B, 29M 4:46:45
21499 Kjellman, A, 50F 4:46:45
21500 Ryan, J, 33F 4:46:46
21501 Jones, N, 29F 4:46:46
21502 Van Klink, Y, 20F 4:46:46
21503 Linzee, D, 42M 4:46:46
21504 Cue, J, 31F 4:46:46
21505 Case, E, 35F 4:46:47
21506 Banda, R, 48M 4:46:47
21507 Dorosewicz, T, 39M 4:46:47
21508 Melo, R, 35M 4:46:47
21509 Graf, E, 48F 4:46:47
21510 Senderoff, P, 49M 4:46:48
21511 Otis, D, 45M 4:46:48
21512 Fosen, T, 51M 4:46:48
21513 Brandshaug, B, 53F 4:46:48
21514 Giorgetti, P, 59M 4:46:48
21515 Coll, I, 75M 4:46:48
21516 Stodola, G, 35M 4:46:48
21517 Babiarz, M, 38F 4:46:48
21518 Gonazlez, J, 44M 4:46:48
21519 Hensel, U, 34F 4:46:49
21520 Planow, L, 44M 4:46:49
21521 Patscheider, R, 34M 4:46:49
21522 Pletz, E, 27F 4:46:49
21523 Sullivan, P, 51M 4:46:50
21524 Goto, K, 21M 4:46:50
21525 Nishiaki, Y, 22M 4:46:51
21526 Escudier, A, 44F 4:46:51
21527 Isaksen, I, 51M 4:46:51
21528 Escudier, G, 46M 4:46:51
21529 Palumbo, P, 40F 4:46:51
21530 Delfour, Y, 39M 4:46:52
21531 Hoerning, W, 54M 4:46:52
21532 Chester, N, 42M 4:46:53
21533 Gallardo, A, 30F 4:46:53
21534 Weldon, J, 34M 4:46:54
21535 Gordon, M, 45M 4:46:54
21536 Federici, C, 35M 4:46:55
21537 Claffey, M, 30F 4:46:55
21538 Reynaud, M, 40F 4:46:55
21539 Reynaud, C, 46M 4:46:55
21540 Clarke, J, 43F 4:46:56
21541 Williams, L, 52M 4:46:56
21542 Rahav, M, 49M 4:46:56
21543 Lindon Jr, T, 40M 4:46:57
21544 Palcy, P, 38M 4:46:57
21545 Harris, L, 44F 4:46:57
21546 Prieur, C, 40M 4:46:59
21547 Kaufman, G, 34M 4:46:59
21548 Foks, J, 53M 4:46:59
21549 Matsunaga, M, 42F 4:46:59
21550 Jones, R, 40M 4:47:00
21551 Bridgforth, J, 44F 4:47:00
21552 Fogli, M, 33F 4:47:00
21553 Bridgforth, B, 54M 4:47:00
21554 McMillen, H, 58M 4:47:01
21555 O'Daniel, J, 59M 4:47:01
21556Furphy, R, 55M 4:47:01
21557 De Beauchamp, S, 63M 4:47:01
21558 Rouviere, C, 40F 4:47:01
21559 Miller, J, 44M 4:47:02
21560 Dusses, A, 46M 4:47:02
21561 Baarslag, M, 24M 4:47:03
21562 Gordon, S, 45M 4:47:03
21563 Nishikawa, Y, 42M 4:47:03
21564 Renault, T, 35M 4:47:03
21565 McDonald, D, 57M 4:47:03
21566 Wind, O, 48M 4:47:03
21567 Baxter, T, 33M 4:47:04
21568 McLaughlin, M, 26M 4:47:04
21569 Mendel, W, 36M 4:47:06
21570 Pez, J, 51M 4:47:06
21571 Coughlin, R, 32M 4:47:06
21572 Leve, R, 33F 4:47:06
21573 Farley, T, 48M 4:47:06
21574 Sinowitz, B, 57M 4:47:07
21575 Michie, C, 49M 4:47:07
21576 Coira, M, 34M 4:47:07
21577 Michie Jr, C, 22M 4:47:07
21578 Basili, C, 30M 4:47:07
21579 Dijkstra, J, 44M 4:47:08
21580 Colom, S, 21M 4:47:08
21581 Mandini, P, 36F 4:47:08
21582 Orsnes, H, 52M 4:47:08
21583 Wiese, B, 46M 4:47:08
21584 Melendez, A, 30M 4:47:08
21585 Dreher, B, 41F 4:47:08
21586 Goldman, G, 26M 4:47:09
21587 Billups, E, 32F 4:47:09
21588 Langley, C, 32F 4:47:09
21589 Espejel Cortina, H, 35M 4:47:09
21590 Trim, G, 51M 4:47:09
21591 Master, B, 39M 4:47:09
21592 King, M, 37F 4:47:09
21593 Cortorillo, S, 36M 4:47:09
21594 Murray, M, 29M 4:47:09
21595 Morrison, L, 37F 4:47:09
21596 Surich, R, 26M 4:47:09
21597 Mulcahy, B, 41M 4:47:09
21598 Gonidec, J, 44M 4:47:10
21599 Jasperse, H, 43M 4:47:10
21600 Flaherty, J, 40M 4:47:10
21601 Blumenberg, H, 41F 4:47:10
21602 Bertoli, A, 58M 4:47:11
21603 Calimon, W, 41M 4:47:11
21604 Lochner, R, 37M 4:47:11
21605 Larsen, E, 26F 4:47:11
21606 Dembek, T, 33F 4:47:11
21607 Leneeuw, P, 31M 4:47:11
21608 Cooper, S, 47M 4:47:11
21609 Montero, H, 54M 4:47:12
21610 Steinberg, L, 51M 4:47:12
21611 Rogers, L, 31F 4:47:12
21612 Higashitani, H, 59M 4:47:12
21613 Kaempf, D, 42F 4:47:13
21614 Kaempf, M, 47M 4:47:13
21615 Hernandez, M, 41M 4:47:13
21616 Minami, A, 27F 4:47:13
21617 Litt, A, 45M 4:47:14
21618 Boschieri, G, 38M 4:47:14
21619 Palladino, L, 34F 4:47:14
21620 Charters, F, 46F 4:47:14
21621 Jolls, C, 49F 4:47:15
21622 Lachica, V, 32M 4:47:15
21623Aoyama, S, 62M 4:47:15
21624 Reisinger, G, 37M 4:47:16
21625 Mettille, M, 38M 4:47:17
21626 Dye, L, 28F 4:47:18
21627 Perez, J, 38M 4:47:18
21628 Bloom, M, 43M 4:47:18
21629 Koker, P, 41M 4:47:19
21630 Loughran, K, 24F 4:47:19
21631 Shields, A, 34F 4:47:20
21632 O'Connor, J, 48M 4:47:20
21633 Park, S, 54M 4:47:20
21634 Beadle, D, 42M 4:47:21
21635 Morrison, G, 36M 4:47:21
21636 Eastham, A, 41F 4:47:21
21637 Stone, A, 37M 4:47:21
21638 Tanaka, H, 43F4:47:22
21639 Neller, F, 50M 4:47:22
21640 Wilson, D, 28F 4:47:22
21641 Fargeas, J, 48M 4:47:22
21642 Wallace, T, 31F 4:47:22
21643 Hassler, S, 40F 4:47:22
21644 Wallace, A, 33M 4:47:22
21645Marchand, C, 39F 4:47:23
21646 Chang, P, 38F 4:47:23
21647 Rechtschaffen, A, 26M 4:47:23
21648 Bech, B, 48F 4:47:23
21649 De La Guardia, R, 50M 4:47:24
21650 Loretta, J, 48M 4:47:24
21651 Takahashi, F, 45M 4:47:24
21652 Lemmens, R, 31M 4:47:24
21653 Needleman, R, 30F 4:47:24
21654 Caruana, M, 51M 4:47:25
21655 Lichtenecker, K, 30M 4:47:25
21656 Tokumasu, N, 28M 4:47:25
21657 Coleman, J, 49M 4:47:26
21658 Neddermeyer, V, 41M 4:47:26
21659 De-Cabissole, B, 45M 4:47:26
21660 Chu, L, 23F 4:47:26
21661 Biggs, J, 58M 4:47:27
21662 Alexander, D, 35F 4:47:27
21663 Kiuchi, T, 59M 4:47:27
21664 Drysdale, B, 39M 4:47:27
21665 Glover, L, 43M 4:47:27
21666 King, N, 28M 4:47:27
21667 Thomas, L, 24F 4:47:28
21668 Leach, C, 34F 4:47:28
21669 Ameille, M, 46F 4:47:29
21670 Hoets, M, 40F 4:47:29
21671 Johnson, L, 52M 4:47:29
21672 Lenzi, T, 46M 4:47:30
21673 Benthin-Potrzebowski, M, 54F 4:47:30
21674 Oda, R, 42F 4:47:30
21675 Linden, A, 43F 4:47:30
21676 Kendall, T, 29M 4:47:30
21677 Bofondi, G, 57M 4:47:31
21678 Matsumoto, J, 47M 4:47:31
21679Fernandez, A, 35M 4:47:31
21680 Racond, B, 31M 4:47:32
21681 Wenke, D, 37M 4:47:33
21682 Beltran, J, 37M 4:47:33
21683 Vecchio, E, 43M 4:47:33
21684 Schaapman, C, 35M 4:47:33
21685 Espy, P, 54M 4:47:34
21686 Marin, R, 46M 4:47:34
21687 Haas, H, 53M 4:47:34
21688 Testu, D, 48M 4:47:35
21689 Parisi, J, 31F 4:47:35
21690 De Gruttolla, G, 46M 4:47:36
21691 Belfiori, P, 43M 4:47:36
21692 Graham, T, 35M 4:47:37
21693 Dionne, J, 34M 4:47:38
21694 Tournel, A, 34F 4:47:38
21695 Brennan, K, 30F 4:47:39
21696 Tournel, J, 36M4:47:39
21697 Grammes, J, 28M 4:47:39
21698 Uoyama, K, 34M 4:47:39
21699 Charlton, T, 43M 4:47:39
21700 Bonin, G, 44M 4:47:40
21701 Takahashi, Y, 25F 4:47:40
21702 Smith, J, 44F 4:47:40
21703Moon, P, 45M 4:47:40
21704 Hietzig, R, 49F 4:47:40
21705 Shanahan, K, 45M 4:47:41
21706 Rieu-Castaing, S, 24M 4:47:41
21707 Van Schoten, J, 48M 4:47:41
21708 Lucchinetti, E, 29F 4:47:41
21709 Hughes, C, 30F 4:47:41
21710 Schreiber, M, 34F 4:47:42
21711 Wernsing, D, 26M 4:47:42
21712 Quosig, R, 40M 4:47:42
21713 Schroder, M, 45F 4:47:42
21714 Manzanares, A, 52M 4:47:42
21715 Bemesderfer, S, 51F 4:47:42
21716 Muellenbach, J, 36F 4:47:43
21717 Matitsin, A, 36M 4:47:44
21718 Liptak, B, 58M 4:47:44
21719 Dyson, K, 35F 4:47:45
21720 Suarez, L, 43M 4:47:45
21721 Schroeder, W, 40M 4:47:45
21722 Hultquist, A, 43M 4:47:46
21723 Mayid, P, 34M 4:47:47
21724 McDougall, J, 25F 4:47:48
21725 Fischer, S, 48M 4:47:48
21726 Siniscalchi, P, 45M 4:47:48
21727 Groot, J, 47M 4:47:49
21728 Barrett, W, 39M 4:47:50
21729 Kuipers, P, 42M 4:47:50
21730 Hughes, M, 42M 4:47:50
21731 Gaertner, W, 68M 4:47:50
21732 Lorenzelli, S, 41F 4:47:51
21733 Brewer, G, 28M 4:47:51
21734 Striebeck, H, 45M 4:47:51
21735 Medeiros, M, 48F 4:47:52
21736 Piccoli, P, 48M 4:47:52
21737 Ceccon, P, 31M 4:47:52
21738 Brunn, R, 46M 4:47:53
21739 Ricken, K, 59M 4:47:53
21740 Kelly, J, 45M 4:47:54
21741 Brown, H, 24M 4:47:54
21742 Marcos Kuri, R, 37M 4:47:54
21743 Holub, T, 49M 4:47:54
21744 Iskra, K, 29F 4:47:55
21745 Ostroff, D, 45M 4:47:55
21746 Hamel, J, 26F 4:47:56
21747 Mueller-Ruetz, U, 37F 4:47:57
21748 Palko, N, 46M 4:47:57
21749 Argenbright, K, 46F 4:47:58
21750 Ruetz, R, 39M 4:47:58
21751 Steinmann, W, 37M 4:47:59
21752 Barker, B, 39F 4:47:59
21753 Thurston, J, 41M 4:47:59
21754 Pasquati, S, 47M 4:48:00
21755 Liebler, P, 39M 4:48:00
21756 Halliday, J, 31F 4:48:01
21757 Levy, A, 45M 4:48:01
21758 Fritz, A, 49M4:48:01
21759 Aronsson, S, 57M 4:48:01
21760 Curtis, M, 39M 4:48:02
21761 Federico, S, 41F 4:48:02
21762 Pagan, M, 33F 4:48:02
21763 Garcia Manchon, D, 44M 4:48:03
21764 Garcia Manchon, F, 38M 4:48:03
21765 Grossmann, F, 59M 4:48:04
21766 Adelung, I, 50F 4:48:04
21767 Abbiss, J, 24M 4:48:04
21768 Grass, B, 23M 4:48:04
21769 Hamer, A, 27F 4:48:04
21770 Lyons, T, 40M 4:48:04
21771 Sornette, F, 35M 4:48:04
21772 Gutierrez, J, 51M 4:48:04
21773 Quinn, R, 39M 4:48:04
21774 Colon, J, 54M 4:48:04
21775 Alarcon, R, 57M 4:48:05
21776 Schmidt, A, 41M 4:48:06
21777 Tychsen, D, 25M 4:48:06
21778 Donohue, J, 47M 4:48:06
21779 Valcin, S, 39M 4:48:07
21780 Van Der Hoeven, A, 36M 4:48:07
21781 Ives, J, 28F 4:48:07
21782 Litner, L, 32F 4:48:08
21783 Ives, B, 28M 4:48:08
21784 Bouwmeester, L, 46M 4:48:09
21785 Yoder, M, 49M 4:48:09
21786 Barsky, M, 32M 4:48:09
21787 Mano, K, 53M 4:48:09
21788 Taylor, P, 41M 4:48:10
21789 Journois, A, 41M 4:48:10
21790 Scoville, K, 34F 4:48:10
21791 Blanc, A, 39M 4:48:11
21792 Scoville, R, 36M 4:48:11
21793 Muller, W, 61M 4:48:11
21794 Grassmann, K, 30F 4:48:11
21795 Van Amerongen, A, 49F 4:48:12
21796 Van Amerongen, H, 51M 4:48:12
21797 Ryan, K, 29F 4:48:13
21798 Jones, J, 34F 4:48:13
21799 Hiriart, P, 41F 4:48:13
21800 Flanaghan, P, 47F 4:48:13
21801 Bockholdt, M, 46F 4:48:13
21802 Smith, B, 51M 4:48:13
21803 Riordan, W, 42M 4:48:14
21804 Alpert, B, 42M 4:48:14
21805 Cavan, J, 58M 4:48:15
21806 Grannan, P, 51M 4:48:16
21807 Galan, C, 30M 4:48:16
21808 Kuhler, W, 51M 4:48:16
21809 Casey, J, 46F 4:48:16
21810 Garner, F, 68M 4:48:17
21811 Knox, R, 33M 4:48:17
21812 Garramone, J, 44M 4:48:17
21813 Katz, R, 48F 4:48:17
21814 Darling, F, 55M 4:48:19
21815 Jaeckle, C, 53M 4:48:19
21816 Texidor*, N, 51F 4:48:20
21817 Morrison, R, 23M 4:48:20
21818 Andreasen, P, 49F 4:48:20
21819 Bech, S, 77M 4:48:20
21820 Ansbro, K, 33F 4:48:21
21821 Bonnevier, J, 35M 4:48:21
21822 Imperio, A, 55M 4:48:21
21823 Vigy, O, 33M 4:48:22
21824 McDermott, B, 30M 4:48:22
21825 Gardella, J, 30F 4:48:22
21826 Van Belle, B, 47F 4:48:23
21827 McMullen, K, 36M 4:48:23
21828 Van Belle, J, 47M 4:48:23
21829 Grossman, G, 27M 4:48:23
21830 Egertson, J, 42M 4:48:23
21831 Moel Aron, A, 33M 4:48:24
21832 Bobry Shuartzman, D, 28F 4:48:24
21833 Messori, L, 45M 4:48:24
21834 Jannetta, S, 28M 4:48:24
21835 Hedbaut, F, 29M 4:48:25
21836 Hedbaut, G, 52M 4:48:25
21837 Brathwaite, R, 50M 4:48:26
21838 Burley, C, 33M 4:48:26
21839 Davidson, T, 44M 4:48:26
21840 Maxwell, B, 35F 4:48:26
21841 Morgan, D, 44M 4:48:26
21842 Bruce, E, 22F 4:48:27
21843 Wood, N, 53M 4:48:27
21844 Musser, J, 59M4:48:28
21845 Montgomery, J, 41M 4:48:28
21846 Hastings, E, 29M 4:48:28
21847 Ruault, O, 29M 4:48:28
21848 O'Brien, R, 42M 4:48:29
21849 Vogel, H, 45F 4:48:29
21850 Marshall, H, 26F 4:48:29
21851 Berney, J, 37M 4:48:29
21852 Mannel, E, 56M 4:48:29
21853 Bartlett, K, 23F 4:48:29
21854 Pina, M, 43F 4:48:30
21855 Koziol, P, 41F 4:48:30
21856 Campbell, M, 40M 4:48:30
21857 Greenberg, S, 44M 4:48:30
21858 Straussner, J, 37M 4:48:31
21859 Mandel, L, 54M 4:48:31
21860 Galea, S, 28F 4:48:31
21861 Lorenzo, J, 41M 4:48:31
21862 Laken, A, 37M 4:48:31
21863 Brown, T, 30F 4:48:31
21864 Girello Jr, A, 42M 4:48:31
21865 Fourcoux, M, 48M 4:48:31
21866 Fjestad, L, 41M 4:48:32
21867 Bencivenga, A, 50M 4:48:32
21868 Schmitz, H, 47F 4:48:32
21869 Goode, M, 28F 4:48:32
21870 Van Der Houwen, A, 67M 4:48:32
21871 Sorrells, K, 38F 4:48:32
21872 Gramley, W, 29M 4:48:32
21873 Rizzuto, S, 30M 4:48:32
21874 O'Reilly, T, 31F4:48:33
21875 Hammond, C, 49F 4:48:33
21876 Lightfoot, P, 24M 4:48:33
21877 Lemon, A, 42F 4:48:33
21878 Akutsu, S, 38M 4:48:33
21879 Renshaw, K, 45M 4:48:34
21880 Simpson, L, 52F 4:48:34
21881 Roy, C, 27F 4:48:34
21882 Embry, L, 25F 4:48:34
21883 Goldfarb, R, 57M 4:48:34
21884 Krauller, A, 59M 4:48:35
21885 Molenaar, K, 54M 4:48:35
21886 Pourcher, J, 49M 4:48:35
21887 Heijkamp Van Wanrooij, A, 37F 4:48:35
21888 Hessler, K, 25F 4:48:36
21889 Turner, C, 33M 4:48:36
21890 Solares, M, 42M 4:48:36
21891 Tahuilan, R, 51M4:48:36
21892 Williams, C, 51M 4:48:36
21893 Sanchez Dominguez, M, 45M 4:48:36
21894 Leboeuf, P, 35M 4:48:37
21895 Meyer, L, 47M 4:48:37
21896 Floyd, B, 38M 4:48:40
21897 Hinojosa Perales, M, 49M 4:48:40
21898 Bridges, A, 46M 4:48:41
21899 Brumbelow, G, 46M 4:48:41
21900 Chase, B, 41F 4:48:41
21901 Kalin, D, 42M 4:48:42
21902 Dollinger, B, 32F 4:48:42
21903 Gray, D, 36F 4:48:43
21904 Wedebrunn, P, 42M 4:48:43
21905 Hryniw, T, 47M 4:48:43
21906 Pantaleone, S, 32M 4:48:44
21907 Arakawa, K, 25M 4:48:44
21908 Martinez Negrete C, D, 38M 4:48:44
21909 O'Brien, K, 24F 4:48:45
21910 Cohen, S, 31M 4:48:45
21911 Gavlick, M, 24F 4:48:45
21912 Gray, J, 49M4:48:46
21913 Gallagher, A, 26F 4:48:47
21914 Rouse, T, 34F 4:48:47
21915 Sutten, D, 41M 4:48:48
21916 Jimenez, E, 39M 4:48:48
21917 Twenhoefel, H, 48M 4:48:48
21918 MacNair, T, 34M 4:48:48
21919 Trainor, S, 36M 4:48:49
21920 Hosana, S, 41M 4:48:49
21921 Zwoch, S, 56M 4:48:49
21922 Guzzio, D, 24M 4:48:50
21923 Haralson, D, 42M 4:48:50
21924 Olson, C, 39F 4:48:50
21925 Ohlenroth, H, 46M4:48:50
21926 Leonard Jr., P, 40M 4:48:50
21927 Konen, R, 38F 4:48:50
21928 Conrad, C, 33F 4:48:50
21929 Grace, J, 30F 4:48:50
21930 Mardfeldt, R, 49F 4:48:51
21931 Ishioka, M, 47F 4:48:51
21932 Cavanaugh, K, 29M 4:48:51
21933 Zeeman, R, 46M 4:48:51
21934 Wissel, S, 28M 4:48:51
21935 Moore, J, 50M 4:48:51
21936 Marshall, J, 34M 4:48:51
21937 Goetze, J, 30M 4:48:51
21938 Chachoua, A, 38M 4:48:51
21939 Mahler, E, 55M 4:48:51
21940 Monticelli, M, 32F 4:48:51
21941 Haskins, D, 49F 4:48:51
21942 Krause, J, 36M 4:48:51
21943 Collinson, S, 51M 4:48:51
21944 Grosse-Coosmann, A, 65M 4:48:51
21945 Marotta, M, 32M 4:48:51
21946 Bill, J, 37M 4:48:51
21947 McLoughlin, B, 41M 4:48:51
21948 Moore, J, 37M 4:48:51
21949Howard, S, 45F 4:48:54
21950 Lyons, T, 44M 4:48:54
21951 Martens, R, 38M 4:48:54
21952 Magyar, I, 36F 4:48:55
21953 Cuttle, M, 41M4:48:55
21954 Bello, J, 35M 4:48:56
21955 Greenberg, R, 47M 4:48:56
21956 Miller, C, 57M 4:48:56
21957 Ruiz, J, 36M 4:48:57
21958 Murillo Valle, L, 25F 4:48:57
21959 Goohue, S, 40M 4:48:58
21960 Lacorte, M, 29F 4:48:58
21961 Kearns, L, 31F 4:48:59
21962 Randell, C, 36M 4:48:59
21963 Bokelmann, K, 44M 4:48:59
21964 Santa Marina, R, 39M 4:49:00
21965 Deutsch, D, 34M 4:49:00
21966 Martin, S, 48F 4:49:00
21967 Martin, D, 50F 4:49:00
21968 Burns, T, 26M 4:49:00
21969 Watkins, R, 48M 4:49:01
21970 Poirier, F, 43F 4:49:01
21971 Tamburro, T, 37F 4:49:01
21972 Martin, A, 51M 4:49:01
21973 Cappiccille, M, 46M 4:49:01
21974 Tafelski, C, 51F 4:49:01
21975 Haas, E, 29F 4:49:01
21976 Monroe, L, 34F 4:49:01
21977 Miller, E, 30M 4:49:02
21978 Raab, A, 21M 4:49:02
21979 Tocha, S, 53F4:49:02
21980 Chin, P, 27F 4:49:02
21981 Zim, A, 32F 4:49:02
21982 Lupkie, T, 42M 4:49:03
21983 Ashbery, T, 43M 4:49:03
21984Magallon, B, 41F 4:49:03
21985 Taieb, F, 31F 4:49:03
21986 Binstock, A, 38F 4:49:04
21987 Batchelor, K, 44M 4:49:04
21988 Thonfeld, A, 49F 4:49:04
21989 Spear, L, 43F 4:49:05
21990 Ryan, T, 34M 4:49:05
21991 Haber, P, 33F 4:49:05
21992 Clausen, R, 46M 4:49:05
21993 Werner, M, 29F 4:49:06
21994 Sharpe, T, 31M 4:49:06
21995 Burke, M, 24F 4:49:06
21996 Sato, S, 42F 4:49:08
21997 Greenberg, A, 53M 4:49:08
21998 Sonenschein, P, 48M 4:49:08
21999 Breuer, P, 39M 4:49:08
22000 Fealy, J, 38M 4:49:08
22001 Herber, H, 47M 4:49:08
22002 Vautrain, B, 61M 4:49:08
22003 Patist, A, 42F 4:49:08
22004 Dellacato, J, 50M 4:49:09
22005 Dura, J, 28M 4:49:09
22006 Haines, J, 38M 4:49:09
22007 Fitzgerald, M, 28F 4:49:09
22008Hoth, D, 50M 4:49:09
22009 Driscoll, M, 29F 4:49:09
22010 Sakellariadis, S, 39M 4:49:09
22011 Nordin, S, 40F 4:49:09
22012 Gremmee, H, 37M 4:49:10
22013 McCann, K, 31F 4:49:12
22014 Smith, M, 49M 4:49:12
22015 Nikolaou, L, 29F 4:49:13
22016 Kalfus, H, 25M 4:49:13
22017 Andersson, S, 44M 4:49:14
22018 Santiago, C, 29F 4:49:14
22019 Adler, E, 30M 4:49:14
22020 Carrera, A, 32M 4:49:15
22021 Hecht, E, 46F 4:49:15
22022 McKinney, T, 28M 4:49:15
22023 Anduran, L, 50F 4:49:15
22024 Van Duin, A, 46M 4:49:16
22025 Hussey, F, 33M 4:49:18
22026 Michallet, M, 49M 4:49:18
22027 Espy, G, 59M 4:49:18
22028 Archambeau, L, 45M 4:49:18
22029 Harkin, D, 28M 4:49:19
22030 Matesich, J, 56M 4:49:19
22031 Guarin, M, 58M 4:49:19
22032 Angulo, G, 64M 4:49:19
22033 Nicolas, M, 54M 4:49:20
22034 Daloia, K, 28F 4:49:20
22035 Daniel, D, 42F 4:49:20
22036 Mahlan, W, 34M 4:49:21
22037 Saferstein, J, 29M 4:49:22
22038 Shapiro, S, 39F 4:49:22
22039 Shum, S, 48M 4:49:22
22040 Quinones, J, 47M 4:49:22
22041 Fehlmann, J, 32M 4:49:22
22042 Hodel, M, 40M 4:49:22
22043 O'Connor, D, 37M 4:49:22
22044 Wildman, D, 29M 4:49:22
22045 Chang, G, 26F 4:49:23
22046 Kimbrough Jr, J, 34M 4:49:23
22047 Sexton, T, 33M 4:49:23
22048 Nickelberry*, A, 41M 4:49:23
22049 Daily, T, 31M 4:49:24
22050 Stanton, K, 39F 4:49:24
22051 Cammaroto, C, 38M 4:49:24
22052 Vos, A, 50M 4:49:24
22053 Corporaal, G, 33M 4:49:24
22054 Brooker, J, 28F 4:49:24
22055 Southern, J, 33M4:49:25
22056 Banke, S, 39F 4:49:25
22057 Studier, G, 56M 4:49:26
22058 Power, E, 39M 4:49:26
22059 Goldman, N, 55M 4:49:26
22060 Clinton, A, 23M 4:49:27
22061 Duffours, G, 44F 4:49:27
22062 Ibarra, L, 44F 4:49:28
22063 Groeneveld, H, 50M 4:49:28
22064 Edstrom, P, 47F 4:49:28
22065 Bergstrom, E, 44F 4:49:28
22066 Rodriguez, R, 52M 4:49:29
22067 Segura Gonzalez, J, 40M 4:49:29
22068 Barragan Gtz Zamora, M, 52M 4:49:29
22069 Ryan III, T, 46M 4:49:29
22070 Deluca, J, 30F 4:49:29
22071 Perrotta, L, 30F 4:49:29
22072 Tighe, M, 36F 4:49:30
22073 Meredith, J, 45M 4:49:30
22074 Tornes, E, 61M 4:49:30
22075 Jones, T, 29F 4:49:30
22076 Gandia, R, 47M 4:49:30
22077 Dorflaufer, K, 47M 4:49:31
22078 Wong, D, 46M 4:49:31
22079 Gee-Shepherd, J, 43F 4:49:31
22080 Spradley, F, 40M 4:49:31
22081 Cammarata, J, 51M 4:49:31
22082 Torres Quiroga, A, 54M 4:49:31
22083 Casale, D, 38F 4:49:32
22084 Cecillon, G, 51M 4:49:32
22085 Wyland, H, 53M 4:49:32
22086 Taira, D, 29F 4:49:33
22087 Wyland, P, 20M 4:49:33
22088 Abel, A, 24F 4:49:33
22089 Leonardi, M, 27F 4:49:34
22090 Rothenbacher, C, 36F 4:49:34
22091 Meisenberg, A, 27F 4:49:34
22092 Jenkins, M, 54M 4:49:34
22093 Payne, T, 37M4:49:34
22094 Dietrick, C, 35M 4:49:36
22095 Sweet Jr, L, 46M 4:49:36
22096 Cannavo, L, 48M 4:49:36
22097 Hubler, T, 35M 4:49:36
22098 Arango, M, 36F 4:49:37
22099 Vang, I, 38M 4:49:38
22100 Campanile, T, 32F 4:49:38
22101 Huie, A, 44M 4:49:38
22102 Nilsen, J, 26M 4:49:38
22103 Taft, L, 37F 4:49:39
22104 George, R, 48M 4:49:39
22105 Rochard, R, 44M 4:49:39
22106 Sakai, H, 37M 4:49:39
22107 Byrum, A, 27F 4:49:40
22108 Schlayer, O, 65M 4:49:40
22109 Faherty, S, 35M 4:49:40
22110 Sutton, R, 47M 4:49:41
22111 Reillet, M, 46M 4:49:41
22112 Saito, T, 36M 4:49:41
22113 Stewart, B, 49M 4:49:41
22114 Del Barrio, E, 34M 4:49:42
22115 Abrutyn, E, 24F 4:49:42
22116 Cozijn, G, 55M 4:49:42
22117 Herman, B, 60F 4:49:42
22118 Zuker, R, 36M 4:49:42
22119 Pauel, P, 42M 4:49:43
22120 Cregger, H, 29F 4:49:44
22121 Gordon, E, 33M 4:49:44
22122 Magnin-Robin, M, 54M 4:49:45
22123 Tan, I, 33F 4:49:45
22124 Pedersen, W, 51M 4:49:46
22125 Nawrocki, T, 29M 4:49:46
22126 Ryan, T, 36M 4:49:46
22127 Bergsland, H, 32F 4:49:47
22128 Propp, W, 47M 4:49:48
22129 Niermann, E, 46M 4:49:48
22130 Daniels, J, 34M 4:49:48
22131 Kraemer, C, 29M 4:49:49
22132 Ferraro, P, 40M 4:49:49
22133 Roberts, K, 45M 4:49:49
22134 Cohen, D, 47M 4:49:50
22135 Nebashi, M, 22F 4:49:50
22136 Bozzella, J, 56M 4:49:50
22137 Dekker, M, 27F 4:49:50
22138 Porter, S, 39M 4:49:51
22139 Sneider, N, 25F 4:49:51
22140 Rodriguez, A, 30M 4:49:52
22141 Gutierrez, A, 47M 4:49:52
22142 Byrd, T, 50M 4:49:52
22143 Stapley, W, 26F 4:49:53
22144 Schloth, N, 32F 4:49:53
22145 Hassan, S, 31M 4:49:53
22146 Gastel, C, 30M 4:49:53
22147 Scheinert, R, 31M 4:49:53
22148 Granado, C, 45M 4:49:53
22149 Roush, E, 35F 4:49:54
22150 Arrvfat, P, 40F 4:49:54
22151 Wcislo, L, 38M 4:49:54
22152 Bonnevier, J, 40F 4:49:55
22153 McCaffrey, P, 31F 4:49:55
22154 Costello, S, 48F 4:49:56
22155 Holsten, W, 42M 4:49:56
22156 Smallman, P, 42M 4:49:56
22157 Kirwan, P, 24F 4:49:57
22158 Ota, S, 37M 4:49:57
22159 Teboul, F, 53M 4:49:57
22160 Manca, J, 43M 4:49:58
22161 Simmons, S, 28F 4:49:58
22162 Lastennet, J, 23M 4:49:58
22163 Bachmann, A, 54M 4:49:59
22164 Winters, D, 42F 4:49:59
22165 Weatherred, M, 32F 4:50:00
22166 Kloeppel, D, 34M 4:50:00
22167 Ditsch, J, 21M 4:50:01
22168 Voelker, E, 52M 4:50:01
22169 Ciccone, L, 24F 4:50:01
22170 Guerrieri, V, 52M 4:50:01
22171 Rhodes, K, 39F 4:50:01
22172 Cohen, G, 38M 4:50:01
22173 Hoogstraten, A, 36F 4:50:02
22174 Bodtker, B, 52M 4:50:02
22175 Potter, M, 49F 4:50:03
22176 Romero Gil, J, 43M 4:50:03
22177 McCarey, E, 40M 4:50:04
22178 Jaeger, H, 43M 4:50:04
22179 Kapczuk, P, 37M 4:50:04
22180 Johnson, B, 48M 4:50:05
22181 Nelson, L, 33F 4:50:05
22182 Mihara, K, 46F 4:50:05
22183 Johansson, R, 60M 4:50:06
22184 Shiu, P, 44M 4:50:07
22185 Lee, S, 34F 4:50:07
22186 Treadwell, M, 39M 4:50:08
22187 Capella Arto, E, 44M 4:50:08
22188 Vilaseca Padros, P, 28F 4:50:08
22189 Lopez Camero, J, 33M 4:50:08
22190 Fernandez Rico, A, 45F 4:50:09
22191 Meyer, C, 25F 4:50:10
22192 Cedard, L, 28M 4:50:10
22193 Kirner, E, 54M 4:50:11
22194 Banani, A, 41M 4:50:11
22195 Wormser, R, 71M 4:50:11
22196 Moncini, P, 32M 4:50:11
22197 Conway, V, 52M 4:50:12
22198 Krajewski, B, 36F 4:50:12
22199 Hogue, J, 55M 4:50:13
22200 Horst, H, 30F 4:50:13
22201 Dubois, S, 49F 4:50:13
22202 Tracey, R, 43M 4:50:14
22203 Munn, A, 32F 4:50:14
22204 Costeseque, A, 39M 4:50:14
22205 Dunkerton, T, 49M 4:50:15
22206 Cano, J, 21M 4:50:16
22207 Hyland, J, 27M 4:50:16
22208 Haller, B, 44M 4:50:17
22209 Ring, J, 54M 4:50:17
22210 Gordon, C, 31F 4:50:17
22211 Knight, B, 25F 4:50:18
22212 Valat, B, 38F 4:50:18
22213 Bernstein, C, 47F 4:50:18
22214 Efron, R, 44M 4:50:18
22215 Lammers, R, 36M 4:50:18
22216 Fry, B, 49M 4:50:19
22217 Schumacher-Tittgen, M, 42F 4:50:19
22218 Ahvenainen, V, 65M 4:50:19
22219Gjertsen, E, 36M 4:50:20
22220 Whitler, D, 37F 4:50:20
22221 Marini, J, 43M 4:50:20
22222 O'Neill, H, 50M 4:50:21
22223 Smith, L, 36F 4:50:21
22224 Cachinois, L, 40M 4:50:21
22225 Mayhood, D, 49M 4:50:22
22226 Williams, R, 38M 4:50:22
22227 Schneider, H, 66M 4:50:22
22228 Pierce, M, 49F 4:50:23
22229 Guyer, D, 32M 4:50:23
22230 McClung, W, 40F 4:50:24
22231 Graif, E, 28F 4:50:24
22232 Yussman, S, 49M 4:50:24
22233 Bagheri, J, 29M 4:50:25
22234 Heaney, K, 45M 4:50:25
22235 Smith, K, 52M 4:50:25
22236 Moura, M, 35F 4:50:25
22237 Tilton, G, 29F 4:50:26
22238 Albers, L, 28F 4:50:26
22239 Murray, J, 35M 4:50:26
22240 Hildebrandt, B, 47F 4:50:26
22241 Gianella, S, 46M 4:50:27
22242 Durfee, S, 30M 4:50:27
22243 Evens, A, 39M 4:50:28
22244 Durfee, H, 54M 4:50:28
22245 Diaz, L, 42M 4:50:28
22246 Garvey, F, 50M 4:50:28
22247 Scammell, T, 24F 4:50:28
22248 Nelson, B, 31M 4:50:28
22249 Testu, L, 47F 4:50:29
22250 Sills, M, 23M 4:50:29
22251 Durniak, C, 45M 4:50:29
22252 Bellobuono, M, 37F 4:50:29
22253 Calega, R, 28M 4:50:30
22254Bencivenga, P, 20M 4:50:31
22255 D'Agostin, J, 53M 4:50:31
22256 Bouju, J, 50M 4:50:31
22257 Woolsey, Y, 26F 4:50:31
22258 Bauer, M, 55M 4:50:32
22259 Somers, C, 31F 4:50:32
22260 Walz, H, 28M 4:50:33
22261 Pascoe, M, 54F 4:50:34
22262 Chatain, D, 42F 4:50:34
22263 Luz, R, 45M 4:50:34
22264 Schmahl, J, 38F 4:50:35
22265 Smith, D, 34M 4:50:36
22266 Heinstman, J, 35F 4:50:36
22267 Seitz, H, 52F 4:50:36
22268 Zazueta Olea, J, 53M 4:50:37
22269 Gazzola, J, 31M 4:50:37
22270 Mandatto, J, 25F 4:50:37
22271 Rittiger, K, 39M 4:50:38
22272 McCusker, P, 54M 4:50:38
22273 Gregorio, P, 44M 4:50:40
22274 Burdock, S, 33M 4:50:40
22275 Rice, T, 36M 4:50:40
22276 Collins, K, 30F 4:50:40
22277 Richardson, C, 41M 4:50:41
22278 Miller, R, 52M 4:50:41
22279 Rusiecki Jr, R, 41M 4:50:42
22280 Robinson, J, 48M 4:50:42
22281 Budd, J, 45M 4:50:42
22282 Roth, W, 46M 4:50:42
22283 Logan, A, 31M 4:50:43
22284 Wirman, D, 45M 4:50:44
22285 Abadia Jr, B, 39M 4:50:46
22286 Kripacz, A, 44F 4:50:46
22287 Noble, S, 50F 4:50:46
22288 Baldi, L, 41F 4:50:48
22289 Yorio-Nieves, N, 38F 4:50:48
22290 Besson, C, 48F 4:50:49
22291 Cubaynes, G, 46M 4:50:50
22292 Kinoshita, F, 48M 4:50:50
22293 Politowicz, R, 32F 4:50:51
22294 Gourdet, B, 29F 4:50:52
22295 Moen, J, 40F 4:50:52
22296 Sodi Saldana, C, 38M 4:50:52
22297 Garcia Gomez, M, 52M 4:50:52
22298 Marek, C, 54M 4:50:53
22299 Munoz Padilla, J, 44M 4:50:53
22300 Pavlik, J, 42M 4:50:53
22301 Jordan, C, 29F 4:50:54
22302 Terres Speziale, A, 41M 4:50:54
22303 Williams, G, 31F 4:50:54
22304 Beyer, J, 51M 4:50:55
22305 Mikkola, K, 43F 4:50:56
22306 Collins, H, 61M 4:50:56
22307 Hernandez, W, 42M 4:50:56
22308 Van Mazijk, J, 40M 4:50:57
22309 Venteau, J, 49M 4:50:57
22310 Vos, A, 43M 4:50:57
22311 Waals, C, 44M 4:50:57
22312 Hagen, C, 32M 4:50:57
22313 McCreary, L, 21F 4:50:57
22314 Zavala Juarez, A, 43F 4:50:58
22315 Hage, W, 46M 4:50:58
22316 Aknin, P, 46M 4:50:58
22317 Theate, R, 50M 4:50:59
22318 Debesson, B, 35M 4:51:00
22319 Optican, T, 33M 4:51:00
22320 Palmeri, B, 47F 4:51:00
22321 Paradi, J, 43F 4:51:00
22322 Berglund, N, 33F 4:51:01
22323 Bryant, M, 33F 4:51:01
22324 Bartram, J, 35M 4:51:01
22325 Suttles, E, 49M 4:51:02
22326 De Boer, E, 32F 4:51:02
22327 Hommers, K, 29F 4:51:02
22328 Lillimagi, M, 49M 4:51:03
22329 Jessor, R, 69M 4:51:03
22330 Rosenberg, G, 41M 4:51:03
22331 Shelton, K, 47M 4:51:04
22332 Adrian, I, 22F 4:51:04
22333 Rawlings, C, 36M 4:51:04
22334 Fingerroos, T, 48M 4:51:04
22335 Ley, C, 37M 4:51:04
22336 Pagani, V, 37M 4:51:04
22337 Delevaux, P, 44M 4:51:05
22338 Scorza, J, 42M 4:51:05
22339 Kiernan, B, 39M 4:51:05
22340 Degnan, M, 30F 4:51:06
22341 West, N, 39M 4:51:07
22342 Hernandez, M, 33M 4:51:08
22343 Rejaudry-Hoarau, A, 43F 4:51:08
22344 Tinna, A, 44M 4:51:08
22345 Collings, S, 24M 4:51:08
22346 Nelson, R, 41M 4:51:09
22347 Cowdrill, G, 38M 4:51:09
22348 Killeen, P, 44F 4:51:10
22349 Fruehling, S, 47F 4:51:10
22350 Stadtler, M, 56F 4:51:10
22351 Smith, S, 47M 4:51:10
22352 Browne, C, 44M 4:51:11
22353 Pierrat, P, 28M 4:51:11
22354 Deu, J, 42M 4:51:11
22355 Salij, P, 29F 4:51:11
22356 Van Rooij, E, 42F 4:51:11
22357 Citto, L, 29M 4:51:12
22358 Hayashi, S, 45F 4:51:12
22359 Schuwerk, H, 28M 4:51:12
22360 Suzuki, M, 32M 4:51:12
22361 Elkins, P, 53M 4:51:12
22362 Currie, J, 30F 4:51:13
22363 Kappele, R, 30M 4:51:13
22364 Schweizerhof, F, 45M 4:51:13
22365 Henning, F, 44M 4:51:13
22366 Willcox, J, 23M 4:51:13
22367 Blanchet, C, 59M 4:51:13
22368 Stabler, R, 45M 4:51:13
22369 Biel, S, 41M 4:51:14
22370 Serocki, R, 47M 4:51:15
22371 Pizzola, A, 21M 4:51:15
22372 Wechsler Benerofe, B, 46F 4:51:16
22373 Urey, P, 53M 4:51:17
22374 Matusewicz, J, 58M 4:51:17
22375 Puro, L, 37F 4:51:17
22376 Ling, L, 36M 4:51:17
22377 Dominguez Cortes, R, 45F 4:51:19
22378 Ferro, R, 38M 4:51:19
22379 Bartholomew, T, 29M 4:51:19
22380 Abdella, P, 51M 4:51:20
22381 Bartholomew, R, 27F 4:51:20
22382 Merlot, F, 44M 4:51:21
22383 Romano, S, 37F 4:51:21
22384 Homont, S, 55M 4:51:22
22385Galko, J, 47M 4:51:22
22386 Bonafos, E, 39M 4:51:22
22387 Vanden Houten, N, 39F 4:51:22
22388 Fabre, S, 43F 4:51:22
22389 Castano, C, 25M 4:51:22
22390 Rearick, J, 36M 4:51:23
22391 Hunt, D, 38M 4:51:24
22392 Taylor, T, 36M 4:51:24
22393 Nissan, R, 38F 4:51:24
22394 Bonafos, E, 38F 4:51:25
22395 Labenski, C, 43F 4:51:28
22396 Rabinowitz, P, 33F 4:51:29
22397 Beristain Martinez, S, 36F 4:51:29
22398 Caruso, J, 38M 4:51:29
22399 Dehnel, A, 53F 4:51:29
22400 O'Neil, P, 49M 4:51:29
22401 Floberg, K, 48M 4:51:29
22402 Falkner, R, 56F 4:51:29
22403 Carrillo, C, 40F 4:51:30
22404 Bluestone, J, 60F 4:51:30
22405 Hayes, J, 46M 4:51:30
22406 Butler, P, 40M 4:51:30
22407 Schefen, E, 42M 4:51:30
22408 Stein, W, 61M 4:51:30
22409 Rogers, N, 47F 4:51:31
22410 Steffes, K, 59M 4:51:31
22411 Stensland, J, 67M 4:51:31
22412 Wrench, W, 50M 4:51:32
22413 Mahoney, M, 42M 4:51:33
22414 Edmonds, S, 44F 4:51:33
22415 Nidzwetzki, A, 26F 4:51:33
22416 Fiol Salinas, E, 56M 4:51:33
22417 Stulberg, D, 51M 4:51:33
22418 White, N, 44F 4:51:34
22419 Sueskun, J, 33M 4:51:34
22420 Diemer, F, 30M 4:51:34
22421 Schrank, H, 47M 4:51:34
22422 D'Silva, R, 49M 4:51:34
22423 Mathwig, K, 31F 4:51:35
22424 Herrera, C, 52F 4:51:35
22425 Guedes, C, 35F 4:51:35
22426 Lemelman, B, 38M 4:51:35
22427 Coronado, J, 42M 4:51:36
22428 Moore, M, 59M 4:51:36
22429 Taiar, C, 43F 4:51:36
22430 Davis, R, 33M 4:51:36
22431 Isler, C, 57M 4:51:37
22432 Roberts, G, 50M 4:51:37
22433 Courtney, G, 34M 4:51:37
22434 Glaser, P, 50M 4:51:37
22435 Panarello, J, 29M 4:51:37
22436 Van Vliet, F, 39M 4:51:38
22437 Turner, J, 30F 4:51:38
22438 Guinzburg, A, 28F 4:51:38
22439 Klein, M, 27F 4:51:38
22440 Martinez, E, 53M 4:51:38
22441 Rosina, S, 44M 4:51:39
22442 Casey, T, 62M 4:51:39
22443 Sullivan, D, 53M 4:51:40
22444 Medina, R, 48M 4:51:40
22445 Lenkowsky, S, 43M 4:51:40
22446 Cochrane, J, 43M 4:51:41
22447 Nishiyama, N, 30F 4:51:41
22448 RUNNER NO. X7654, 35M 4:51:41
22449 Stodter, B, 32F 4:51:42
22450 Diaz, R, 43M 4:51:43
22451 Campbell, B, 36F 4:51:44
22452 Bellocq, G, 49M 4:51:44
22453 Meinders, E, 33M 4:51:45
22454 Gooden, P, 36M 4:51:46
22455 Koscinski, J, 48M 4:51:46
22456 Conway, M, 29M 4:51:46
22457 Carvallo, E, 61M 4:51:47
22458 Begue, A, 47M 4:51:47
22459 Lieuwma, R, 44M 4:51:47
22460 Liebrich, H, 44M 4:51:48
22461 Torrone, S, 40F 4:51:48
22462 Theiss, E, 51M 4:51:48
22463 Rife, G, 34M 4:51:49
22464 Van Der Hoek, N, 41M 4:51:49
22465 Schuldt, N, 41F 4:51:49
22466 Guenthner, G, 38M 4:51:49
22467 Blake-Haskins, J, 48M 4:51:49
22468 Vincent, M, 36F 4:51:50
22469 Walker, G, 36M 4:51:50
22470 Van Riel, J, 52M 4:51:50
22471 Abel, H, 53M 4:51:50
22472 Morel, M, 40F 4:51:51
22473 Smolin, S, 56M 4:51:51
22474 Uemura, H, 45F 4:51:52
22475 Pedro, D, 23F 4:51:52
22476 Eriks, E, 34M 4:51:52
22477 Tufodandria, V, 71M4:51:53
22478 Jakobsson, Y, 39F 4:51:53
22479 Lee, E, 38F 4:51:53
22480 Wittlin, J, 54M 4:51:53
22481 Solis, J, 40M 4:51:53
22482 Gluck, M, 38M 4:51:54
22483 Hyon, R, 56M 4:51:54
22484 Gluck, L, 33F 4:51:54
22485 Hollander, D, 38F 4:51:54
22486 Stancik, L, 32F 4:51:55
22487 Thomson, I, 34M 4:51:55
22488 Tucker Jr, H, 45M4:51:55
22489 Tinchant, D, 50M 4:51:55
22490 Sellers, C, 37M 4:51:55
22491 McWilliam, M, 51F 4:51:55
22492 Bloom, E, 38M 4:51:55
22493 Christman*, D, 40F 4:51:55
22494 Oliveira, M, 61M 4:51:56
22495 Klauder, G, 57M 4:51:56
22496 Dubman, S, 46M 4:51:56
22497Jimenez Mujica, L, 59M 4:51:56
22498 Segovia Rodriguez, J, 23M 4:51:57
22499 Blick, P, 38F 4:51:58
22500 Den Drijver, M, 22F 4:51:58
22501 Simonnot, J, 47M 4:51:58
22502 Masticola, J, 58M 4:51:59
22503 Kolbert, S, 57M 4:52:00
22504 Kurisky, J, 56M 4:52:00
22505 De Dominguez, B, 40F 4:52:00
22506 Toney, C, 25F 4:52:00
22507 Werkstell, H, 49M 4:52:01
22508 Jaffe, B, 46F 4:52:01
22509 Von Der Heydt, K, 50M 4:52:01
22510 Brenton, R, 43M 4:52:01
22511 Fleming, C, 45F 4:52:01
22512 Vloedman, P, 30M 4:52:02
22513 Rockmore, J, 56M 4:52:02
22514 Bell, J, 36F 4:52:02
22515 Baskin, G, 51M 4:52:03
22516 Slovacek, J, 49M 4:52:03
22517 Marguth, J, 55M 4:52:03
22518 Gerber, R, 27M 4:52:04
22519 Tooze, M, 32M 4:52:04
22520 Huseby, K, 50F 4:52:05
22521 Lyman Jr, H, 64M 4:52:05
22522 Coletta, J, 32M 4:52:06
22523 Roche, A, 32F 4:52:07
22524 Desko, P, 41M 4:52:08
22525 Quenault, S, 24M 4:52:08
22526 Colmant, D, 18M 4:52:08
22527 Williamson Sr, C, 56M 4:52:09
22528 Saras Povinelli, A, 32F 4:52:09
22529 Leopold, B, 50M 4:52:10
22530 Smith, C, 37M 4:52:10
22531 Hall, J, 43M 4:52:11
22532 McGuinness, P, 44M 4:52:11
22533 Freedman, M, 52M 4:52:11
22534 Talbot, B, 46M 4:52:12
22535 Magnuson, E, 64M 4:52:12
22536 Sireci, S, 31M 4:52:12
22537 Blondin, M, 34F 4:52:12
22538 Lamb, J, 55M 4:52:13
22539 Dunham, D, 27F 4:52:13
22540 Rosset, R, 59M 4:52:14
22541 Koss, R, 41F 4:52:14
22542 Rabinovitz, A, 32M 4:52:14
22543 Barron, R, 52M 4:52:15
22544 Defer, G, 49M 4:52:15
22545 Gikofsky, I, 49M 4:52:15
22546 Atwood, D, 37F 4:52:15
22547 Tanner, A, 32F 4:52:15
22548 Greenwald, P, 39M 4:52:15
22549 Christian, J, 48M 4:52:15
22550 Perry, D, 41M 4:52:16
22551 Manta, J, 31M 4:52:17
22552 Maistre, L, 42M 4:52:17
22553 Hurley, R, 42M 4:52:17
22554 Hart, C, 49F 4:52:17
22555 Rein, G, 49M 4:52:18
22556 Wilson, H, 47F 4:52:18
22557 Christensen, J, 46M 4:52:18
22558 Hill, E, 40F 4:52:19
22559 Kirwan, J, 40M 4:52:19
22560 Hebig, S, 30M 4:52:19
22561 Vasnier, D, 37M 4:52:20
22562 Fleming, S, 43F 4:52:20
22563 Byrne, M, 38F 4:52:20
22564 Hoffmann, G, 46F 4:52:20
22565 Journet, A, 44F 4:52:20
22566 Doeppner, M, 40M 4:52:20
22567 Chenebaud, C, 41M 4:52:21
22568 Moore, S, 30F 4:52:21
22569 Lemaire, J, 51M 4:52:21
22570 Zalkin, N, 28F 4:52:21
22571 Fabry, J, 31M 4:52:22
22572 Begley, D, 38M 4:52:22
22573 Burton, A, 33F 4:52:22
22574 Long, R, 39M 4:52:22
22575 Estrada Hernandez, V, 23M 4:52:22
22576 Deutschmann, J, 29F 4:52:22
22577 Robinson, J, 42M 4:52:23
22578 Di Pierro, G, 48M4:52:23
22579 Van Overeem, F, 46M 4:52:23
22580 Masone, T, 42M 4:52:23
22581 Edelsbrunner, E, 30F 4:52:24
22582 Redel, J, 46M 4:52:24
22583 Denenberg, D, 28F 4:52:24
22584 Loeffelman, P, 38F 4:52:24
22585 Roesti, R, 41F 4:52:25
22586 Ruch, M, 49F 4:52:25
22587 Kane, M, 34M 4:52:25
22588 Lefebvre, C, 55M 4:52:25
22589 Niemantsverdriet, F, 45M 4:52:26
22590 Campbell, M, 34F 4:52:26
22591 Leahey, R, 49M 4:52:26
22592 Groblewski, R, 33F 4:52:27
22593 Duncan-Powell, R, 38F 4:52:27
22594 Clancy, G, 49M 4:52:28
22595 Naccash, R, 39F 4:52:28
22596 Coleman, T, 52M 4:52:28
22597 Bonfanti-Moretti, D, 40F 4:52:28
22598 Smagorinsky, H, 50F 4:52:28
22599 Bell, T, 32F 4:52:28
22600 Desboeufs, J, 50M 4:52:28
22601 Rossi, R, 29M 4:52:28
22602 Hickey, N, 26M 4:52:28
22603 Hagemann, E, 58F 4:52:28
22604 Sadick, N, 37F 4:52:29
22605 Guardino, M, 42M 4:52:29
22606 Klerk, B, 43M 4:52:30
22607 Bonfigli, M, 32M 4:52:30
22608 Raiser, S, 35M 4:52:30
22609 Royer, L, 33F 4:52:30
22610 Saldinger, B, 32M 4:52:30
22611 Pinches, R, 45M 4:52:30
22612 Ortiz, C, 40F 4:52:31
22613 Miller, J, 36M 4:52:32
22614 Moricet, C, 29M 4:52:32
22615 Giaever, T, 29F 4:52:33
22616 Wyss, H, 59M 4:52:34
22617 Schneider-Dittli, C, 41F 4:52:34
22618 Batrus, F, 45M 4:52:34
22619 Hidalgo Castillo, M, 47M 4:52:34
22620 Hofer, K, 46M 4:52:35
22621 Moshier, M, 27M 4:52:35
22622 Antonellis, D, 32F 4:52:35
22623 Hosler, J, 56M 4:52:36
22624 Mayer, M, 24M 4:52:36
22625 Hubble, M, 61M 4:52:36
22626 Weiner, C, 50F 4:52:37
22627 Reichert, S, 30M 4:52:37
22628 Lane, S, 27F 4:52:38
22629 Knauer, G, 46M 4:52:38
22630 Moed, R, 40M 4:52:38
22631 Delrieu, O, 28M 4:52:38
22632 Buchan, M, 33F 4:52:39
22633 Koprulu, M, 37M 4:52:40
22634 Hoenders, H, 43M 4:52:40
22635 Solash, E, 23M 4:52:40
22636 Clancy, M, 31M 4:52:41
22637 Bernson, P, 41F 4:52:41
22638 Sweeney, T, 37M 4:52:41
22639 Albert, J, 47M 4:52:41
22640 Roman, B, 49M4:52:41
22641 Bruskin, L, 28F 4:52:42
22642 Karopkin, M, 48M 4:52:42
22643 Gaare, K, 30F 4:52:42
22644 Donovan, R, 51M 4:52:43
22645 Butterworth, L, 33F 4:52:43
22646 Fernandez, J, 21M 4:52:43
22647 Rangel, T, 55M 4:52:44
22648 Di Perna, O, 24M 4:52:44
22649 Hodgson, O, 32M 4:52:44
22650 Bates, W, 45M 4:52:45
22651 Zimmerman, J, 36F 4:52:45
22652 Kielty, S, 32F 4:52:46
22653 Voight, P, 31M 4:52:46
22654 Verrier, C, 20M 4:52:46
22655 Kaminski, H, 30F 4:52:48
22656 Laurance, D, 42M 4:52:49
22657 Chinitz, S, 23M 4:52:49
22658 Sebastian, T, 28M 4:52:49
22659 Dehler, J, 63M 4:52:50
22660 Cooke, P, 39F 4:52:50
22661 Wilson, B, 36M 4:52:50
22662Karlsson, W, 66M 4:52:51
22663 Stafford, J, 44M 4:52:51
22664 Gayton, S, 32F 4:52:51
22665 Nakagawa, H, 42M 4:52:52
22666 Hill, R, 53M 4:52:52
22667 Holowka, D, 40M 4:52:52
22668 Morgan, J, 32M 4:52:53
22669 Tahara, M, 35M 4:52:53
22670 Sanker, C, 31F 4:52:53
22671 Coppa, A, 67M 4:52:54
22672 Cardoza, J, 38M 4:52:54
22673 Wisniewski, A, 37M 4:52:54
22674 Gutierrez, F, 44M 4:52:54
22675Larkin, S, 36M 4:52:55
22676 Velazquez Peon, J, 39M 4:52:55
22677Butler, J, 52M 4:52:55
22678 Veith, H, 31M 4:52:55
22679 Fitzsimons, J, 35M 4:52:55
22680 Hashimoto, A, 31M 4:52:55
22681 Gnudtzmann, E, 47M 4:52:56
22682 Gibbons, D, 45M 4:52:56
22683 Kaplowitz, S, 40M 4:52:56
22684 Shields, P, 31M 4:52:57
22685 Weaver, B, 51M 4:52:57
22686 Pitton, M, 33M 4:52:57
22687 Miraux, L, 21M 4:52:58
22688 Spiro, P, 19M 4:52:58
22689 Arras Vota, L, 37F 4:52:58
22690 Lindberg, L, 40M 4:52:58
22691 Garcia, M, 28F 4:52:58
22692Kushner, C, 40M 4:52:58
22693 Alfaro Martinez, S, 50M 4:52:59
22694 Froes, M, 21F 4:52:59
22695 Bishop-Losey, S, 41F 4:53:00
22696 Elizondo Gonzalez, J, 43M 4:53:00
22697 Losey, D, 45M 4:53:00
22698 Yoshida, S, 51F 4:53:01
22699 Sutherland, K, 28F 4:53:01
22700 Patzwahl, B, 56F 4:53:01
22701 Murphy, B, 35M 4:53:01
22702 Zetterlund, L, 47F 4:53:01
22703 Bullard, M, 48F 4:53:02
22704 Meseberg, A, 46F 4:53:02
22705 Kitada, C, 34F 4:53:02
22706 Rye, K, 34M 4:53:02
22707 Bickerton, L, 40F 4:53:03
22708 Yang, J, 29M 4:53:03
22709 Morreale, M, 34M 4:53:03
22710 Perrone, S, 54M 4:53:03
22711 Naseimbene, M, 41M 4:53:03
22712 Benedict, P, 28M 4:53:04
22713 Reed, T, 49M 4:53:04
22714 Martinsson, J, 40M 4:53:04
22715 Chinitz, L, 40M 4:53:05
22716 Chinitz, S, 70M 4:53:05
22717 Honda, A, 59F 4:53:06
22718 Doerksen, G, 58M 4:53:06
22719 McGriff, D, 43M4:53:06
22720 McGuinness, D, 24F 4:53:07
22721 Naples, G, 37F 4:53:07
22722 Pavlic, Y, 51M 4:53:07
22723 Medrano, W, 41M 4:53:07
22724 Rehman, J, 40F 4:53:08
22725 Reilly, E, 37M 4:53:08
22726 Rodriguez Chavez, J, 32M 4:53:09
22727 Batchelder, K, 29F 4:53:09
22728 Skinner, N, 44M 4:53:09
22729 Tynan, T, 44F 4:53:10
22730 Goldberg, M, 43M 4:53:10
22731 Cunningham, E, 38F 4:53:10
22732 Baker, B, 25F 4:53:11
22733 King, R, 36M 4:53:11
22734 Smith, M, 27F 4:53:12
22735 Kimmel, J, 52M 4:53:12
22736 Lee, W, 50M 4:53:13
22737 Osswald, M, 41F 4:53:13
22738 Flaz, I, 39M 4:53:13
22739 Deissler, H, 47F 4:53:13
22740 Pollack, S, 42F 4:53:14
22741 Fleming, S, 28F 4:53:14
22742 Allen, S, 40F 4:53:14
22743 Coghlan, E, 34F 4:53:14
22744 Barrett, D, 50F 4:53:14
22745 Bachmann, W, 35M4:53:14
22746 Afflitto, F, 54M 4:53:15
22747 Gilles, K, 42M 4:53:15
22748 Eidenschenk, A, 26F 4:53:15
22749 Eidenschenk, C, 26F 4:53:15
22750 Glynn, D, 51M 4:53:15
22751 Hartsfield, T, 51M 4:53:16
22752 Novick, K, 28F 4:53:16
22753 Yamane, K, 70M 4:53:16
22754 Bors, P, 33M 4:53:17
22755 Boyd, C, 35F 4:53:18
22756 Reynolds, K, 31F 4:53:18
22757 Livrozet, P, 25F 4:53:18
22758 Boucher, C, 37M 4:53:19
22759 Livrozet, M, 54F 4:53:20
22760 Steffens, B, 24M4:53:20
22761 Curry, R, 39M 4:53:20
22762 Livrozet, R, 51M 4:53:20
22763 Morris, I, 30F 4:53:21
22764 Cole, P, 55M 4:53:21
22765 Redneris, E, 53F 4:53:21
22766 Quinn, D, 60M 4:53:22
22767 Terzoli, A, 30M 4:53:22
22768 King, R, 42M 4:53:22
22769 Robillard, N, 39F 4:53:22
22770 Chisholm, D, 51F 4:53:22
22771 Yang, E, 29F 4:53:23
22772 Carvalho, M, 31F 4:53:23
22773 Carvalho, R, 34M 4:53:23
22774 Steiner, R, 35F 4:53:23
22775 Cirella, V, 39F 4:53:24
22776 Carvalho, R, 36M 4:53:24
22777 Petri, B, 56F 4:53:24
22778 Cerda Gonzalez, C, 33F 4:53:25
22779 Fernandez Perez, L, 34M 4:53:25
22780 Ventura, P, 30M 4:53:25
22781 Schwally, F, 47M 4:53:26
22782 Hervold, A, 42M 4:53:27
22783 Hasan, M, 49M 4:53:27
22784 Bousquet, A, 46F 4:53:27
22785 McGovern, L, 31F 4:53:28
22786 Bousquet, D, 47M 4:53:28
22787 Nordstrand, M, 59M 4:53:29
22788 Flynn, E, 44F 4:53:29
22789 Medellin Olivos, S, 45M 4:53:29
22790 Leisner, S, 50M 4:53:29
22791 Van Essen, J, 32F 4:53:29
22792 Duhamel, P, 32M 4:53:30
22793 Schets, R, 45M 4:53:30
22794 Jensen, K, 31M 4:53:30
22795 Baker, K, 37M 4:53:30
22796 Power, E, 56M 4:53:30
22797 Aldukhan, A, 43M 4:53:31
22798 Selin, M, 48M 4:53:31
22799 Stafford, M, 41M 4:53:31
22800 Van Nes, W, 43M 4:53:31
22801 Christner, E, 30F 4:53:32
22802 Ortega Sanchez, A, 49F 4:53:33
22803 Cline, C, 38F 4:53:34
22804 Hyland, P, 44F 4:53:34
22805 Berlioz, D, 31M 4:53:34
22806 Hirsch, L, 27F 4:53:35
22807 Rubin, M, 31M 4:53:35
22808 Hoffman, M, 45F 4:53:35
22809 Stein, I, 40M 4:53:36
22810 Bouvier, G, 51M 4:53:36
22811 Rosensweig, D, 30M 4:53:36
22812 Moore, S, 43M 4:53:36
22813 Rice, D, 28M 4:53:36
22814 Mazer, R, 43M 4:53:36
22815 Demogenes, L, 30F 4:53:36
22816 Zins, J, 45M 4:53:37
22817 Wilbur, R, 51M 4:53:37
22818 Vickery, D, 37F 4:53:38
22819 Mehran, R, 32F 4:53:38
22820 Lee, W, 47M 4:53:38
22821 Mokrzycki, M, 33F 4:53:38
22822 Hardy, L, 33M 4:53:38
22823 Martin Del Campo, A, 59M 4:53:38
22824 Mele, A, 26M 4:53:39
22825 Guillaume, C, 47M 4:53:39
22826 Veres, J, 46M 4:53:39
22827 Suttie, J, 44M 4:53:39
22828 Vitiello, A, 30F 4:53:40
22829 Lopez Rodrigo, S, 62M 4:53:40
22830 Beaud, A, 41F 4:53:40
22831 Bouwmeester-Bons, E, 41F 4:53:40
22832 Pyron, D, 29M 4:53:40
22833 Ward, A, 30F 4:53:41
22834 Suttie, K, 45F 4:53:41
22835 Adamson, H, 48M 4:53:41
22836 Youshock, S, 34F 4:53:41
22837 Davis, M, 39F 4:53:41
22838 Leonardi, M, 27F 4:53:41
22839 Cannon, B, 44F 4:53:41
22840 Cook, M, 39M 4:53:42
22841 Cook, M, 34M 4:53:42
22842 Musante, O, 60M 4:53:42
22843 Drolshammer, J, 50M 4:53:42
22844 Puche, M, 35M4:53:43
22845 Somers, W, 42M 4:53:43
22846 Seyffert Dr., M, 49M 4:53:43
22847 Wisotzke, B, 25M 4:53:43
22848 Greer, C, 42M 4:53:43
22849 Campos, R, 48M 4:53:44
22850 Bluestein, R, 52M 4:53:44
22851 Evans, D, 30M 4:53:44
22852 Teno, J, 42M 4:53:45
22853 Langeland, K, 39M 4:53:45
22854 Parry, G, 44M 4:53:45
22855 Ricketson, R, 49M 4:53:47
22856 Crane, S, 25F 4:53:47
22857 Stringer, M, 48M 4:53:47
22858 Valdes Herrera, J, 42M 4:53:48
22859 Billings, S, 34F 4:53:48
22860 Teltenkotter, G, 33M 4:53:48
22861 Hamilton, H, 31F 4:53:49
22862 Koenig, A, 44F 4:53:49
22863 Blunt, T, 36F 4:53:50
22864 Rogers, M, 37M 4:53:51
22865 Soerensen, B, 30F 4:53:51
22866 Martinez Rubio, B, 45F 4:53:51
22867 Lamante, C, 41M 4:53:52
22868 Martinez, G, 60M 4:53:52
22869 Hannisdahl, E, 23F 4:53:53
22870 Joyce, J, 26M 4:53:54
22871 Bogdasarian, J, 50M 4:53:54
22872 Fried, J, 31F 4:53:54
22873 Bartolomeo, J, 26M 4:53:54
22874 De Rauglaudre, L, 34M 4:53:54
22875 Tapia Paredes, L, 35M 4:53:54
22876 Bittscheidt, E, 56F 4:53:56
22877 McGovern, J, 31M 4:53:56
22878 Dandrea, S, 29F 4:53:56
22879 Harris, K, 35F 4:53:57
22880 De Bourgoin, C, 26F 4:53:57
22881 Gloskin, E, 43M 4:53:57
22882 Torres, E, 43F 4:53:57
22883 Gloskin, F, 37M 4:53:57
22884 Sova, K, 29F 4:53:58
22885 Nakamura, T, 62M 4:53:58
22886 Del Rosario, M, 52M 4:53:59
22887 Cohen, T, 35M 4:53:59
22888 Levine, A, 41M 4:53:59
22889 Holton, G, 40F 4:53:59
22890 Hennessy, M, 32M 4:54:00
22891 Cline, J, 52M 4:54:00
22892 Flynn, D, 25M 4:54:01
22893 Terranova, V, 36M 4:54:02
22894 Discala, J, 49M 4:54:02
22895 Clerout-Audebrand, M, 56M 4:54:02
22896 Lawrence, J, 29M 4:54:03
22897 Tocornal, F, 29M 4:54:03
22898 Burger, P, 42F 4:54:03
22899 Leisner, J, 47F 4:54:03
22900 Durkin, J, 66M 4:54:04
22901 Cohen, V, 52M 4:54:04
22902 Gable, K, 26F 4:54:04
22903 Broaddus, J, 43M 4:54:05
22904 Tucker, J, 54M 4:54:05
22905 Gazzola, L, 42F 4:54:06
22906 Moncada, F, 55M 4:54:06
22907 Yartz, R, 37M 4:54:07
22908 Steward, B, 51M 4:54:07
22909 Van Den Berg, J, 41F 4:54:07
22910 Douma, J, 58F 4:54:08
22911 Gierke, T, 30M 4:54:08
22912 Sender, H, 46F 4:54:08
22913 Wilson, A, 29F 4:54:08
22914 Kvaale, J, 60M 4:54:08
22915 Gonzalez, B, 46F 4:54:08
22916 Bacca, P, 44M 4:54:08
22917 Brozzo, J, 30F 4:54:08
22918 Brozzo, R, 31M 4:54:08
22919Ennis, R, 51F 4:54:09
22920 Riggi, S, 38M 4:54:09
22921 Riggi, V, 38F 4:54:10
22922 Alvarez Ortiz, N, 26F 4:54:10
22923 Keith, L, 29F 4:54:10
22924 Van Dam, L, 48M 4:54:10
22925 Sorlie, M, 32F 4:54:10
22926 Agrios, J, 56M 4:54:11
22927 Krausche, H, 58M 4:54:11
22928 Janosy, R, 40M 4:54:11
22929 Utashiro, Y, 48M 4:54:12
22930 Cassidy, J, 52M 4:54:12
22931 Okazawa, H, 28M 4:54:12
22932 Reilly, R, 32M 4:54:13
22933 Ferrer, M, 48F 4:54:14
22934 Tiralosi, J, 40M 4:54:14
22935 Reinders, A, 50M 4:54:14
22936 Koga, C, 30F4:54:15
22937 Pater, G, 44M 4:54:16
22938 Brown, J, 41M 4:54:16
22939 McFadden, J, 57M 4:54:16
22940 Van Eyck, B, 29M 4:54:17
22941 Klemm, U, 43M 4:54:17
22942 Mulvenna, K, 42M 4:54:17
22943 Yeomans, J, 24F 4:54:18
22944 De Ruiter, P, 44M 4:54:18
22945 Kjellman, L, 45M 4:54:18
22946 Carroll, J, 46M 4:54:19
22947 Bliss, R, 61M 4:54:19
22948 Darrell, J, 49M 4:54:19
22949 Stokes, J, 32M 4:54:19
22950 Breault, J, 29M 4:54:19
22951 Rezvan, A, 53M 4:54:20
22952 Bortz, W, 64M 4:54:20
22953 Swords, J, 19M 4:54:20
22954 Swords, W, 59M 4:54:20
22955 Johnson, C, 33F 4:54:21
22956 Stockert, J, 25M 4:54:21
22957 Wagner, C, 19M 4:54:21
22958 Leffell, M, 35M 4:54:21
22959 Schneider, W, 66M 4:54:22
22960 Wagner, E, 47M 4:54:22
22961 O'Malley, D, 38M 4:54:22
22962 Borio, M, 39M 4:54:22
22963 Coichetti, K, 33F 4:54:22
22964 Rossman, V, 43F 4:54:23
22965 Beall, S, 39F 4:54:23
22966 Rossman, F, 44M 4:54:23
22967 Disarbois, J, 48M 4:54:23
22968 Suzuki, S, 42M 4:54:24
22969 Stephenson, C, 39M 4:54:24
22970 Bourgeret, D, 37M 4:54:25
22971 Lindner, J, 48M 4:54:25
22972 Hillen, W, 41M 4:54:25
22973 Rabain, P, 48M 4:54:25
22974 McKenna, M, 31M 4:54:25
22975 O'Donnell, M, 33M 4:54:25
22976 Tivel, R, 53M 4:54:26
22977 Edmunds, S, 27F 4:54:27
22978 Cahill, M, 52M 4:54:28
22979 Nadelbach, A, 28M 4:54:28
22980 Bissonnette, S, 47F 4:54:28
22981 Salgado, J, 46M 4:54:28
22982 Robas, N, 48F 4:54:28
22983 Ostrom, B, 55F 4:54:29
22984 Yates, L, 39F 4:54:29
22985 Pelusio, V, 29M 4:54:30
22986 Stewart, J, 60M 4:54:30
22987 Wahlberg, H, 41M 4:54:30
22988 Van Orden, J, 48F 4:54:30
22989 Tynion, A, 44F 4:54:31
22990 Clemens, P, 36M 4:54:31
22991 Friedl, W, 49M 4:54:32
22992 Arias, I, 31M 4:54:32
22993 Kuehl, H, 48M 4:54:32
22994 Johnson, E, 29F 4:54:32
22995 Mauceri, S, 26M 4:54:32
22996 Mast, C, 18M 4:54:33
22997 Peterson, S, 37F 4:54:33
22998 Fynn, D, 57M 4:54:33
22999 duDomaine, M, 19M 4:54:34
23000 Cheney, C, 51M 4:54:35
23001 Schimmel, H, 53M 4:54:35
23002 Sheldon, L, 47F 4:54:35
23003 Nieves Roman, J, 30M 4:54:36
23004 Sparks, S, 39F 4:54:36
23005 Gogarnoiu, D, 38M 4:54:36
23006 Valery, R, 41F 4:54:36
23007 Marren, P, 35M 4:54:36
23008 Niego, J, 36M 4:54:37
23009 Rose, V, 51M 4:54:37
23010 Pleasant, J, 51M 4:54:38
23011 Cavey, E, 34M 4:54:38
23012 Borden, C, 42F 4:54:39
23013 Santonocito, A, 31M 4:54:39
23014 Hetzel, S, 41M 4:54:39
23015 Kohli, H, 50M 4:54:39
23016 Griethuysen, D, 42M 4:54:39
23017 Vila, J, 20M 4:54:40
23018 Kentin, G, 56M 4:54:40
23019 Vila, J, 50M 4:54:41
23020 Scully, J, 28F 4:54:41
23021 Keene, B, 45M 4:54:41
23022 Bod, G, 50F 4:54:41
23023 Cunningham, C, 32F4:54:41
23024 Macdonald, G, 42M 4:54:42
23025 Bakker, M, 47F 4:54:42
23026 Sutherland, T, 24F 4:54:42
23027 Trabucco, P, 37F 4:54:42
23028 Fleischli, T, 52F 4:54:42
23029 McManus, E, 23M 4:54:42
23030 Van Tienen, T, 45F 4:54:42
23031 Gertoberens, K, 42M 4:54:42
23032 Qualey, C, 40M 4:54:43
23033 Molnar, J, 41M 4:54:43
23034 McCoy, D, 33M 4:54:44
23035 Conn, L, 30F 4:54:44
23036 Nemouchi, O, 31F 4:54:46
23037 Vescovi, L, 37F 4:54:47
23038 Caire, M, 28F 4:54:48
23039 Ahmed, F, 46M 4:54:48
23040 Grant, C, 60M 4:54:48
23041 Rojas, N, 25M 4:54:49
23042 Pagani, C, 46M 4:54:49
23043 Garcia, M, 37F 4:54:49
23044 Toner, W, 49M 4:54:49
23045 Charleston, A, 49F 4:54:50
23046 Berlin, R, 53F 4:54:50
23047 Buch, A, 31F 4:54:50
23048 Stolls, J, 61M 4:54:51
23049 Snoek, G, 33M 4:54:51
23050 Anderson, M, 29F 4:54:51
23051 Cook, R, 28F 4:54:51
23052 Lennon, K, 33F 4:54:52
23053 Carapaica, H, 41M 4:54:52
23054 Link, J, 38F 4:54:52
23055 Conner, L, 30F 4:54:53
23056 Clausen, H, 51M 4:54:54
23057 Da Silva, J, 35M 4:54:54
23058 Eichelberger, D, 34M 4:54:54
23059 Clohessy, R, 37M 4:54:54
23060 Henderson, J, 35M 4:54:55
23061 Edwards, T, 50M 4:54:56
23062 Hanko, M, 31F 4:54:58
23063 Siegrist, S, 28F 4:54:58
23064 Ollins, B, 44M 4:54:59
23065 Esser, J, 34M 4:54:59
23066 Wolf, L, 49M 4:54:59
23067Reisner, J, 70M 4:55:00
23068 Swift, C, 35M 4:55:00
23069 Oosthuizen, P, 26M 4:55:01
23070 Maillet, C, 22F 4:55:01
23071 Stober, G, 59M 4:55:01
23072 Schertz, P, 41M 4:55:02
23073 Gonzalez, T, 51M4:55:03
23074 Dasilva, R, 36M 4:55:03
23075 Hoelper, R, 55M 4:55:03
23076 Sakowitz, R, 56M 4:55:04
23077 Stanley, M, 33F 4:55:04
23078 Crosdale, H, 38M 4:55:05
23079 Bellido, J, 30M 4:55:06
23080 Levermann, F, 39M 4:55:06
23081 Head, M, 26F 4:55:06
23082 Warum, S, 21M 4:55:06
23083 Dalivoust, G, 44F 4:55:06
23084 Dorizas, A, 35F 4:55:06
23085 Hildebrand, M, 52M 4:55:07
23086 Kaiser, A, 46F 4:55:07
23087 Hildebrand, T, 48F 4:55:07
23088 Kaiser, W, 45M4:55:07
23089 Caraway, C, 30F 4:55:07
23090 Flodberg, C, 51M 4:55:07
23091 Lie, T, 29M 4:55:07
23092 Carruthers, T, 43M 4:55:08
23093 Nagayasu, Y, 32F 4:55:09
23094 Acerra, V, 38F 4:55:09
23095 Weber, K, 47M 4:55:09
23096 Barry, A, 27M 4:55:09
23097 McNeil, C, 28F 4:55:10
23098 Bryans, C, 29M 4:55:10
23099 Hoegsberg, E, 62F 4:55:10
23100 Johansson, R, 33M 4:55:10
23101 Aagaard, P, 38M 4:55:11
23102 Romo, M, 48M 4:55:11
23103 Berman, M, 52M 4:55:11
23104 Wohlfeil, C, 35F 4:55:11
23105 Biegel, M, 29M 4:55:11
23106 Morris, C, 31F 4:55:11
23107 Daniels, K, 24M 4:55:13
23108 Doherty, K, 36F 4:55:13
23109 Blauman, W, 30F 4:55:13
23110 Lucas, F, 40M 4:55:13
23111 Cohen, S, 45M 4:55:14
23112 Ochoa, T, 25M 4:55:14
23113 Cohen, L, 42F 4:55:15
23114 Beaumont, B, 62M 4:55:15
23115 Kaneko, K, 33M 4:55:15
23116 Iida, K, 33M 4:55:15
23117 Zwirn, A, 45M 4:55:16
23118 Berry, R, 30F 4:55:16
23119 Zlotkin, M, 35M 4:55:18
23120 Martin, R, 47M 4:55:18
23121 Kobasa, J, 28M 4:55:18
23122 Vidal, M, 47M 4:55:19
23123 Taylor, N, 34F 4:55:19
23124 Lecoq, C, 44M 4:55:19
23125 Laikind, S, 56M 4:55:19
23126Laikind, C, 57F 4:55:19
23127 Bozzini, R, 63M 4:55:20
23128 Bienkowski, R, 48M 4:55:20
23129 Fisher, G, 45M 4:55:20
23130 Thompson, D, 39F 4:55:21
23131 Hays, M, 65M 4:55:21
23132 Suk, W, 26F 4:55:21
23133 Kornett, M, 27M 4:55:21
23134 Williams, M, 24M 4:55:22
23135 Yacovoni, R, 56M 4:55:22
23136 Weinstein, S, 32M 4:55:22
23137 Gelman, D, 40M 4:55:22
23138 Lewis, L, 29F 4:55:23
23139 Zahran Filho, E, 34M 4:55:24
23140 Budd, A, 36F 4:55:24
23141 O'Doherty, J, 34F 4:55:25
23142 Forcioli, P, 30M 4:55:25
23143 Pruvot, J, 34M 4:55:25
23144 Marchand, B, 51M 4:55:26
23145 Maley, D, 25M4:55:26
23146 Ruesch, C, 42F 4:55:26
23147 Richard, O, 32M 4:55:27
23148 Crabb, A, 40M 4:55:27
23149 Jacques, E, 37M 4:55:28
23150 Hassane, L, 36M 4:55:28
23151 Nottebaere, C, 37F 4:55:28
23152 Lelong, J, 45F 4:55:29
23153 Demoor, M, 34F 4:55:29
23154 Ota, R, 44F 4:55:29
23155 Billore, J, 41M 4:55:29
23156 Dresden, P, 59M 4:55:29
23157 Glanes, J, 35M 4:55:29
23158 Fitzhenry, W, 34F 4:55:30
23159 Wiener, D, 35M 4:55:30
23160 Dekkar, D, 23M 4:55:30
23161 Shriver, J, 31F 4:55:30
23162 Sebaa, M, 26M 4:55:30
23163Secor Jr, R, 35M 4:55:30
23164 Mindell, C, 57F 4:55:31
23165 Fezaa, M, 28M 4:55:31
23166 Reid, D, 41M 4:55:31
23167 Kerrache, A, 26M 4:55:31
23168 Szepkouski, R, 42M 4:55:31
23169 Marchese, J, 42M4:55:32
23170 Bernard, M, 50F 4:55:32
23171 Ewy, E, 32F 4:55:32
23172 Chandeck, H, 62M 4:55:33
23173 Halebian, P, 41M 4:55:33
23174 Ishikawa, K, 50M 4:55:33
23175 Horne III, H, 25M 4:55:34
23176 Gallagher, J, 54M 4:55:34
23177 Busch, D, 56M 4:55:34
23178 Hoiskar, H, 33M 4:55:34
23179 Hoiskar, E, 64M 4:55:34
23180 Boyd, K, 29M 4:55:34
23181 Wozneak, L, 30F 4:55:35
23182 Orvananos, A, 40M 4:55:35
23183 Seidl, D, 38M 4:55:35
23184 Maury, P, 30F 4:55:35
23185 Finke, R, 41F 4:55:35
23186 De-Cabissole, B, 43F 4:55:35
23187 Roeder, R, 58M 4:55:36
23188 Robbins, L, 40F 4:55:37
23189 Ovejero, E, 37M 4:55:38
23190 Pritz, K, 40F 4:55:38
23191 Pritz, R, 38M 4:55:39
23192 Montgomery, D, 40M 4:55:39
23193 Dyess, C, 32M 4:55:39
23194 Nicell, C, 37M 4:55:40
23195 Sekou, J, 38M 4:55:40
23196 Heist, S, 27F 4:55:40
23197 Gomez, R, 39M 4:55:40
23198 Carrion, J, 37M 4:55:40
23199 Brahic, J, 39M 4:55:41
23200 Money, B, 33M 4:55:41
23201 Fuller, A, 43M 4:55:41
23202 O'Grody, J, 48M 4:55:41
23203 Nishizu, S, 44M 4:55:42
23204 Theobald, H, 58M4:55:42
23205 Farmer, B, 51M 4:55:42
23206 Lugo, P, 45M 4:55:43
23207 Payne, B, 33F 4:55:43
23208 Rizzi, A, 29M 4:55:43
23209Bender, J, 50M 4:55:43
23210 Shinmoto, S, 44M 4:55:44
23211 Rothman, D, 28F 4:55:44
23212 Sato, C, 42M 4:55:44
23213 Koike, J, 39M4:55:44
23214 Kane, K, 45F 4:55:45
23215 Estrada Jasso, J, 45M 4:55:45
23216 Petersen, S, 45F 4:55:45
23217 Tafjord, E, 49M 4:55:45
23218 Faudin, A, 48M 4:55:46
23219 Szakacs, T, 46M 4:55:46
23220 Benoit, C, 44M 4:55:46
23221 Capt, M, 55M 4:55:46
23222 Bowe, L, 48M 4:55:46
23223 Townsend, D, 41F 4:55:47
23224 Solano, S, 33M 4:55:47
23225 Weaver, D, 36F 4:55:47
23226 Avalone Filho, O, 46M 4:55:47
23227 Weaver, R, 33M 4:55:47
23228 Petersen, I, 46M 4:55:48
23229 Dickens, M, 42M 4:55:48
23230 Ellard, C, 48M 4:55:48
23231 Brumbelow, L, 47F 4:55:49
23232 Hunsicker Sanko, V, 38F 4:55:49
23233 Medlock, M, 48M 4:55:49
23234 Sloop, R, 50M 4:55:49
23235 Frank, P, 28M 4:55:49
23236 Zaccone, J, 47M 4:55:50
23237 Playford, L, 26M 4:55:50
23238 Stern, L, 53M 4:55:50
23239 Healy, C, 31F 4:55:50
23240 Mattera, M, 48M 4:55:51
23241 Sylvester, P, 41M 4:55:51
23242 Jansson, L, 50M 4:55:51
23243 Walsh, W, 40M 4:55:51
23244 Preli, K, 38M 4:55:51
23245 Felberbaum, D, 28F 4:55:51
23246 Cnaan, R, 43M 4:55:51
23247 Franck Dr, M, 44M 4:55:53
23248 Stulp, J, 44M 4:55:53
23249 Reynold, C, 36F 4:55:53
23250 Zuknick, R, 55M 4:55:54
23251 Portaluppi, C, 37F 4:55:54
23252 August, G, 33M 4:55:54
23253 Anderson, S, 33F 4:55:55
23254 Zaslow, S, 67M 4:55:55
23255 Doyle, R, 45M 4:55:55
23256 Lafond, K, 38M 4:55:55
23257 Gorena Mireles, M, 42M 4:55:55
23258 Padgett, B, 29M 4:55:55
23259 Gonzalez Courtade, A, 40M 4:55:55
23260 Ward, S, 40F 4:55:56
23261 Thompson, R, 18F 4:55:56
23262 Levine, R, 42M 4:55:56
23263 Wright, B, 41F 4:55:57
23264 Carone, E, 38M 4:55:57
23265Broadhead, A, 31F 4:55:58
23266 Rojek, K, 48F 4:55:58
23267 Alfonzo, A, 34M 4:55:59
23268 Ehrlich, J, 53M 4:56:00
23269 Kelly, F, 32M 4:56:00
23270 Sokoloff, A, 34M 4:56:00
23271 Pomposello Jr, P, 25M 4:56:00
23272 DeFilippo, C, 37F 4:56:00
23273 Novig, R, 51M 4:56:00
23274 Gastineau, J, 34F 4:56:00
23275 Vavasseur, J, 47F 4:56:00
23276 Brindjonc, D, 39F 4:56:00
23277 Dullmeyer, E, 29M 4:56:00
23278 Rakovic, A, 35F 4:56:01
23279 Simao, J, 41M 4:56:01
23280 Topouzis, S, 29M 4:56:01
23281 Arsenault, S, 37F 4:56:01
23282 Wutkewicz, K, 55M 4:56:02
23283 Lindemann, S, 26F 4:56:03
23284 Nakamura, P, 31F 4:56:03
23285 Lennane, A, 33M 4:56:04
23286 Mullin, J, 45F 4:56:04
23287 Moran, M, 45M 4:56:04
23288 Telheim, I, 22F 4:56:05
23289 Curry, W, 39M 4:56:05
23290 Creekman, J, 41M 4:56:05
23291 Peloille, B, 28M 4:56:05
23292 Ornelas Cabrera, L, 35F4:56:05
23293 Nau, J, 46M 4:56:06
23294 Ward, M, 43F 4:56:06
23295 Morgo Plasencia, J, 38M 4:56:06
23296 Salzer, T, 40M 4:56:06
23297 Zucconi, D, 55M 4:56:06
23298 Morris, T, 36F 4:56:06
23299 Armato, L, 32F 4:56:07
23300 Guerin, P, 58M 4:56:07
23301 Murray, G, 49M 4:56:07
23302 Trinkoff, P, 35M 4:56:07
23303 Westermann, C, 31F 4:56:07
23304 Luna, A, 27F 4:56:07
23305 Kitada, K, 31F 4:56:08
23306 Cowley, P, 40F 4:56:08
23307 Kerr, J, 25F 4:56:09
23308 Ashiki, T, 40M 4:56:09
23309 McVeigh, P, 34F 4:56:10
23310Cooper, J, 45M 4:56:10
23311 Schwanewede, T, 29M 4:56:10
23312 Eype, P, 34F 4:56:10
23313 Dale, G, 43M 4:56:10
23314 King, J, 46M 4:56:11
23315 Eype, A, 35M 4:56:11
23316 Kelleher, J, 31M 4:56:11
23317 Rabjohns, R, 47M 4:56:12
23318 Flint, B, 46F 4:56:12
23319 Patterson, J, 36M 4:56:12
23320 Calabrese, J, 37F 4:56:13
23321 Miyamoto, C, 36M 4:56:14
23322 Remie, J, 41M 4:56:14
23323 Sampson, J, 36M 4:56:14
23324 Townsend, A, 31M 4:56:14
23325 Katz, P, 29M 4:56:14
23326 Ystenes, K, 43M 4:56:14
23327 Tiffany, M, 47M 4:56:14
23328 Dabrowski, T, 53M 4:56:15
23329 Nylander, A, 47M 4:56:15
23330 McNeila, M, 35F 4:56:15
23331 Dupont, F, 36M 4:56:15
23332 Koski, M, 38F 4:56:15
23333 Lopp, T, 23M 4:56:16
23334 Dahlberg, L, 26F 4:56:16
23335 Bird, B, 34F 4:56:16
23336 Ribeiro Filho, J, 37M 4:56:16
23337 Fogle, M, 48F 4:56:16
23338 Greenberg, D, 42M 4:56:16
23339 Mancusi, U, 52M 4:56:16
23340 Gerretsen, W, 35M 4:56:16
23341 Maisinger, D, 51M 4:56:16
23342 Crapet, S, 31F 4:56:16
23343 Falize, D, 47M 4:56:17
23344 Mustachia, M, 55M 4:56:17
23345 Viforel, J, 60F 4:56:17
23346 Cohn, R, 51M 4:56:18
23347 Heffernan, T, 48M 4:56:19
23348 Hirohashi, M, 62M 4:56:19
23349 Dalfini, M, 30M 4:56:19
23350 Babinet, O, 27M 4:56:19
23351 Cohen, A, 24F 4:56:20
23352 Williams, C, 44F 4:56:20
23353 Herold, F, 51M 4:56:20
23354 Cecchini, A, 53M 4:56:20
23355 Sweeney, P, 31M 4:56:20
23356 Fitte, J, 53M 4:56:20
23357 McGraw, B, 33M 4:56:21
23358 Sheehan, V, 45F 4:56:21
23359 Huseby, H, 44M 4:56:22
23360 Kirsten, R, 51M 4:56:22
23361 Rosenberger, L, 55F 4:56:23
23362 Bom, M, 38M 4:56:23
23363 Haikal, D, 43F 4:56:25
23364 Gillen, J, 24M 4:56:25
23365 Merilainen, R, 44F 4:56:25
23366 Zisholtz, B, 35M 4:56:26
23367 Hansen, O, 55M 4:56:27
23368 Kreijger De Roo, N, 51F 4:56:27
23369 Egret, P, 41M 4:56:27
23370 Claxton, V, 46F 4:56:28
23371 Henry, A, 34M 4:56:28
23372 Barksoale, J, 43M 4:56:29
23373 Morgenthaler, W, 46M 4:56:30
23374 Schaab, P, 52M 4:56:30
23375 Renard, L, 50M 4:56:30
23376 Regan*, W, 48M 4:56:31
23377 Peudevin, J, 52M 4:56:31
23378 Howell, L, 31M 4:56:31
23379 McNamara, M, 45M 4:56:31
23380 Anderson, E, 44F 4:56:32
23381 Bennett, W, 57M 4:56:32
23382 Obase, H, 30F 4:56:32
23383 Koester, S, 43M4:56:32
23384 Myers, S, 39M 4:56:33
23385 Cooper, B, 53M 4:56:33
23386 Myers, J, 35M 4:56:33
23387 Lo, D, 49F 4:56:34
23388 Phillips, G, 42M 4:56:34
23389 Golla, D, 26M 4:56:34
23390 Ianniello Jr., M, 28M 4:56:34
23391 Fitzpatrick, J, 43F 4:56:35
23392 Fernandez Soto, L, 35F 4:56:35
23393 Moses, B, 54M 4:56:35
23394 Haines, B, 55M 4:56:36
23395 Chavez, A, 60M 4:56:36
23396 Cozzarelli, P, 31F 4:56:37
23397 Brennan, M, 29F 4:56:37
23398 Mendez, R, 44M 4:56:37
23399 Pirkle, S, 53F 4:56:38
23400 St-Amand, N, 49M 4:56:38
23401 Krueger, T, 26F 4:56:39
23402 Van Wifferen, A, 45F 4:56:39
23403 Kinney, T, 22F 4:56:39
23404 Koerner, C, 45M 4:56:40
23405 Spear, J, 21M 4:56:40
23406 Marlowe, B, 40F 4:56:40
23407 Lobozzo III, J, 20M 4:56:40
23408 Kahlow, R, 51M 4:56:40
23409 Sutton, E, 38F 4:56:41
23410 Anderson, S, 29F 4:56:41
23411 Hardeveld, C, 33F 4:56:41
23412 Osder, I, 53M 4:56:42
23413 Smith, J, 23F 4:56:42
23414 Hamui Sutton, L, 37M 4:56:42
23415 Belloni, L, 26M 4:56:42
23416 Bernard, M, 26M 4:56:43
23417 Iuliano, M, 26M 4:56:43
23418 Terrell, S, 42F 4:56:43
23419 Tolisano, M, 45M 4:56:44
23420 Shessel, S, 41F 4:56:44
23421 DiMaggio, J, 47M 4:56:44
23422Uzawa, M, 32F 4:56:44
23423 Wolff, R, 48F 4:56:44
23424 Wolff, H, 53M 4:56:45
23425 Shessel, F, 45M 4:56:45
23426 Finneran, K, 23F4:56:46
23427 Fujiyama, H, 30M 4:56:46
23428 Previato, S, 63M 4:56:46
23429 Foy, J, 33M 4:56:46
23430 Kawahara, J, 36M 4:56:46
23431 Hull, J, 26M 4:56:47
23432 Sutin, J, 28F 4:56:47
23433 Yumoto, K, 34M 4:56:47
23434 O'Connell, M, 44M 4:56:47
23435 Tarn, T, 46M 4:56:48
23436 McGuinness, K, 43M 4:56:48
23437 Tolosa Sarro, I, 54F 4:56:48
23438 Besne, F, 47M 4:56:49
23439 Nares, W, 57M 4:56:49
23440 Granville, J, 24F 4:56:50
23441 Adler, G, 29M 4:56:50
23442 Rubidge, W, 36M 4:56:51
23443 Hake, B, 45M 4:56:51
23444 Palandrani, R, 49M 4:56:51
23445 Van Der Pal, R, 25M 4:56:52
23446 Margolis, M, 34M 4:56:52
23447 Maguire, R, 37M 4:56:52
23448 Piscitelli, T, 34F 4:56:52
23449 Carena, C, 50M 4:56:52
23450 Maurice, A, 28F 4:56:52
23451 Bound, S, 32M 4:56:52
23452 Pennington, H, 24F 4:56:53
23453 Dell'Orso, A, 31M 4:56:54
23454 Terroba, J, 54M 4:56:54
23455 Morroni, R, 43M 4:56:54
23456 Farley, M, 40F 4:56:54
23457 Waaijer, L, 46M 4:56:54
23458 Righi, R, 42M 4:56:54
23459 Pricone, S, 44M 4:56:54
23460 Williams, S, 38M 4:56:54
23461 Eldridge, L, 35F 4:56:55
23462 Ariko, J, 50F 4:56:55
23463 Shay, J, 35M 4:56:55
23464 Flohe, R, 29M 4:56:55
23465 Walsh, J, 51M 4:56:55
23466 Gallant, P, 61M 4:56:56
23467 Hierl, M, 49F 4:56:56
23468 Cumber, B, 46M 4:56:56
23469 Kurth, H, 48M 4:56:56
23470 Ferrao, A, 26F 4:56:56
23471 Price, F, 44M 4:56:56
23472 Connor, L, 29F 4:56:57
23473 Steckel, J, 34M 4:56:57
23474 Mendez, F, 46M 4:56:57
23475 Cohen, A, 57M 4:56:57
23476 Nishimoto, K, 50F 4:56:57
23477 Walker, B, 36M 4:56:57
23478 Hula, R, 47M 4:56:58
23479 Landeck, R, 33M 4:56:58
23480 Powers, S, 28F 4:56:58
23481 Bellamy Jr, C, 43M 4:56:59
23482 Kwong, P, 29M 4:56:59
23483 Johansson, G, 42M 4:56:59
23484 Schablinski, R, 50M 4:56:59
23485 McCord, J, 34F 4:56:59
23486 Armistead, M, 41M 4:57:00
23487 Craig, D, 47M 4:57:01
23488 Fitzpatrick, A, 26F 4:57:02
23489 Browne, D, 40F 4:57:02
23490 Casile, A, 50F 4:57:02
23491 Haider, A, 43M 4:57:02
23492 Legge, A, 33F 4:57:02
23493 Ogiso, A, 22M 4:57:02
23494 Weisgarber, G, 25F 4:57:02
23495 Frazier, C, 48F 4:57:02
23496Piccarillo, S, 18M 4:57:03
23497 Martinez, A, 51M 4:57:03
23498 Malamut, R, 35F 4:57:03
23499 Mican, F, 50M 4:57:03
23500 Haughey, M, 23F 4:57:05
23501 Hunter, K, 30F 4:57:06
23502 Cappachione, K, 50F 4:57:06
23503 Hay, J, 30F 4:57:07
23504 Reynoso, T, 46M 4:57:07
23505 Tosch, M, 28F 4:57:08
23506 Drybrough, R, 47M 4:57:09
23507 Pohland, A, 18F 4:57:10
23508 Myers, B, 30M 4:57:10
23509Pohland, P, 38M 4:57:10
23510 Gold, J, 38F 4:57:11
23511 Promisel, I, 27M 4:57:11
23512 Kenul, J, 50M 4:57:11
23513 Gleber, P, 35M4:57:11
23514 Strollo, C, 35F 4:57:12
23515 Strollo, J, 54M 4:57:12
23516 Frazer, M, 28F 4:57:12
23517 Goodman, C, 35F 4:57:13
23518 Okabe, H, 31M 4:57:13
23519 Hubble, M, 50M 4:57:13
23520 Mengel, W, 40M 4:57:13
23521 Capogna, B, 39F 4:57:14
23522 Oettl, B, 40M 4:57:14
23523 Ohashi, N, 22M 4:57:15
23524 Gillick, M, 22M 4:57:16
23525 Riley, P, 39F 4:57:16
23526 Prehn, F, 65M 4:57:16
23527 Hashimoto, Y, 54M 4:57:18
23528 Martinez, F, 28M 4:57:20
23529 Parr, J, 43M 4:57:20
23530 Lockhart, R, 48M 4:57:20
23531 Friedman, K, 39M 4:57:20
23532 Eveker, S, 30M 4:57:23
23533 Akaki, M, 58M 4:57:23
23534 Weaver, R, 28F 4:57:23
23535 Guillaume, D, 41F 4:57:25
23536 Rosen, P, 41M 4:57:25
23537 Vilella, F, 61M 4:57:26
23538 Muniz-Echevarria, O, 50M 4:57:26
23539 Howard, P, 26M 4:57:26
23540 Salas, A, 45M 4:57:26
23541 Spaschak, S, 31F 4:57:27
23542 Gronkowski, R, 31M 4:57:27
23543 Bosk, H, 49M 4:57:27
23544 Sugiura, J, 38M 4:57:28
23545 Williams, S, 42F 4:57:28
23546 De Lima, C, 27M 4:57:28
23547 Rothman, S, 47M 4:57:28
23548 Verola, O, 23M 4:57:30
23549 Vazquez, L, 47M 4:57:31
23550 Mathey, M, 42F 4:57:31
23551 Griffin, M, 45M 4:57:31
23552 Franzke, H, 58M 4:57:32
23553 Cordero, P, 25M 4:57:32
23554 Werfel, D, 30F 4:57:32
23555 Acosta, J, 31M 4:57:32
23556 Rocha, H, 42M 4:57:32
23557 Roldan Amaris, P, 36F 4:57:33
23558 Lemming, N, 56M 4:57:33
23559 Chodkiewiez, P, 25M 4:57:33
23560 Cayan, P, 38M 4:57:34
23561 Ringhofer, J, 51M 4:57:34
23562 Powell, D, 39M 4:57:34
23563 Ellis, N, 31F 4:57:34
23564 Tribe, K, 38F 4:57:34
23565 Harrison Jr., R, 47M 4:57:35
23566 Turner, R, 49M 4:57:35
23567 Varty, N, 55M 4:57:35
23568 Peisner, D, 42M 4:57:35
23569 Ossmo, C, 35F 4:57:36
23570 Rapaport, L, 27F 4:57:36
23571 Six, D, 31M 4:57:37
23572 Striebeck, C, 44M 4:57:37
23573 Chung, I, 43F 4:57:37
23574 Otte, J, 45M 4:57:38
23575 Guerrero, C, 61M 4:57:38
23576 Olivers, J, 51M 4:57:38
23577 Hughes, H, 48F 4:57:38
23578 Dautrich, B, 30F 4:57:40
23579 McMahon, R, 51M 4:57:40
23580 Gerdel, M, 41M 4:57:41
23581 Girod, S, 20M 4:57:41
23582 Moran, R, 49M 4:57:41
23583 Puons, J, 49M 4:57:41
23584 Benwitt, E, 30F 4:57:42
23585 Rosado, F, 29M 4:57:42
23586 Shetty, B, 29M 4:57:42
23587 Marcello, J, 37M 4:57:42
23588 Buckley, J, 32M 4:57:42
23589 Ogino, Y, 47F 4:57:42
23590 Osojnak, S, 31M 4:57:42
23591 McGourty, M, 45M 4:57:42
23592 Rolfsen, G, 43F 4:57:43
23593 Patterson, K, 35F 4:57:43
23594 McGreevy, R, 53M 4:57:44
23595 Pisani, J, 25F 4:57:44
23596 Newman, I, 63M 4:57:44
23597 Johnson, R, 55M 4:57:45
23598 Mullin, K, 48M 4:57:45
23599 Mansfield, B, 44M 4:57:45
23600 Craig, D, 45M 4:57:45
23601 Beers, B, 25M 4:57:45
23602 Abramowitz, R, 49M 4:57:46
23603 O'Neill, K, 26M 4:57:46
23604 Burden, J, 36M 4:57:47
23605 Ritchey, H, 67M 4:57:48
23606 Goffney, K, 33M 4:57:48
23607Cragin, G, 23F 4:57:48
23608 Eichner, S, 50M 4:57:49
23609 Den Dikkenboer, L, 54F 4:57:49
23610 Sauvigne-Kirsch, J, 33F 4:57:49
23611 Voigt, M, 40F 4:57:50
23612 Smaldone, K, 37F 4:57:51
23613 Pedersen, N, 39M 4:57:51
23614 Braga, D, 46F 4:57:52
23615 Merida, J, 44M 4:57:52
23616 Dorn, G, 55F 4:57:52
23617 Guinard, H, 32F 4:57:52
23618 Lauga, C, 49M 4:57:52
23619 Schollaert, H, 54F 4:57:53
23620 O'Connor, S, 28F 4:57:53
23621 Herant, P, 32M 4:57:53
23622 Di Christina, A, 28F 4:57:54
23623 Sancet, V, 28F 4:57:54
23624 Greenberg, L, 37F 4:57:54
23625 Yellen, J, 39M 4:57:54
23626 Chora Guardapo, E, 41M 4:57:54
23627 Sancet, F, 27F 4:57:54
23628 Pauli, R, 40M 4:57:55
23629 Nishiyama, F, 29F 4:57:55
23630 Fuller, J, 46M 4:57:55
23631 Fuller, M, 45F 4:57:55
23632 Corthell, D, 37M 4:57:56
23633 Lomas De Mallen, D, 47F 4:57:56
23634 Gallagher, J, 55M 4:57:56
23635 Worsham, C, 39M 4:57:56
23636 Dalcero, R, 48M 4:57:56
23637 Borchesenius, H, 26M 4:57:57
23638 Gregorchik, C, 28M 4:57:57
23639 Strickland, K, 39F 4:57:57
23640 Roset, N, 26F 4:57:58
23641 Langdon, R, 22M 4:57:58
23642 Doudard, P, 39M 4:57:58
23643 Scott, R, 59M 4:57:58
23644 Vila, S, 64M 4:57:58
23645 Scheffe, M, 29M 4:57:59
23646 Ferini, G, 45M 4:57:59
23647 Altamirano Sarmiento, R, 43M 4:57:59
23648 Maquine, J, 36M 4:57:59
23649 Ramos, L, 26F 4:57:59
23650 Cavicchioli, V, 57F 4:57:59
23651 Phillips, G, 29M 4:58:00
23652 Neubert, R, 38M 4:58:00
23653 Beller Lev, B, 32F 4:58:00
23654 Newton, H, 40F 4:58:00
23655 Pickering, A, 45M 4:58:00
23656 Michalski, E, 29F 4:58:00
23657 Kohl, G, 40M 4:58:00
23658 Smith, B, 29M 4:58:00
23659 Butensky, S, 72M 4:58:01
23660 Betts, S, 35M 4:58:02
23661 Sap, M, 47M 4:58:02
23662 De Borst, N, 37M 4:58:02
23663 Lavin, J, 37M 4:58:03
23664 Kanda, M, 26F 4:58:03
23665 Trachtenberg, E, 36M 4:58:03
23666 Morfin Nunez, J, 49M 4:58:04
23667 Shaffer, B, 36M 4:58:04
23668 Selin, K, 56M 4:58:04
23669 Persson, O, 25M 4:58:04
23670 Colsa, P, 32M 4:58:05
23671 Parrales, C, 43M 4:58:06
23672 Sessions, B, 36F 4:58:06
23673 Hutauruk, S, 27F 4:58:06
23674 Safran, D, 24F 4:58:06
23675 Frasier, J, 25F 4:58:06
23676 Teplinsky, A, 42M 4:58:06
23677 Turner, J, 56F 4:58:07
23678 English, J, 24F 4:58:07
23679 Liebman, M, 44M 4:58:07
23680 Alberico, F, 49M 4:58:07
23681 Bernier, C, 24F 4:58:07
23682 Schlesinger, M, 54M 4:58:08
23683 Du Chaffaut, G, 47M 4:58:08
23684 Mussari, G, 32M 4:58:08
23685 Berger, I, 50F 4:58:09
23686 Luijpen-Eijer, H, 41F 4:58:09
23687 Lorentzen, M, 40F 4:58:09
23688 Rosen, G, 54M 4:58:10
23689 Eijer-Devilee, J, 37F 4:58:10
23690 Tsubata, T, 21M 4:58:11
23691 Corey, T, 29M 4:58:12
23692 Skliar, A, 49F 4:58:12
23693 Klein, S, 33M 4:58:12
23694 Augusto, R, 36F 4:58:13
23695 Maynes, E, 29M 4:58:13
23696 Gallin, N, 49F 4:58:13
23697 Augusto, V, 41M 4:58:13
23698 Smolar, K, 28F 4:58:13
23699 Bergofin, A, 28F 4:58:14
23700 Alcivar, P, 18F 4:58:15
23701 Schmidt, J, 28F 4:58:17
23702 Cornila, G, 37F 4:58:18
23703 Cornila, R, 54M 4:58:19
23704 Stallo, M, 36F 4:58:19
23705 Boyle, M, 32M 4:58:19
23706 McDonough, E, 34F 4:58:21
23707 Harris, R, 56M 4:58:21
23708 Reilly, D, 33F 4:58:21
23709 Lorentzen, I, 45F 4:58:22
23710 Heederik, S, 45F 4:58:22
23711 Scheiwiller, E, 53M 4:58:22
23712 Schaap-Verhey, P, 41F 4:58:22
23713 DeSantis, J, 31F 4:58:23
23714 Braverman, A, 54M 4:58:23
23715 Holm, U, 50F 4:58:24
23716 Handt, L, 32M 4:58:25
23717 Hornblass, J, 24M4:58:26
23718 Kocher, E, 50M 4:58:27
23719 Rivera, J, 49F 4:58:28
23720 Lewis, S, 44M 4:58:28
23721 Marks, S, 52F 4:58:29
23722 Johansen, H, 48M 4:58:30
23723 Bice, K, 27F 4:58:31
23724 Rodney, B, 56M 4:58:32
23725 Liadis, S, 49M 4:58:32
23726 Callahan, J, 36M 4:58:32
23727 Schemmel, M, 27M 4:58:33
23728 Spannagel, L, 36M 4:58:33
23729 Spannagel, J, 35F 4:58:34
23730 Kim, J, 30F 4:58:34
23731 Sommerfeld, G, 60M 4:58:35
23732 Guldbrand, J, 28M 4:58:36
23733 Pringez, C, 44F 4:58:36
23734 Manuel, C, 46F 4:58:36
23735 Grant, J, 48M 4:58:36
23736 Martens, J, 30F 4:58:37
23737 Bellavia, M, 25M 4:58:37
23738 Westphal, J, 55M 4:58:38
23739 Bertrand, S, 29M 4:58:38
23740 Schupp, D, 32M 4:58:39
23741 Saskor, L, 67M 4:58:40
23742 Osborne, C, 61M 4:58:40
23743 Moore, H, 28F 4:58:41
23744 Clark, R, 43M 4:58:42
23745 Hsieh, S, 31M 4:58:42
23746 Cason, P, 48F 4:58:42
23747 Onishi, M, 33F 4:58:42
23748 Faergen, B, 45M 4:58:42
23749 Rosenberg, K, 46F 4:58:43
23750 Espanol Castells, M, 41M 4:58:43
23751 Brill, H, 48M 4:58:43
23752 Otsu, Y, 32M 4:58:43
23753 Rosenberg, M, 66M 4:58:44
23754 Lynch, M, 34F 4:58:45
23755 Day, J, 45M 4:58:45
23756 Nykanen, I, 60F 4:58:45
23757 DeAngelis, C, 30F 4:58:45
23758 Lomba, E, 44M 4:58:46
23759 Kaplan, H, 31M 4:58:46
23760 Grant, L, 27F 4:58:46
23761 De Beer, G, 47M 4:58:46
23762 Feinig, A, 31M 4:58:46
23763 Brandt, D, 55M 4:58:46
23764 Perrow, S, 54F 4:58:47
23765 Schretzman, W, 40M 4:58:47
23766 Ouvrard, P, 40M 4:58:47
23767 Ng, J, 29F 4:58:48
23768 Flores Carreola, G, 38M 4:58:48
23769 Mara, J, 48M 4:58:48
23770 Davison, R, 52M 4:58:49
23771 Thiex, A, 44M 4:58:50
23772 Resseger, K, 49M 4:58:51
23773 Ochshorn, D, 38M 4:58:51
23774 Sion, A, 41M 4:58:51
23775 Buckingham, I, 49M 4:58:52
23776 Frankel, J, 29M 4:58:52
23777 Whitby, J, 40M 4:58:52
23778 Simeon, C, 36M4:58:52
23779 Walker, S, 46F 4:58:52
23780 Mendez Alicea, R, 48M 4:58:52
23781 Whitby, K, 44F 4:58:53
23782 Conroy, K, 36M 4:58:54
23783 Heidkamp, R, 55F 4:58:54
23784 Kopp, M, 41M 4:58:55
23785 Greenwood, B, 43M 4:58:55
23786 Munier, A, 29M 4:58:55
23787 Heineman, C, 35F 4:58:56
23788 Sanchirico, M, 37F 4:58:56
23789 Greene, J, 40M 4:58:57
23790 Wagehals, E, 57M 4:58:57
23791 Langs, C, 39M 4:58:57
23792 Demieri, P, 25M 4:58:57
23793 Saalfeld, A, 50F4:58:58
23794 Da Rosa, J, 27F 4:58:59
23795 Dimaggio, J, 29M 4:58:59
23796 Da Rosa, P, 54F 4:58:59
23797 Aguirre Cossio, D, 58M 4:59:00
23798 Da Rosa, J, 58M 4:59:00
23799 Calame, C, 32F 4:59:00
23800 Mirsky, P, 24M 4:59:00
23801 Van Boven, M, 37M 4:59:01
23802 Brunkhorst, H, 33F 4:59:01
23803 Dijkstra-Mosk, C, 36F 4:59:01
23804 Glaeser, T, 33M 4:59:02
23805 Lagacherie, G, 47M 4:59:03
23806 Kronau, D, 35F 4:59:03
23807 Caraffini, C, 46M 4:59:03
23808 Binnie Jr, J, 41M 4:59:04
23809 Gordon, N, 41F 4:59:04
23810 Baller, J, 24M 4:59:04
23811 Erle, D, 52M 4:59:04
23812 Sutton, S, 29M4:59:05
23813 Miller, H, 26F 4:59:05
23814 Donlan, Y, 32F 4:59:06
23815 Gill, J, 31F 4:59:07
23816 Balleres, A, 44M 4:59:08
23817 Wynveldt, W, 43M 4:59:09
23818 Sobiech, K, 41M 4:59:09
23819 Huigen, J, 36M 4:59:09
23820 Connolly, S, 40F 4:59:10
23821 Bitar, G, 29M 4:59:10
23822 Schiavo, T, 40M 4:59:10
23823 Cohen, E, 32M4:59:10
23824 Portnoy, M, 56M 4:59:11
23825 Tohme, W, 29M 4:59:11
23826 Bakker, L, 40F 4:59:12
23827 John, M, 46M 4:59:12
23828 Kelly, F, 34F 4:59:12
23829 Young, L, 40F 4:59:13
23830 Thierry, R, 56M 4:59:13
23831 Keith, A, 45M 4:59:13
23832 Hoffmann, H, 57M 4:59:14
23833 Hansson, L, 52M 4:59:15
23834 Nicol, M, 35M 4:59:16
23835 Levin, D, 36M 4:59:16
23836 Posner, N, 48M 4:59:16
23837 Jenatschke, S, 26F 4:59:16
23838 German, W, 55M 4:59:16
23839 Queralt, J, 42M 4:59:17
23840 Jenke, T, 26M 4:59:18
23841 Vance, P, 33M 4:59:18
23842 Strom, H, 59M 4:59:18
23843 Park, J, 39M 4:59:18
23844 Tomassetti, J, 24M 4:59:19
23845 Ota, T, 54M 4:59:19
23846 Karas, S, 61M 4:59:20
23847 Christedes, C, 44F 4:59:20
23848 McDonald, M, 45F 4:59:20
23849 Spatz, R, 45M 4:59:21
23850 Pairoux, R, 28F 4:59:21
23851 Battle, J, 48F 4:59:21
23852 Bohlscheid, W, 50M 4:59:21
23853 Barrows, T, 47M 4:59:21
23854 Bingley, H, 52F 4:59:22
23855 Boret, J, 48M 4:59:22
23856 Yoshizumi, A, 45M 4:59:22
23857 Briesemeister, R, 40M 4:59:22
23858 Neck, D, 35M 4:59:22
23859 Sze, W, 28M 4:59:23
23860 Fagundes, D, 50M 4:59:25
23861 Folmer, J, 50M 4:59:26
23862 Morrison, D, 27M 4:59:26
23863 Overstreet, B, 46M 4:59:26
23864 Wilber, A, 36F 4:59:27
23865 Degoumois, A, 58F 4:59:27
23866 McCreedy, K, 40F 4:59:28
23867 Faccendini, C, 59M 4:59:28
23868 Futo, P, 56F 4:59:28
23869 Galiza, I, 59M 4:59:29
23870 Hennessey, M, 23F 4:59:29
23871 Sellors, J, 32M4:59:29
23872 Peacock, C, 29F 4:59:29
23873 Walsh, R, 30M 4:59:30
23874 Meermann, G, 55M 4:59:30
23875 Sundermann, K, 31F 4:59:30
23876 Katz, C, 32M 4:59:30
23877 Wiersema, H, 50M 4:59:31
23878 Limbaugh, T, 53M 4:59:31
23879 Reuther, M, 37F 4:59:31
23880 Erdmann , D, 59M 4:59:31
23881 Choi, D, 52M 4:59:32
23882 Luescher, R, 44F 4:59:32
23883 Maruyama, T, 40M 4:59:32
23884 Wiersema, E, 42M 4:59:33
23885 Rat, H, 49M 4:59:33
23886 Young, J, 51M 4:59:33
23887 Kerr, B, 46M 4:59:33
23888 Voda, M, 35F 4:59:33
23889 Mansfield Jr, H, 43M 4:59:33
23890 Schipper, J, 40F 4:59:34
23891 Fehlmann, V, 39F 4:59:35
23892 Canner, G, 50M 4:59:35
23893 Edenbaum, M, 26M 4:59:36
23894 Poloner, H, 26M 4:59:36
23895 Grandin, G, 49M 4:59:36
23896 Geddes, W, 28M 4:59:36
23897 Lobel, J, 49M 4:59:37
23898 Edenbaum, S, 50M 4:59:38
23899 Mesulam, L, 33F 4:59:39
23900 Mueller, M, 29F 4:59:39
23901 Wray, D, 41M 4:59:39
23902 Corbarieu, M, 44F 4:59:39
23903 Legrand, A, 43F 4:59:39
23904 Fink, W, 49M 4:59:39
23905 Anderlini, U, 72M 4:59:39
23906 Brand, B, 55F 4:59:40
23907 Boutross, C, 46F 4:59:41
23908 Segarra, M, 41F 4:59:41
23909 Valente, R, 36M 4:59:41
23910 Kushner, J, 39M 4:59:41
23911 Zell, M, 41F 4:59:41
23912 Wagner, F, 24F 4:59:41
23913 Zell, J, 51M 4:59:42
23914 Neuhaus, G, 53M 4:59:42
23915 Pohling, J, 40M 4:59:42
23916 Testa, A, 44M 4:59:42
23917 Masser, A, 48M 4:59:43
23918 Pizzamiglio, G, 58M 4:59:44
23919 Small, A, 58M4:59:44
23920 Nomura, T, 63M 4:59:44
23921 Harris, C, 39M 4:59:44
23922 Inoue, F, 43F 4:59:44
23923 Leong, E, 40M 4:59:45
23924 Savage, B, 38F 4:59:45
23925 Jansen, H, 35M 4:59:45
23926 Pierce, L, 33F 4:59:45
23927 Li, E, 36M 4:59:46
23928 Jones, P, 64M 4:59:47
23929 Bender, M, 66M 4:59:47
23930 Smith, K, 28M 4:59:47
23931 Nakamori, N, 27F 4:59:48
23932 Zambrano Venado, M, 45M 4:59:49
23933 O'Neill, J, 53M 4:59:49
23934 Armbruster, D, 40M 4:59:49
23935 Campocci, F, 52M 4:59:49
23936 Andreasen, K, 23F 4:59:49
23937 Gallegos, M, 40M 4:59:49
23938 Munizaga, J, 44M 4:59:50
23939 Toulet Salas, E, 39M 4:59:50
23940 Gagnon, J, 36M 4:59:50
23941 Brafman, Y, 30M 4:59:52
23942 Emblen, K, 25F 4:59:52
23943 Segal, H, 28F 4:59:53
23944 Flynn, M, 25M 4:59:53
23945 Aino, M, 45M 4:59:53
23946 Haines, F, 70M 4:59:54
23947 Nussbaum, P, 42F 4:59:54
23948 Duran, M, 28F 4:59:54
23949 McQuillan, M, 32M 4:59:54
23950 Merola, E, 35F 4:59:54
23951 Matich, J, 26M 4:59:55
23952 Salminen, A, 55F 4:59:55
23953 McQuillan, D, 26M 4:59:55
23954 Xenias, S, 51M 4:59:56
23955 Mikesch, K, 41M 4:59:57
23956 Roberts, C, 36M 4:59:57
23957 Hubers, J, 31M 4:59:57
23958 Houlmann, B, 53M 4:59:57
23959 Ford, S, 39F 4:59:57
23960 Flaig, J, 36F 4:59:57
23961 Beyeler, R, 54M 4:59:58
23962 Jimmerskog, R, 36M 4:59:58
23963 Von Bueren, E, 45F 4:59:58
23964 Sullivan, W, 30M 4:59:58
23965 Veker, S, 38M 4:59:58
23966 Ottaviani, F, 26F 4:59:58
23967 Carpentier, F, 26F 4:59:59
23968 Tazawa, E, 46F 4:59:59
23969 Silverman, L, 29F 5:00:00
23970 Dr. Danckert, H, 60M 5:00:00
23971 Smith, J, 43M 5:00:00
23972 Lopez, D, 33F 5:00:00
23973 Wallworth, S, 36F 5:00:00
23974 Abraham, S, 52F 5:00:00
23975 Jain, R, 28M 5:00:00
23976 Santa Colon, P, 54M 5:00:05
23977 Boulanger, D, 64M 5:00:05
23978 DeAnda, V, 54F 5:00:05
23979 Utasi, J, 55M 5:00:05
23980 Weber, J, 40M 5:00:05
23981 Khan, E, 42F 5:00:07
23982 Perez, J, 43M 5:00:08
23983 Weber, M, 37F 5:00:08
23984 Bloch, A, 32M 5:00:09
23985 Burkhardt, R, 28F 5:00:09
23986 McCallum, W, 46M 5:00:09
23987 Thompson, G, 61M 5:00:10
23988 Cornel, B, 47M 5:00:10
23989 Patelis, T, 31M 5:00:11
23990 Cornel, M, 42F 5:00:11
23991 Okumoto, N, 30F 5:00:12
23992 Santos, J, 45M 5:00:12
23993 Chappell, P, 33F 5:00:12
23994 Kishida, Y, 33M 5:00:12
23995 Schatte, K, 44F 5:00:13
23996 Olsthoorn, J, 40F 5:00:13
23997 Hesselbom, A, 44M 5:00:14
23998 Encarnacion, S, 39M 5:00:14
23999 Nowak, W, 57M5:00:15
24000 Maldonado, G, 53M 5:00:15


Even Marathon Is Political
In the homestretch of the governor's race yesterday, not even the New York City Marathon was free of political controversy.
Late in the day, about 25 Hasidic Jews from Williamsburg in Brooklyn appeared at City Hall to complain that police officers had taken down posters for George E. Pataki from lampposts along the route there in the early morning, saying that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had ordered that there be no political signs along the race.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON (Part 6 of 8); New York City's Finest: They're Strong Through the Finish
15001 Hutcher, G, 41F 4:18:36
15002 Lewino, D, 35M 4:18:37
15003 Leslie, D, 44M 4:18:37
15004 Habib, P, 46M 4:18:37
15005 Coffey, A, 51M 4:18:37
15006 Barnett, P, 48M 4:18:38
15007 Bottrill, M, 33M 4:18:38
15008 De-Montgolfier, L, 43M 4:18:38
15009 Sesia, G, 50M 4:18:38
15010 Per-Kristian, M, 49M 4:18:38
15011 Raylman, R, 32M 4:18:38
15012 Ibarra, M, 35M 4:18:38
15013 Tandberg, A, 38M 4:18:38
15014 Diniz, J, 31M 4:18:38
15015 Hendriks, M, 45M 4:18:38
15016 Tramposch, W, 45M 4:18:38
15017 Morales, J, 25M 4:18:39
15018 Quiroz, J, 23M 4:18:39
15019 Panichi, A, 54M 4:18:39
15020 Strutt, B, 57M4:18:39
15021 Villarreal, P, 56M 4:18:39
15022 Payne, S, 28M 4:18:39
15023 Murray, D, 28F 4:18:39
15024 Leon Velez, A, 37M 4:18:39
15025 Behrens, F, 53M 4:18:40
15026 Nazario, M, 35M 4:18:40
15027 Thompson, M, 50M 4:18:40
15028 Mando, P, 30M 4:18:41
15029 Blake, M, 23M 4:18:41
15030 MacDonald, J, 25M 4:18:41
15031 O'Dwyer, J, 36M 4:18:41
15032 Nancarrow, C, 43M 4:18:42
15033 Van Itallie, R, 62M 4:18:42
15034 Souza Filho, A, 33M 4:18:42
15035 Llernea, H, 46M 4:18:42
15036 Bechet, J, 42M 4:18:43
15037 Castrie, G, 43M4:18:43
15038 Schmidt, H, 52M 4:18:43
15039 Parra, A, 53M 4:18:43
15040 Pfarl, W, 49M 4:18:43
15041 Tubella, J, 34M 4:18:43
15042 Schipper, J, 51M 4:18:44
15043 Fontaine, R, 52M 4:18:44
15044Wright, K, 32F 4:18:44
15045 Cirincione, P, 31F 4:18:44
15046 Core, D, 45M 4:18:45
15047 Paquet, G, 50M 4:18:45
15048 Nomura, T, 36M 4:18:45
15049 Stensland, K, 40M 4:18:45
15050 Uerlings, W, 49M 4:18:45
15051 Goerlitz, M, 64M 4:18:45
15052 Fontana, R, 47M 4:18:45
15053 Scheurwater, H, 43M 4:18:45
15054 Fontana, O, 27M 4:18:46
15055 Sicina, W, 37M 4:18:46
15056 Baxter, J, 36M 4:18:46
15057 Marrone, F, 45M 4:18:47
15058 Davis, R, 39F 4:18:47
15059 Carrola, A, 41M 4:18:47
15060 Leeker, M, 29F 4:18:48
15061 Carver, B, 35M 4:18:48
15062 Donza, S, 41M 4:18:48
15063 Garcia, J, 43M 4:18:49
15064 Tison, J, 36F 4:18:49
15065 Levy, L, 50F 4:18:49
15066 Jenkins, D, 34M 4:18:49
15067 Astarita, J, 33M 4:18:50
15068Siegal, G, 45M 4:18:50
15069 Reiter, S, 39F 4:18:50
15070 Anderson, C, 57M 4:18:50
15071 Colameco, M, 38M 4:18:50
15072 Van Der Geest, J, 58M 4:18:51
15073 Kendall, M, 48M 4:18:52
15074 Irwin, S, 22F 4:18:52
15075 Nygaard, E, 53F 4:18:52
15076 Lombardo Jr, R, 28M 4:18:53
15077 Danaher, E, 29F 4:18:53
15078 Okamoto, S, 64M 4:18:53
15079 Ellefson, J, 30F 4:18:53
15080 Gasser, K, 29M 4:18:54
15081 Doat, M, 49F 4:18:54
15082 Sotoodeh, K, 30M 4:18:54
15083 Rendon Gonzalez, C, 52M 4:18:54
15084 Hinrichsen, H, 56M 4:18:54
15085 Kolodzieski, T, 35F 4:18:54
15086 Aragon, F, 40M 4:18:54
15087 LaRocca, T, 38M 4:18:55
15088 Keppler, A, 41F 4:18:55
15089 Jensen, L, 47M 4:18:55
15090 Aldrovandi, R, 57M 4:18:55
15091 Vecchiariello, V, 25F 4:18:55
15092 Mosher, L, 45M 4:18:56
15093 Smith, J, 30F 4:18:56
15094 Hickey, J, 27M 4:18:57
15095 Marsault, C, 37M 4:18:57
15096 Monnet, D, 35M 4:18:57
15097 Destang, P, 31M 4:18:58
15098 Delgado, H, 32M 4:18:58
15099 Delliaux, R, 38M 4:18:58
15100 Bernhardt, C, 32F 4:18:58
15101 Villette, A, 51M 4:18:58
15102 Tabary, J, 49M 4:18:59
15103 Olsson, H, 49M 4:18:59
15104 Morgardo, D, 48M 4:18:59
15105 Hill, L, 27F 4:18:59
15106 Poepoe, L, 31F 4:19:00
15107 Gorman, E, 42M 4:19:00
15108 Mitas, T, 28F 4:19:00
15109 Villaret, G, 41M 4:19:00
15110 Freeman, E, 46M 4:19:01
15111 Rogers, J, 30M 4:19:01
15112 Bradshaw, P, 46M 4:19:01
15113 Ennis, D, 31M 4:19:01
15114 Weissberger, R, 36F 4:19:01
15115 Somelofske, R, 46M 4:19:01
15116 Visona, F, 49M 4:19:02
15117 Desroches, L, 25F 4:19:03
15118 Friendly, D, 31F 4:19:03
15119 Petersen, E, 46M 4:19:03
15120 Ho, K, 29M 4:19:03
15121 Altbuch, A, 41M 4:19:04
15122 Bratke, M, 45M 4:19:04
15123 Litner, A, 41M 4:19:04
15124 Berman, R, 37M 4:19:04
15125 Torrealba, L, 36M 4:19:04
15126 Ostrander, J, 32F 4:19:05
15127 Moren, A, 48M 4:19:05
15128 Haunss, L, 24F 4:19:05
15129 DeCarlo, D, 51M 4:19:06
15130 Huffman, D, 28M 4:19:06
15131 Holbein, O, 27M 4:19:06
15132 Chaix, M, 45M 4:19:06
15133 Fruithof, H, 53M 4:19:06
15134 Morales Mancilla, R, 21M 4:19:06
15135 Cassidy, J, 36M 4:19:07
15136 Blain, J, 39M 4:19:07
15137 Leonardi, A, 36F 4:19:07
15138 David, R, 39M 4:19:07
15139 Casas Torres, A, 33M 4:19:08
15140 Puskul, S, 41M 4:19:08
15141 Perry, L, 43F 4:19:08
15142 Caso, A, 49M 4:19:09
15143 Spence, R, 36M 4:19:09
15144 Gorman, F, 55F 4:19:09
15145 Knight, J, 26M 4:19:09
15146 Myones, P, 36M 4:19:09
15147 Ribero, I, 29F 4:19:09
15148 Doing, A, 25M 4:19:09
15149 Engelhardt, G, 44M 4:19:10
15150 Sobrero, A, 40M 4:19:10
15151 Sparrow, J, 40F 4:19:10
15152 Frete, S, 36M 4:19:10
15153 Barrett, D, 35M 4:19:10
15154 Anderson, J, 47M 4:19:11
15155 Stefanik, T, 56M 4:19:11
15156 Degen, T, 25F 4:19:11
15157 Lally, M, 26M 4:19:12
15158 Moelland, G, 35F 4:19:12
15159 Greco, Y, 44M 4:19:12
15160 Ludi, A, 60F 4:19:12
15161 Mirsky, L, 28F 4:19:12
15162 McGowan, J, 27M 4:19:12
15163 Musso, R, 40F 4:19:13
15164 Safley, S, 45F 4:19:13
15165 Malm, C, 29F 4:19:13
15166 Renaioli, G, 28M 4:19:14
15167 Mac Cormac, S, 28F 4:19:14
15168 Krull, B, 42M 4:19:14
15169 Eckert, J, 24F 4:19:14
15170 Stone, J, 36M 4:19:14
15171 Poulsen, F, 25M 4:19:15
15172 McMillen, M, 54M 4:19:15
15173 Cox, R, 29M 4:19:15
15174 Tittermary, A, 40M 4:19:16
15175 Tellerman, R, 45F 4:19:16
15176 Molina, A, 39F 4:19:16
15177 Cook, A, 43M 4:19:16
15178 Petrella, J, 47F 4:19:16
15179 Kielstra, R, 48M 4:19:17
15180 Nielsen, E, 47F 4:19:17
15181 Lafont, B, 39M 4:19:18
15182 Selders, T, 49M4:19:18
15183 Roehm, W, 58M 4:19:18
15184 Wydick, J, 55M 4:19:18
15185 Baldinger, G, 30M 4:19:18
15186 Johnson, C, 43M 4:19:18
15187 Albornoz, N, 30M 4:19:18
15188 Axt, S, 30F 4:19:18
15189 Besson, L, 26M 4:19:18
15190 Lane, M, 19M 4:19:19
15191 Jennings, G, 45M 4:19:19
15192 Leon Arellano, P, 21M 4:19:19
15193 Moeller, P, 34M 4:19:20
15194 Lobo, J, 26F 4:19:20
15195 Sciamarelli, J, 37M 4:19:20
15196 Sharp, J, 42M 4:19:20
15197 Harding, E, 25F 4:19:20
15198 Boidi, S, 31M 4:19:20
15199 Mielke, D, 47M 4:19:21
15200 Quarles, H, 24F 4:19:21
15201 Hoerschelmann, H, 43M 4:19:21
15202 Kabel, C, 24M 4:19:21
15203 Rosen, D, 23M 4:19:21
15204 Saporito, J, 39M 4:19:21
15205 Pishko, D, 43M 4:19:22
15206 Piper, H, 61M 4:19:22
15207 Harris, W, 40M 4:19:22
15208 Sales, M, 33F 4:19:22
15209 Butkevich, T, 28M 4:19:23
15210 Stevens, P, 34M 4:19:23
15211 Aulie, J, 47M 4:19:23
15212 Cohen, T, 25M 4:19:23
15213Mihara, T, 52M 4:19:23
15214 Mathias, L, 52M 4:19:23
15215 Ribeiro, P, 41M 4:19:24
15216 Hek, W, 32M 4:19:24
15217 Herbert, K, 42M4:19:24
15218 Purcell, B, 21F 4:19:24
15219 Sporsheim, H, 28M 4:19:25
15220 Roehm, E, 62F 4:19:25
15221 Padilla, J, 45M 4:19:25
15222 Ruane, J, 36M 4:19:25
15223 Betar, R, 42F 4:19:25
15224 Florian, D, 49M 4:19:25
15225 Gaudemer, V, 32F 4:19:26
15226 Watkins, W, 40M 4:19:26
15227 Saad, A, 24F 4:19:26
15228 Middleton, M, 45M 4:19:26
15229 Hooijer, C, 42M 4:19:26
15230 Velazquez Carranza, Y, 38F 4:19:27
15231 Mohr, T, 48M 4:19:27
15232 Adam, R, 38M 4:19:27
15233 Pourcher, F, 45F 4:19:27
15234 Penalba, C, 43M 4:19:27
15235 Kass, S, 33F 4:19:28
15236 Guenault, M, 49M 4:19:28
15237 Fiddler, A, 51M 4:19:28
15238 Mestre, L, 38F 4:19:29
15239 Strand, J, 24M 4:19:29
15240 Ballantyne, J, 26F 4:19:29
15241 Lopez, S, 27M 4:19:29
15242 Valois, F, 49M 4:19:29
15243 Sales, S, 31F 4:19:29
15244 Dufauit, L, 31F 4:19:29
15245 Pung, J, 36F 4:19:29
15246 Jones, J, 51M 4:19:29
15247 Sandness, K, 31F 4:19:29
15248 Katsura, S, 34M 4:19:30
15249 Cruz, I, 31M 4:19:30
15250 Macintyre, J, 38M 4:19:30
15251 Fiore, A, 64M 4:19:30
15252 Sizer, S, 37F 4:19:30
15253 Grady, E, 46M 4:19:30
15254 Allen, C, 31M 4:19:31
15255 Burke, C, 36M 4:19:31
15256 Gajda, B, 60M 4:19:31
15257 Tolman, M, 23F 4:19:31
15258 Lewis, T, 32M 4:19:32
15259 Porricelli, D, 42M 4:19:32
15260 Gottet, S, 54M 4:19:33
15261 Himmel, A, 41M 4:19:33
15262 Kresge, K, 39M 4:19:34
15263 Blanvillain, D, 42M 4:19:34
15264 Osollo, O, 45M 4:19:34
15265 Cammarata, R, 50M 4:19:35
15266 Beulink, P, 50M 4:19:35
15267 Feigelson, T, 33M 4:19:35
15268 Fells, D, 34M 4:19:36
15269 Avatar, C, 45M 4:19:36
15270 Carrasco, C, 28M 4:19:36
15271 Hirst, L, 32F 4:19:36
15272 Ryder, K, 27F 4:19:37
15273 Franzen, W, 41M 4:19:37
15274 Outcalt, K, 23M 4:19:37
15275 Liewerkus, C, 33M 4:19:38
15276 Zamora, G, 45M 4:19:38
15277 Ferwerda, J, 40M 4:19:38
15278 Edwards, L, 34F 4:19:38
15279 Herrmann, J, 45M 4:19:38
15280 Solomon, L, 33F 4:19:38
15281 Moran, C, 56M 4:19:38
15282 Tetart, G, 47M 4:19:39
15283 Juenger, R, 43M 4:19:39
15284 O'Neill, C, 35F 4:19:39
15285 Sorrentino, G, 39M 4:19:39
15286 English, D, 37F 4:19:40
15287 Saroli, V, 42M 4:19:40
15288 Robinson, K, 45M 4:19:40
15289 Mace, C, 39F 4:19:41
15290 Jacobson, S, 35M 4:19:41
15291 Martin, R, 50M 4:19:41
15292 Rach, A, 44M 4:19:42
15293 Menzer, E, 30M 4:19:42
15294 Bergvall, R, 42M 4:19:42
15295 Schoenhoefer, H, 30M 4:19:42
15296 Andersen, S, 35F 4:19:42
15297 Brand, W, 59M 4:19:43
15298 Babbit, H, 53M 4:19:43
15299 Golden, T, 32M 4:19:43
15300 Proto, J, 36M 4:19:43
15301 Thibaut, M, 45F 4:19:43
15302 Ness, P, 35M 4:19:44
15303 Arentsen, D, 32M 4:19:44
15304 Wright, J, 42M 4:19:44
15305 Cortet, J, 35M 4:19:45
15306 Thibaut, J, 42F 4:19:45
15307 Osborne, I, 53M 4:19:45
15308 Gentil, R, 54M 4:19:45
15309 Morrison, J, 26F 4:19:45
15310 Hendriks, R, 43M 4:19:45
15311 Hinojosa Aguerrevere, E, 39M 4:19:46
15312 Mouchon, J, 43M 4:19:46
15313 Vertiz Rodriguez, J, 45M 4:19:46
15314 Alary, C, 47M 4:19:46
15315Figueroa Martinez, E, 48M 4:19:46
15316 Morrison, D, 32M 4:19:46
15317 Hocking, C, 42F 4:19:46
15318 Pachet, A, 42M 4:19:46
15319 Johns, L, 37F 4:19:46
15320 Wyborn, P, 32M 4:19:46
15321 Ishii, R, 38F 4:19:47
15322 Schouten, H, 41M 4:19:47
15323 DeMattia, M, 54F4:19:47
15324 Flynn, C, 42M 4:19:48
15325 Couzens, J, 33M 4:19:48
15326 Dirnbacher, T, 45M 4:19:48
15327 Faure, A, 30F 4:19:49
15328 Eichelberger, J, 33M 4:19:49
15329 O'Gorman, F, 54M 4:19:49
15330 Ordas, M, 42F 4:19:49
15331 Creel, J, 40M 4:19:49
15332 Berends, B, 36M 4:19:49
15333 Guerrera, R, 45M 4:19:49
15334 Berger, G, 30M 4:19:49
15335 Guenard, S, 47F 4:19:50
15336 Marsh, J, 32F4:19:50
15337 Vazquez Del Rivero, M, 44F 4:19:50
15338 Joerger, U, 32M 4:19:51
15339 Natkins, S, 51M 4:19:51
15340 Jones, M, 31M 4:19:52
15341 Polastri, F, 46M 4:19:52
15342 Verburg, H, 37M 4:19:52
15343 Ugalde Penagos, J, 46M 4:19:52
15344 Quartararo, P, 33M 4:19:52
15345 Pace, F, 59M 4:19:53
15346 Rosental, D, 54M 4:19:53
15347 Wambold, C, 28M 4:19:54
15348 Leff, M, 36M 4:19:55
15349 Cohen, J, 29M 4:19:55
15350 Lukas*, M, 41M 4:19:56
15351 Socol, D, 42F 4:19:56
15352 Harder, W, 57M 4:19:57
15353 Ryckebusch, M, 43M 4:19:57
15354 Polo, J, 36M 4:19:57
15355 Nowery, D, 39F 4:19:57
15356 Carlington, L, 48M 4:19:57
15357 Fauci, A, 32F 4:19:58
15358 Martinez Madrigal, E, 35M 4:19:58
15359 Penaloza Plascencia, M, 50M 4:19:58
15360 Carbonell Arnau, S, 49M 4:19:58
15361 Morgenstern, A, 23F 4:19:58
15362 Hoopes, S, 51M 4:19:59
15363 Diaz De La Vega, D, 34M 4:19:59
15364 Bacon, P, 26F 4:19:59
15365 Lindberg, A, 38F 4:19:59
15366 Kato, K, 32F 4:19:59
15367 Kato, S, 35M 4:19:59
15368 Jacob, E, 35M 4:19:59
15369 Soto, M, 52M 4:20:00
15370 Van Drunen, J, 38M 4:20:00
15371 Ives, A, 30M 4:20:00
15372 Carinci, M, 58F 4:20:01
15373 Mooij, J, 30F 4:20:01
15374 Karlsson, I, 51F 4:20:01
15375 Nieminen, P, 56M 4:20:01
15376 Dehlitsch, R, 60M4:20:02
15377 Williams, C, 36F 4:20:02
15378 Giton, D, 52M 4:20:02
15379 Deml, H, 47M 4:20:03
15380 Foubert, M, 44M 4:20:03
15381 Gallagher, E, 43M 4:20:05
15382 Ainsworth, D, 29M 4:20:05
15383 Monaco, T, 59M 4:20:05
15384 Lopez, C, 41M 4:20:06
15385 Fitchett, C, 41M 4:20:06
15386 Cain, E, 48M 4:20:06
15387 Van Der Brugge, P, 58M 4:20:06
15388 Birchall, F, 37F 4:20:06
15389 Brulas, G, 47M 4:20:07
15390 Koyfman, S, 47M 4:20:07
15391 Graham, D, 46F 4:20:07
15392 Flachenaecker, M, 33M 4:20:07
15393 Lentz, C, 38M 4:20:07
15394 Kohnert, I, 50F 4:20:07
15395 Sobrie, M, 42F 4:20:08
15396 Lozano Galindo, H, 55M 4:20:08
15397 Biase, J, 54M 4:20:08
15398 Vazquez Alba, M, 48M 4:20:08
15399 Blachere, C, 41M 4:20:08
15400 Ramos Marrero, J, 36M 4:20:08
15401 Beier, F, 27M 4:20:09
15402 Kalnay, J, 33M 4:20:10
15403 Lacouture, A, 30M 4:20:11
15404 Castagna, G, 56M 4:20:11
15405 Perman, D, 54M 4:20:12
15406 Jones, R, 45M 4:20:13
15407 Cassidy, S, 32M 4:20:13
15408 Farrell, E, 47M 4:20:14
15409 Daniels, O, 37F 4:20:14
15410 Espy, I, 32M 4:20:14
15411 O'Hanlon, P, 51F 4:20:14
15412 Lin, C, 55M 4:20:14
15413 Ludwig, A, 24F 4:20:15
15414 Schubert, M, 34M 4:20:15
15415 Toepoel, J, 49F 4:20:15
15416 Tresca Carducci, G, 46M 4:20:15
15417Malandain, T, 30M 4:20:15
15418 Prawda, A, 47M 4:20:15
15419 Orgeval, J, 42M 4:20:15
15420 Jaworski, S, 42M 4:20:16
15421 Recher, A, 33M 4:20:16
15422 Verdugt, N, 38F 4:20:16
15423 Klarman, P, 59M4:20:17
15424 Lewis, P, 45F 4:20:18
15425 Knibbs, C, 31F 4:20:18
15426 Heger, F, 52M 4:20:19
15427 Aas, A, 46M 4:20:19
15428 Wight, T, 33M 4:20:19
15429 Retureta, M, 32M 4:20:19
15430 Auer, W, 31M 4:20:20
15431 Torre Prieto, A, 40M 4:20:20
15432 Wakkee, J, 34M 4:20:20
15433 Randel, P, 29M 4:20:21
15434 Costantin, O, 19M 4:20:21
15435 Stillhard, R, 41M 4:20:21
15436 Heblack, A, 44M 4:20:21
15437 Doherty, P, 28M 4:20:21
15438 Kernbach, J, 33M 4:20:21
15439 Jost, C, 27M 4:20:21
15440 Demirtas, L, 29F 4:20:21
15441 Lefebvre, H, 37M 4:20:21
15442 Webers, F, 47M 4:20:22
15443 Olshansky, L, 39F 4:20:22
15444 Iuso, L, 39M 4:20:22
15445 Anderson, D, 46F 4:20:22
15446 Hogue, C, 41F 4:20:23
15447 Cassar, P, 43F 4:20:23
15448 Diaz, A, 31M 4:20:23
15449 Callender, J, 36F 4:20:24
15450 Petitjean, F, 33M 4:20:24
15451 Cardona, L, 30M 4:20:24
15452 Flanagan, M, 34M 4:20:24
15453 Felici, R, 47M 4:20:25
15454 Adey, K, 36M 4:20:25
15455 Duncanson, J, 36M 4:20:25
15456 Gerrish, C, 42M 4:20:25
15457 Oneal, J, 62M 4:20:25
15458 Vish, M, 45F4:20:26
15459 Reyes, E, 40M 4:20:26
15460 Wilson, D, 35F 4:20:26
15461 Ward, E, 30F 4:20:26
15462 Groenewegen, B, 30M 4:20:26
15463 Payen, G, 24M 4:20:27
15464 Guerra, J, 46M 4:20:27
15465 Doyle, F, 30M 4:20:27
15466 Crawford, R, 45M 4:20:27
15467 Simunek, L, 30F 4:20:28
15468 Sabatini Jr, R, 26M 4:20:28
15469 Havron Jr, J, 36M 4:20:29
15470 Salas Lotfe, S, 46F 4:20:29
15471 Zarros, P, 30M 4:20:29
15472 Burgess Jr., W, 31M 4:20:29
15473 Bernstein, J, 31M 4:20:30
15474 Dundas, J, 37F 4:20:30
15475 Trimoullat, P, 36M4:20:30
15476 Torres, J, 33M 4:20:30
15477 Papon, D, 37M 4:20:31
15478 Clavelier, J, 32M 4:20:31
15479 Holmes, K, 29F 4:20:31
15480 Garza Ochoa, M, 47M 4:20:31
15481 Hoefer, A, 46F 4:20:31
15482 Landis, J, 26M 4:20:32
15483 Gardner, C, 39M 4:20:32
15484 Volonakis, A, 46M 4:20:32
15485 Wikstrom, D, 38M 4:20:32
15486 Byrne, K, 27F 4:20:33
15487 Winick, K, 27M 4:20:33
15488 Schmid, M, 26M4:20:33
15489 Santoy Lozano, F, 50M 4:20:33
15490 Navarro Ledesma, F, 41M 4:20:34
15491 Steinfeld, D, 31M 4:20:34
15492 Cherry, L, 31M 4:20:34
15493 Ohara, E, 39M 4:20:34
15494 Anderson, J, 29F 4:20:34
15495 Malone, C, 35M 4:20:34
15496 Goldin, W, 41M 4:20:34
15497 Vijgen, P, 39M 4:20:34
15498 Reusink, R, 46M 4:20:34
15499 Stoiber, W, 49M 4:20:35
15500 Sullivan, J, 46F 4:20:35
15501 Thomas Brooks, L, 31F 4:20:36
15502 Moeller, L, 47M 4:20:36
15503 Patterson, R, 42M 4:20:36
15504 Juergens, M, 24M 4:20:36
15505 Sington, P, 41F 4:20:36
15506 Worbye, J, 53M 4:20:37
15507 Carter, M, 50M 4:20:37
15508 Esser, H, 46M 4:20:37
15509 Simburger, E, 56F 4:20:38
15510 Hennessy, N, 50M 4:20:39
15511 Jonsson, S, 40M 4:20:39
15512 Christiansen, I, 29F 4:20:39
15513 Ribner, R, 28F 4:20:39
15514 Kruger, K, 56F 4:20:39
15515 Saylor, V, 33F 4:20:39
15516 Bazin, K, 33M 4:20:39
15517 Del Sordo, D, 41F 4:20:39
15518 Werbicki, M, 37F 4:20:40
15519 Ventura, V, 47M 4:20:40
15520 Tastet, J, 51M 4:20:40
15521 Rochet, C, 37M 4:20:40
15522 Kneller, J, 48M 4:20:40
15523 Chui, B, 31M 4:20:40
15524 Iltis, F, 27F 4:20:41
15525 Shapiro, S, 53M 4:20:41
15526 Toth, L, 37F 4:20:41
15527 Froman, P, 51M 4:20:41
15528 Merrow, A, 39M 4:20:42
15529 Stamm, S, 30M 4:20:42
15530 Hyne, R, 39M 4:20:42
15531 Katsch, J, 50M 4:20:42
15532 Wright, C, 31F 4:20:43
15533 Tebbano, M, 42M 4:20:43
15534 Fargette, V, 31F 4:20:43
15535 Tolk, J, 31M 4:20:44
15536 Borello, D, 44M 4:20:44
15537 O'Connor, J, 40F 4:20:44
15538 Savolainen, M, 40M 4:20:44
15539 Childress, J, 33F 4:20:45
15540 Sherer, M, 37M 4:20:45
15541 Rinehart, R, 45M 4:20:45
15542 Babichev, V, 61M 4:20:45
15543 Opiacio, P, 39F 4:20:45
15544 Defecmeneux, T, 31M 4:20:45
15545 Stern, J, 42M 4:20:45
15546 Sage, B, 23F 4:20:46
15547 Lewis, R, 42M 4:20:46
15548 Mossiat, A, 30M 4:20:46
15549 Hales, T, 34M 4:20:46
15550 Kasmin, R, 24M 4:20:46
15551 Murray, C, 36M 4:20:46
15552 Alstodt, L, 24M 4:20:47
15553 Vidales Hernandez, L, 32F 4:20:47
15554 Rawat, Y, 52M 4:20:47
15555 Preza Gomez, J, 43M 4:20:47
15556 Maury, D, 47M 4:20:47
15557 Massie, A, 34M 4:20:47
15558 Scarcella*, L, 43M 4:20:48
15559 Zocca, E, 36M 4:20:48
15560 Kendrick, T, 42M 4:20:48
15561 Watson, P, 45M 4:20:49
15562 MacLearie, A, 33F 4:20:49
15563 Kelly, M, 24F 4:20:49
15564 Miranda, L, 42M 4:20:50
15565 Guese, A, 38M 4:20:50
15566 Torrini, A, 30M 4:20:50
15567 Louw, I, 35F 4:20:50
15568 Okelly, D, 30M 4:20:50
15569 Gonzalez, L, 45M 4:20:50
15570 Crombie, D, 49M 4:20:50
15571 Haak, U, 40M 4:20:50
15572 Cook, T, 25F 4:20:51
15573 Moffitt, D, 47M 4:20:51
15574 Bumgardner, J, 34M 4:20:51
15575 Coronado Barajas, P, 35F 4:20:52
15576 Oxman, M, 51M 4:20:52
15577 Oberg, B, 60M 4:20:52
15578 Varga, V, 67M 4:20:52
15579 Batty, J, 42M 4:20:52
15580 Granville, M, 26F 4:20:52
15581 Biallas, J, 40M 4:20:52
15582 McGowan, C, 31F 4:20:53
15583 Cope, L, 42M 4:20:53
15584 Roman, M, 52F 4:20:53
15585 Madeira, P, 30M 4:20:53
15586 De Vrind, J, 35M 4:20:54
15587 Martarello, L, 34F 4:20:54
15588 Ortega, A, 45M 4:20:54
15589 Chambers, R, 38M 4:20:55
15590 Eri, T, 45F 4:20:55
15591 Malmberg, J, 42M 4:20:55
15592 Wyler, D, 42M 4:20:55
15593 Bennett, A, 35M 4:20:55
15594 Stromoe, O, 44M 4:20:55
15595 Albert, J, 45M 4:20:55
15596 West, W, 48M 4:20:56
15597 Nunez Laureano, A, 49M 4:20:56
15598 Trias, G, 50M 4:20:56
15599 McIntyre, P, 37M 4:20:56
15600 Wilson, R, 26F 4:20:56
15601 Chinea, J, 46M 4:20:56
15602 Bedelis, A, 35F 4:20:56
15603 Forman, M, 42M 4:20:56
15604 De Vries, D, 32M 4:20:57
15605 Long, D, 29M 4:20:57
15606 Jankiewicz, J, 28M 4:20:57
15607 Brady, C, 28M 4:20:57
15608 Otero, I, 28F 4:20:57
15609 Samuels, C, 54F 4:20:58
15610 Garza De Villarreal, L, 34F 4:20:58
15611 Kao, J, 42F 4:20:58
15612 Kossoff, A, 25M 4:20:58
15613 Faludi, R, 35M 4:20:59
15614 Kieffer, P, 24F 4:20:59
15615 Wornell, D, 39M 4:20:59
15616 Dean, J, 28M 4:20:59
15617 Hanousek, W, 49M 4:20:59
15618 Barron, E, 50M 4:20:59
15619 Szeto, H, 42F 4:21:00
15620 Mozaffari, K, 35M 4:21:00
15621 Friedman, L, 46M 4:21:00
15622 Bachelier, S, 19M 4:21:00
15623 Brock, J, 42M 4:21:01
15624 Torres Sansoube, R, 44M 4:21:01
15625 Galaz, J, 42M 4:21:01
15626 Toscano, C, 40F 4:21:02
15627 Leue Dr., O, 53M 4:21:02
15628 Timor, I, 58M 4:21:02
15629 Stortstrom, L, 27F 4:21:02
15630 Sanderman, R, 38M 4:21:02
15631 Mallory, C, 30M 4:21:02
15632 Inoue, K, 46M 4:21:03
15633 Hartmann, M, 33F 4:21:03
15634 Matava, M, 31M 4:21:04
15635 Skoczypiec, S, 38M 4:21:04
15636 Poulain, R, 44F 4:21:04
15637 Haysley, J, 26F 4:21:04
15638 Root, M, 31M 4:21:04
15639 Harrison, M, 40M 4:21:05
15640 Greenwald, G, 27M 4:21:05
15641 Maher, D, 35M 4:21:05
15642 Goodwin, J, 26F 4:21:05
15643 Weber, G, 31M 4:21:06
15644 Barth, L, 26M 4:21:06
15645 Zimsek, A, 49M 4:21:06
15646 Rege, M, 31M 4:21:06
15647 Decelle, E, 48M 4:21:06
15648 Goldstein, K, 38F 4:21:07
15649 Doisy, C, 49M 4:21:07
15650 Wellmann, C, 31M 4:21:07
15651 Raynal, J, 35M 4:21:07
15652 Krivacs, J, 38M 4:21:08
15653 Flatow, S, 40M 4:21:08
15654 Kanfer, K, 32M 4:21:08
15655 Garza Pena, L, 40M 4:21:08
15656 Risamenapatty, D, 42M 4:21:08
15657 Bluer, D, 40M 4:21:08
15658 Van Impe, J, 50M 4:21:09
15659 Holtschneider, D, 32M 4:21:10
15660 Spadola, C, 39M 4:21:11
15661 Stirpe, M, 38M 4:21:11
15662 Ferchaud, J, 35M 4:21:11
15663 Carlsson, L, 45M 4:21:12
15664 Degeling, J, 53M 4:21:12
15665 Charton, M, 34M 4:21:12
15666 Vlasov, D, 21M 4:21:12
15667 Padilla, G, 29F 4:21:12
15668 Cicatiello, J, 44M 4:21:12
15669 Oliveira, P, 41M 4:21:12
15670 Fishman, D, 30M 4:21:13
15671 Girones, H, 30M 4:21:13
15672 Gant, D, 61M 4:21:14
15673 Browne, K, 36M 4:21:15
15674 Rodriguez, N, 34F 4:21:15
15675 Monschau, C, 38F 4:21:15
15676 Saab, A, 23M 4:21:16
15677 Lopez, P, 50M 4:21:16
15678 Pyles, S, 46M 4:21:17
15679 Scaglione, P, 52F 4:21:17
15680 Sauvageau, R, 50M4:21:17
15681 Hanley, T, 31F 4:21:17
15682 Bradford, P, 25F 4:21:18
15683 Bolech, P, 42M 4:21:18
15684 Lawler, M, 35F 4:21:18
15685 Walker, P, 34M 4:21:18
15686 Fernandez, E, 31F 4:21:18
15687 Vela Lugo, A, 40M 4:21:19
15688 Auneau, H, 30M 4:21:19
15689 Segot, J, 50M 4:21:19
15690 Colin, Y, 39M 4:21:19
15691 Kurachi, K, 55M 4:21:20
15692 Godfrey, L, 46M 4:21:20
15693 Giunti, M, 38M 4:21:20
15694 Wilson, B, 43M 4:21:20
15695 Moore, H, 62M 4:21:21
15696 De Oteyza, D, 24F 4:21:21
15697 Schwartz, L, 41M 4:21:21
15698 Picard, H, 32F 4:21:22
15699 Hill, R, 46M 4:21:22
15700 Nemeth, S, 36M 4:21:22
15701 Dalivoust, P, 46M 4:21:23
15702 Kuhlkamp, H, 55M 4:21:23
15703 Homma, K, 32F 4:21:23
15704 Hamm, K, 52M 4:21:23
15705 Goyne, J, 48M 4:21:23
15706 Godoy, J, 42M 4:21:24
15707 Chavez, J, 38M 4:21:24
15708 Sipes, S, 31F 4:21:24
15709 Vartanian, G, 47M 4:21:24
15710 Cellerier, C, 43F 4:21:25
15711 Arfanotti, A, 58M 4:21:25
15712 Baer, J, 46F 4:21:25
15713 Silveira, O, 64M 4:21:25
15714 Van Den Heuvel, A, 36M 4:21:25
15715 Marr, G, 65M 4:21:25
15716 Bowen, A, 68M 4:21:26
15717 Lebon, P, 41M 4:21:26
15718 Knetemann-Donker, G, 43F 4:21:26
15719 Sugimoto, H, 51M 4:21:27
15720 Silverman, L, 47M 4:21:27
15721 Kolsky, M, 54M 4:21:27
15722 Spotti, A, 44M 4:21:28
15723 Bakker, D, 45M 4:21:28
15724 Silva, M, 31F 4:21:28
15725 Hansen, P, 49M 4:21:29
15726 Driguez, L, 41F 4:21:29
15727 Muskin, C, 45M 4:21:29
15728 Matthew, G, 61M 4:21:29
15729 Heinemann, D, 28M 4:21:30
15730 Ehe, H, 60M 4:21:30
15731 Kennedy, V, 33F 4:21:30
15732 Spieser, P, 39M 4:21:30
15733 Castellon, G, 40F 4:21:30
15734 Lex, W, 51M 4:21:30
15735 Belime, C, 40F 4:21:30
15736 Harrison, B, 42F 4:21:31
15737 Hamel, J, 38F 4:21:31
15738 Faulds, P, 42M 4:21:31
15739 Mounier, J, 52M 4:21:31
15740 Lanza, L, 37M 4:21:31
15741 Longaphie, G, 35M4:21:31
15742 Lane, C, 27F 4:21:31
15743 Padilla, A, 38M 4:21:31
15744 Khalek, Y, 38M 4:21:31
15745 Dutchin, C, 38F 4:21:32
15746 Cros, J, 44M 4:21:32
15747 Fighetti, C, 22M 4:21:32
15748 Thuillier, Y, 43M 4:21:32
15749 Bowie Sr., R, 50M 4:21:33
15750 Deutsch, J, 32M 4:21:33
15751 Miller, N, 25M 4:21:33
15752 Scharnberg, H, 40M 4:21:33
15753 Bielefeld, B, 27F 4:21:34
15754 Lederman, G, 38M 4:21:34
15755 Felton, K, 20F 4:21:34
15756 Sadler, A, 33F 4:21:34
15757 Rosoff, S, 34M 4:21:34
15758 Grad, R, 51M 4:21:34
15759 Flood, W, 28M 4:21:35
15760 Zorrilla Vargas, V, 41M 4:21:35
15761 Harkness, C, 33F 4:21:35
15762 Lulliii, H, 35M 4:21:35
15763 Helewitz, J, 36M 4:21:35
15764 Flax, M, 49M 4:21:35
15765 Caveng, D, 41M 4:21:35
15766 Flores, N, 33F 4:21:35
15767 Preti, A, 30M4:21:35
15768 Cohan, J, 31M 4:21:35
15769 Moriello, G, 28F 4:21:36
15770 Blom, A, 41F 4:21:36
15771 Jouffrault, F, 41F 4:21:36
15772 Kemper, M, 33M 4:21:36
15773 Harth, R, 44M 4:21:36
15774 Moore, B, 42M 4:21:37
15775 Ripmaster, M, 48F 4:21:37
15776 Marr, D, 33M 4:21:38
15777 Shivaji, S, 39F 4:21:38
15778 Abaya, E, 48M 4:21:38
15779 Beckjord, S, 38F 4:21:38
15780 Guzman, R, 65M 4:21:38
15781 Watson, R, 37M 4:21:39
15782 Novinc, S, 28F 4:21:39
15783 Mirante, M, 37M 4:21:39
15784 Gerson, B, 27M 4:21:39
15785 Brumm, L, 18F 4:21:39
15786 Pandelli, A, 39M 4:21:39
15787 Raskin, P, 28F 4:21:39
15788 Seipp, U, 35F 4:21:39
15789 Rohrer, P, 25F 4:21:39
15790 Benford, R, 54M 4:21:40
15791 Van Vliet, F, 37M 4:21:40
15792 Seiver, B, 39M 4:21:40
15793 Skogly, K, 50M 4:21:40
15794 Finnell, A, 43F 4:21:40
15795 Durke, T, 36M 4:21:40
15796 Seitz, G, 48M 4:21:40
15797 Bivens, K, 50F 4:21:40
15798 Lombardi, M, 36M 4:21:41
15799 Lopez, R, 39M 4:21:41
15800 Raguso, R, 46M 4:21:41
15801 Dama, M, 38M 4:21:41
15802 McDonald, T, 56M 4:21:41
15803 Hummel, J, 44F 4:21:42
15804 Michelen, J, 24M 4:21:42
15805 Marcos, L, 51M 4:21:42
15806 Gallardo, J, 58M 4:21:43
15807 Tschudi, H, 52M 4:21:43
15808 Russell, W, 28M 4:21:43
15809 Le Sage, S, 44M 4:21:43
15810 Topper Jr., R, 40M 4:21:43
15811 Pachter, S, 34M 4:21:44
15812 Benjert, M, 50M 4:21:44
15813 Min, D, 26F 4:21:44
15814 Franke, M, 36M 4:21:44
15815 Kotys, A, 32M 4:21:44
15816 Rauh, M, 47M 4:21:44
15817 Garcia, C, 39M 4:21:44
15818 Kirk, J, 37M 4:21:45
15819 Forgione, C, 28M 4:21:45
15820 Farias Garcia, A, 44M 4:21:45
15821 Koehn, P, 46M 4:21:45
15822 Vesin, Y, 53F 4:21:45
15823 Samara Jr, F, 33M 4:21:45
15824 Haesche, J, 29F 4:21:46
15825 Manocchia, P, 33M 4:21:46
15826 Lamour, S, 38M 4:21:46
15827 Reilly, H, 35M 4:21:46
15828 Ornes, P, 41M 4:21:47
15829 Lombard, F, 50F 4:21:47
15830 Mazzaglia, R, 49M 4:21:47
15831 Borges, C, 53M 4:21:48
15832 Englebardt, L, 39M 4:21:50
15833 Yuen, J, 35M 4:21:50
15834 Barbieri, A, 54M 4:21:50
15835 McLoughlin, N, 27M 4:21:51
15836 Pourchet, M, 44M 4:21:51
15837 Ohno, N, 29M 4:21:51
15838 McLoughlin, P, 28M 4:21:51
15839 Dietrich, G, 45M 4:21:52
15840 Perkins*, R, 31M 4:21:52
15841 Clement, S, 37M 4:21:53
15842 Flener, M, 46M 4:21:54
15843 Abbate, R, 53M 4:21:54
15844 Triolet, A, 42M 4:21:55
15845 Loeser, H, 36M 4:21:55
15846 Fudali, H, 31M 4:21:55
15847 Ochoa, M, 32M 4:21:56
15848 Polan, M, 35M 4:21:56
15849 Forte, M, 48M 4:21:57
15850 Berkowitz, L, 57M 4:21:57
15851 Paquette, A, 58M 4:21:58
15852 Knapp, J, 32M 4:21:58
15853 Weiner, P, 40M 4:21:59
15854 Tuhrim, S, 40M 4:22:00
15855 Jouffrault, M, 42M 4:22:00
15856 O'Dwyer Brett, R, 35F 4:22:00
15857 Hausmann, A, 39M 4:22:00
15858 Richardson, H, 28F 4:22:01
15859 De Heij, L, 43F 4:22:01
15860 Sonaglia, F, 36M 4:22:01
15861 Murakami, S, 27M 4:22:02
15862 Woodwell, L, 39F 4:22:02
15863 Inoue, T, 51M 4:22:02
15864 Christianson, M, 42M 4:22:02
15865 Maguire, P, 27M 4:22:03
15866 Moeller, J, 44M 4:22:03
15867 Coleman, K, 34M 4:22:04
15868 Cuypers, L, 48M 4:22:04
15869 Virk, S, 45M 4:22:06
15870 Brosnan, D, 25M 4:22:06
15871 Elliot, B, 35M 4:22:06
15872 Hollingsed, L, 47F 4:22:06
15873 Bain, J, 38M 4:22:06
15874Farrell, C, 37F 4:22:07
15875 Sauer, E, 36M 4:22:07
15876 Murphy, J, 34M 4:22:07
15877 Nessel, L, 26F 4:22:08
15878 Angrisano, C, 47M 4:22:08
15879 Elliott, J, 33M 4:22:08
15880 Paloni, M, 37F 4:22:09
15881 Boston, B, 63M 4:22:10
15882 Camarano, E, 42M 4:22:11
15883 Karpiuk, T, 27M 4:22:11
15884 Kuscsik, S, 28M 4:22:11
15885 Gallagher, M, 32F 4:22:11
15886 Perrin, A, 41M 4:22:12
15887 Mitchell, J, 38M 4:22:12
15888 Denes, B, 37M 4:22:12
15889 Grusetski, J, 50M 4:22:13
15890 Tilson, M, 35M 4:22:13
15891 Pascarell, E, 39M 4:22:13
15892 Lai, W, 32M 4:22:13
15893 Calafat Lopez, J, 49M 4:22:14
15894 Denton, C, 33M 4:22:14
15895 Beasley, L, 35M 4:22:14
15896 Sheffield, J, 25M 4:22:14
15897 Jagtenberg, R, 50M 4:22:14
15898 Hale, R, 38M 4:22:14
15899 Keith, C, 54M 4:22:15
15900 Hufschmid, W, 43M 4:22:15
15901 Ashe, A, 35M 4:22:15
15902 Pinder, A, 26F 4:22:15
15903 Argudo, J, 54M 4:22:15
15904 Lambrechts, F, 44M 4:22:15
15905 Jeffrey, J, 28M 4:22:16
15906 Goetzmann, J, 42M 4:22:16
15907 Persson, U, 49M 4:22:16
15908 Hammond, L, 24F 4:22:17
15909 Cusic, J, 72M 4:22:18
15910 Welsh-Pellegrino, S, 33F 4:22:18
15911 De Jong, E, 40M 4:22:18
15912 Gregorio, D, 34F 4:22:19
15913 Schockman, R, 45M 4:22:19
15914 Leeuw, E, 35M 4:22:19
15915 Holden, G, 35M 4:22:19
15916 Trewin, D, 41M 4:22:20
15917Fiocco, P, 63M 4:22:20
15918 Romero, A, 36M 4:22:20
15919 Weisberg, M, 57M 4:22:20
15920 Goebel, J, 25M 4:22:20
15921 Field, R, 43M 4:22:20
15922 Concepcion, J, 55M 4:22:20
15923 Riestra, J, 41M 4:22:21
15924 Horan, C, 29F 4:22:21
15925 Herd, H, 44F 4:22:22
15926 Boudeville, J, 47M 4:22:22
15927 Gold, M, 45M 4:22:22
15928 Milton, J, 49M 4:22:22
15929 Rosas, L, 41M 4:22:23
15930 Kobayashi, S, 35M 4:22:23
15931 Willcox, C, 48M 4:22:23
15932 Mahnen, J, 49F 4:22:23
15933 Friberg, P, 49M 4:22:23
15934 Boyer, M, 41M 4:22:24
15935 Brammer, A, 34F 4:22:24
15936 Ferrigno, R, 24M 4:22:25
15937 Ewing, A, 26M 4:22:25
15938 Mazan, K, 38F 4:22:25
15939 Peters, P, 46M 4:22:25
15940 Weston, T, 37M 4:22:25
15941 Silva, R, 48M 4:22:25
15942 Giudice, A, 37M 4:22:25
15943 Villarreal Elizondo, A, 64M 4:22:25
15944 Kelly, T, 53M 4:22:25
15945 Ahn, Y, 25M 4:22:26
15946 Feuerstein, P, 34F 4:22:26
15947 Sparr, S, 45M 4:22:26
15948 Hunter, B, 32F 4:22:26
15949 Nesbitt, P, 35F 4:22:27
15950 Hoerschelmann, O, 36M 4:22:27
15951 Revel, E, 33M 4:22:27
15952 Ekstrom, A, 34F 4:22:27
15953 Sklar, S, 30M 4:22:28
15954Hosein, J, 18M 4:22:28
15955 Sklar, B, 29F 4:22:28
15956 Nevels, R, 36M 4:22:28
15957 Powell, E, 29F 4:22:28
15958 Tucker, S, 35M 4:22:29
15959 Locs, A, 36F 4:22:29
15960 Krone, E, 40M 4:22:29
15961 Pellis, R, 47M 4:22:29
15962 Hall, F, 36M 4:22:29
15963 Kilb, K, 55M 4:22:29
15964 Bauer, S, 39M 4:22:30
15965 Williams, M, 57F 4:22:30
15966 Bonner, P, 54F 4:22:30
15967 Smith, S, 53F 4:22:30
15968 James, F, 32F 4:22:31
15969 Miller, J, 36M 4:22:31
15970 Seyfried, C, 27F 4:22:31
15971 Beer, P, 36M 4:22:31
15972 Smith, C, 35F 4:22:32
15973 Kierstead, G, 39M 4:22:32
15974 Smedley, T, 32M 4:22:32
15975 Mizoo, K, 39M 4:22:33
15976 Balog, T, 39M4:22:33
15977 Sundberg, C, 50M 4:22:33
15978 Pirttioja, R, 41M 4:22:33
15979 Broussard, L, 31M 4:22:34
15980 Kuchta, J, 46M 4:22:34
15981 D'Anglejan Chatillon, J, 33M 4:22:34
15982 Frantz, G, 47F 4:22:35
15983 Augier, J, 49M 4:22:35
15984 Ryan, K, 43M 4:22:35
15985 Breslow, J, 51M 4:22:35
15986 Bullock, D, 36F 4:22:36
15987 Andersen, H, 18M 4:22:37
15988 Radelhof, A, 44M 4:22:38
15989 Wijnants, I, 34F 4:22:38
15990 White, L, 34F 4:22:39
15991 Junior, A, 58M 4:22:39
15992 Lohausen, C, 26M 4:22:40
15993 Lewis IV, E, 24M 4:22:40
15994 Santini, C, 39M 4:22:40
15995 White, S, 36M 4:22:40
15996 Rogers, T, 60M 4:22:40
15997 Goebel, E, 46F 4:22:40
15998 Gaarenstroom, K, 41M 4:22:40
15999 Johnson, E, 26M 4:22:40
16000 Gelin, H, 50M 4:22:40
16001 Armstrong, K, 29M 4:22:41
16002Sales, B, 52M 4:22:41
16003 Gustafson, S, 44F 4:22:43
16004 Malroux, C, 47M 4:22:43
16005 Awofeso, A, 33M 4:22:43
16006 Schneider, A, 39M 4:22:43
16007 Farrell, K, 31F 4:22:43
16008 Ligutti, B, 52M 4:22:43
16009 Bouillon, S, 50F 4:22:43
16010 Hoyois, G, 39M 4:22:44
16011 Baker, J, 39M 4:22:44
16012 Gianocca, G, 45M 4:22:44
16013 Strabbing, A, 44M 4:22:44
16014 Orlowski, C, 41M 4:22:44
16015 Hinderks, F, 34M 4:22:45
16016 Pineda M.D., J, 43M 4:22:45
16017 Foster, F, 29M 4:22:45
16018 Smith, A, 42M 4:22:46
16019 Smith, J, 40M 4:22:46
16020 Katz, M, 25M 4:22:46
16021 Bartczak, R, 47F 4:22:47
16022 Schafer, J, 29M 4:22:48
16023 Steiner, J, 29M 4:22:48
16024 Perez, M, 49M 4:22:48
16025 Barton, J, 28F 4:22:48
16026 Schneider, A, 30M 4:22:48
16027 Ortega, A, 46M 4:22:48
16028 Ehrlich, R, 41M 4:22:48
16029 O'Leary, D, 35F 4:22:48
16030 Fabi, K, 30F 4:22:48
16031 Barton, C, 33M 4:22:49
16032 Burroughs, M, 42M 4:22:49
16033 Bodkin, A, 29F 4:22:49
16034 Granado, J, 47F 4:22:49
16035 Barton, J, 28M 4:22:49
16036 Pernet, B, 45F 4:22:49
16037 Primack, A, 24M 4:22:50
16038 Dahl, B, 26F 4:22:50
16039 Eaton, R, 35M 4:22:50
16040 Carrera, R, 30F 4:22:50
16041 Torelli, F, 28M 4:22:51
16042 Zeffer, L, 31F 4:22:51
16043 Guinard, Y, 31M 4:22:51
16044 Gastaldo, J, 47M 4:22:51
16045 Levine, P, 41F 4:22:51
16046 Stahl, S, 40M 4:22:52
16047 Abrams, L, 32F 4:22:52
16048 Glover, R, 47M 4:22:52
16049 Nathan, W, 41M 4:22:52
16050O'Dell, E, 35M 4:22:52
16051 Westerman, T, 37F 4:22:53
16052 Klees, E, 35M 4:22:53
16053 O'Brien, P, 34F 4:22:53
16054 Otero, R, 56M 4:22:53
16055 Rufini, S, 52M 4:22:53
16056 Copin, B, 31F 4:22:53
16057 McEwan, G, 56M 4:22:53
16058 Alexander, R, 26M 4:22:54
16059 Tjarnlund, E, 55M 4:22:54
16060 Ingram, S, 31F 4:22:54
16061 Stoffels, N, 41F 4:22:54
16062 McCavitt, S, 28F 4:22:54
16063 Riggi, T, 35M 4:22:55
16064 Dale, S, 31F 4:22:55
16065 Harrison, T, 25M 4:22:55
16066 Whitworth, D, 43F 4:22:55
16067 Moulin, J, 43M 4:22:55
16068 Silverman, J, 26F 4:22:56
16069 Rigby, G, 41M 4:22:56
16070 Nicholson Jr, R, 45M 4:22:56
16071 Charrondiere, M, 45F 4:22:57
16072 Navarro, G, 36M 4:22:57
16073 Van Weyenberg, J, 50M 4:22:57
16074 Gomzalez-Segovia, A, 48M 4:22:57
16075 Batterman, M, 27M 4:22:57
16076 Juarez Montanez, J, 43M 4:22:57
16077 Ruth, G, 37M 4:22:57
16078 Hale, R, 51M 4:22:57
16079 Repaal, E, 34M 4:22:58
16080 Sharp, D, 51M 4:22:58
16081 Egtvedt, G, 49F 4:22:58
16082 Venturi, L, 46M 4:22:58
16083 Berman, Z, 32M 4:22:59
16084 Schuerstedt, U, 39M 4:22:59
16085 Bodini, M, 23M 4:22:59
16086 Grefe, H, 37M 4:23:00
16087 Milovan, R, 46M 4:23:00
16088 Kuhlmann, R, 36M 4:23:00
16089 Thompson, C, 25F 4:23:00
16090 Amlie, K, 51M 4:23:00
16091 Hernandez Peraza, P, 33M 4:23:00
16092 Dyer, R, 46M 4:23:00
16093 Sebastian, J, 25F 4:23:00
16094 Perl, G, 28M 4:23:01
16095 McGovern, A, 29M 4:23:01
16096 Yamamoto, K, 55M 4:23:01
16097 Gilbert, S, 46M 4:23:01
16098 Sery, O, 23M 4:23:02
16099 Schreefel, H, 43M 4:23:02
16100 Gonzalez, J, 33M 4:23:02
16101 Almanza Rodriguez, R, 39M 4:23:02
16102 De Vries, M, 36M 4:23:02
16103Breloin, J, 50M 4:23:03
16104 Luck, R, 35M 4:23:03
16105 De Haan, M, 41M 4:23:04
16106 King, M, 32M 4:23:04
16107 Alarcon, J, 50M 4:23:04
16108 Ramakers, Y, 42F 4:23:04
16109 Herzog, W, 60M 4:23:04
16110 Aakula, A, 44F 4:23:04
16111 Sjoman, M, 39F 4:23:04
16112 Darneille, M, 43F 4:23:05
16113 Larson, B, 34F 4:23:05
16114Guerra, C, 36M 4:23:05
16115 Aigner, W, 28M 4:23:05
16116 Flores Hernandez, J, 44M 4:23:06
16117 Barnes, M, 41M 4:23:06
16118 Ortiz, R, 52M 4:23:07
16119 Becherer, R, 52M 4:23:07
16120 Beonarz, C, 25M 4:23:07
16121 Herlihy, J, 25M 4:23:07
16122 Panichelli, F, 45M 4:23:07
16123 Rockholz-Werner, G, 41F 4:23:08
16124 Delnevo, J, 49M 4:23:08
16125 Ortega, H, 33M 4:23:08
16126 Dubin, D, 46M 4:23:08
16127 Jones, B, 25M 4:23:09
16128 Macpherson, J, 45M 4:23:09
16129 Bednarczyk, M, 31F 4:23:09
16130 Christandl, H, 35M 4:23:09
16131 Vargas Perdomo, B, 26F 4:23:10
16132 Bravo, U, 36M 4:23:10
16133 Otten, P, 37M 4:23:10
16134 Cummings, E, 26F 4:23:11
16135 Lifrak, T, 47M 4:23:11
16136 Barbaro, D, 41M 4:23:11
16137 Stewart, J, 32F 4:23:11
16138 Lloyd, J, 37M 4:23:11
16139 McArdle, T, 27F 4:23:12
16140 Plump, E, 55M 4:23:12
16141 Meacham, T, 37M 4:23:13
16142 Azares, N, 43M 4:23:13
16143 Boeker, W, 42M 4:23:14
16144 Adkins, D, 39M 4:23:14
16145 Walter, H, 54M 4:23:14
16146 Goerlitz, M, 32M 4:23:14
16147 McGovern, S, 29M 4:23:14
16148 Dooskin, R, 53F 4:23:15
16149 Geukens, R, 32M 4:23:16
16150 Virella, F, 54M 4:23:17
16151 Mignemi, C, 62M 4:23:17
16152 Pancani, J, 54M4:23:18
16153 Smith, C, 30M 4:23:18
16154 Commers, M, 30M 4:23:19
16155 Caronni, M, 37M 4:23:19
16156 Ballabio, L, 54M 4:23:19
16157 Silva, P, 35F 4:23:19
16158 Hughes, R, 38F 4:23:19
16159 Johnson, J, 30M 4:23:20
16160 Cherruault, S, 30M 4:23:20
16161 Lozada, O, 32M 4:23:20
16162 Francisco, E, 47M 4:23:20
16163 Graham, B, 25M 4:23:20
16164 Fagiano, M, 34F 4:23:20
16165 Evans, B, 52M 4:23:21
16166 Quinn, T, 30M 4:23:21
16167 Seiler, V, 40F 4:23:21
16168 Yasumatsu, K, 32M 4:23:21
16169 Hudson, C, 29F 4:23:22
16170 Jakobs, J, 26M 4:23:22
16171 Ascoli, J, 49M 4:23:23
16172 Gaines, V, 47M 4:23:23
16173 Muriset, F, 42M 4:23:23
16174 Ackerman, A, 41M 4:23:24
16175 Silveira Jr, C, 50M 4:23:24
16176 Sandell, K, 22F 4:23:24
16177 Luna Hernandez, B, 38F 4:23:24
16178 Henkel, H, 57M 4:23:24
16179 Cavazos Garcia, J, 47M 4:23:25
16180 DiFilippo, J, 44M 4:23:25
16181 Cleusters, P, 44M 4:23:25
16182 Tago, K, 26F 4:23:25
16183 Rea, C, 41M 4:23:25
16184 Glading, J, 46M 4:23:26
16185 Figueroa Ortega, I, 38M 4:23:26
16186 Brasser, P, 38M 4:23:26
16187 Jackson, L, 54M 4:23:26
16188 Heczko, B, 38M 4:23:26
16189 Smith, J, 51M 4:23:27
16190 Kravatz, J, 34M 4:23:27
16191 Bannon, A, 24F 4:23:27
16192 Baello, J, 38M 4:23:27
16193 Boodin, L, 22M 4:23:28
16194 Regala, E, 52M 4:23:28
16195 Schreiber, A, 43F 4:23:28
16196 Erdal, B, 51M 4:23:28
16197 Jacobs, R, 59M 4:23:29
16198 Manninen, M, 41M 4:23:29
16199 Schreiber, W, 46M 4:23:29
16200 Kushins, E, 47M 4:23:30
16201 McConnell, P, 39M 4:23:30
16202 Dickson, D, 48M 4:23:30
16203 Slater, M, 37M 4:23:30
16204 Hollender, H, 53M 4:23:31
16205 Brown, K, 30M 4:23:31
16206 McGee, R, 30M 4:23:31
16207 Legrand, J, 19M 4:23:31
16208 Glass, M, 34F 4:23:31
16209 Kawamura, M, 68M 4:23:31
16210 Donohue, C, 35F 4:23:31
16211 Powers, M, 38M 4:23:31
16212 Lunny, B, 22M 4:23:32
16213 Friedrich, H, 33M 4:23:32
16214 Bondy, F, 56M 4:23:32
16215 Herman, S, 33M 4:23:32
16216 Bergstrom, J, 36M 4:23:33
16217 Avendano, F, 68M 4:23:33
16218 Weinstein, D, 26M 4:23:33
16219 Brix, B, 45M 4:23:33
16220 Boon, W, 50M 4:23:33
16221 Hanson, D, 34M 4:23:33
16222 Wahler, S, 32M 4:23:33
16223 Freudenstein, G, 32F 4:23:34
16224 Garcia, M, 38M 4:23:34
16225 Ribeiro, A, 42F 4:23:34
16226 Osowsky, M, 43M 4:23:35
16227 Ard, F, 56F 4:23:35
16228 Woltin, D, 26M 4:23:35
16229 Chauvin, R, 45M 4:23:35
16230 Pierlot, D, 29M 4:23:35
16231 Keating, D, 52M 4:23:35
16232 Willems, M, 35M4:23:35
16233 Held, O, 47M 4:23:35
16234 Shah, A, 27F 4:23:36
16235 Lange, G, 27M 4:23:36
16236 Stapel, T, 30M 4:23:37
16237 De Cocq, C, 38M 4:23:37
16238 Glassman, B, 31M 4:23:37
16239 Moriarty, J, 35F 4:23:38
16240 Nemcosky, K, 38M 4:23:38
16241 Zwart, C, 51M 4:23:39
16242 Goulden, L, 45M 4:23:39
16243 Mengel, C, 38F 4:23:40
16244 Andree, A, 56M 4:23:40
16245 Thatcher, J, 49M 4:23:40
16246 Lynch, P, 51M 4:23:40
16247 Mangan, S, 33F 4:23:40
16248 Solera, H, 47M 4:23:41
16249 Davidson, K, 40F 4:23:42
16250 Najera, E, 46M 4:23:42
16251 Kormendi, L, 31F 4:23:42
16252 Sugiura, C, 20F 4:23:43
16253 Farrar, J, 47M 4:23:43
16254 Conzemius, J, 47F 4:23:43
16255 Andree, B, 55F 4:23:43
16256 Paula, J, 33M 4:23:43
16257 Composto, C, 49M 4:23:44
16258 Shaw, R, 44M 4:23:44
16259 Bartolome, J, 46M 4:23:44
16260 Febinger, H, 23F 4:23:44
16261 Dettinger, M, 44M 4:23:44
16262 Van Opstal, D, 33M 4:23:45
16263 Schmitt, C, 53M 4:23:45
16264 DeGennaro, B, 49F 4:23:45
16265 Bronner, M, 35F 4:23:45
16266 Bronner, A, 37M 4:23:45
16267 Beck, S, 44F 4:23:45
16268 Martinez Garza, F, 41M 4:23:46
16269 Izzo, P, 41M 4:23:46
16270 Brouwer, G, 38M 4:23:46
16271 De Haan, L, 36M 4:23:46
16272 Tobin, J, 31M 4:23:46
16273 Waage, F, 53M 4:23:46
16274 Jacobsen, F, 54M 4:23:46
16275 Raspa, E, 43M 4:23:47
16276 Stijne, K, 41M 4:23:47
16277 VanDyke, J, 29M 4:23:47
16278 Dakin, A, 35M 4:23:47
16279 Personeni, E, 39M 4:23:47
16280 Sandoy, T, 31F 4:23:47
16281 Olinger, C, 64M 4:23:48
16282 Champion, D, 25M 4:23:48
16283 Reiser, C, 27F 4:23:48
16284 Abruzzi, M, 29M 4:23:48
16285 Sledzik, S, 32M 4:23:48
16286 Lebrun, J, 37M 4:23:48
16287 Ostrom, K, 29F 4:23:49
16288 Febvre, P, 36M 4:23:49
16289 Harrison, P, 40M 4:23:49
16290 Kabatznick, B, 37M 4:23:50
16291 Pijbes, R, 48M 4:23:50
16292 Seda, E, 35M 4:23:50
16293 Gordon, S, 24M 4:23:50
16294 Lin, V, 38M 4:23:51
16295 Johansson, S, 59M 4:23:51
16296 Crouch, S, 25M 4:23:51
16297 Ligtvoet, J, 45F 4:23:51
16298 Bezard, J, 47M 4:23:52
16299 Nesbit, J, 41M 4:23:52
16300 Van Beek, J, 50M 4:23:52
16301 Jansen, F, 28M 4:23:52
16302 Katkow, E, 50M 4:23:52
16303 Van Den Berg, R, 56M 4:23:52
16304 Pollinger, K, 34M 4:23:53
16305 Heptinstall, N, 28M 4:23:53
16306 Ferris, C, 38M 4:23:53
16307 Hatterer, J, 36F 4:23:53
16308 Thomas, E, 49M 4:23:54
16309 Bielitz Dr, G, 49F 4:23:54
16310 Faltracco, E, 57M4:23:54
16311 Mancilla Sanchez, G, 23M 4:23:54
16312 Bielitz, G, 54M 4:23:54
16313 Bakker-Vos, K, 40F 4:23:54
16314 Bakker, J, 47M 4:23:54
16315 Ingram, R, 35M 4:23:55
16316 Evans, D, 30M 4:23:55
16317 Donahue, G, 51M 4:23:55
16318 Beinlich, B, 38M 4:23:55
16319 Brenner, P, 34M 4:23:56
16320 Gomez, L, 57M 4:23:56
16321 Scala, M, 30M 4:23:56
16322 Paladino, T, 37M 4:23:56
16323 Williams, W, 39M 4:23:56
16324 Storey, R, 51M 4:23:56
16325 Reissinger, B, 24F 4:23:57
16326 Kneebone, L, 30F 4:23:57
16327 Wekerle, R, 35M 4:23:58
16328 Wells, E, 41F 4:23:58
16329 Rosenberger, C, 35M 4:23:58
16330 Belilgne, A, 41F 4:23:58
16331 Zieglitz, B, 36F 4:23:58
16332 Monschau, P, 40M 4:23:58
16333 Sroczynski, J, 27F 4:23:58
16334 Heimbach, F, 53M 4:23:59
16335 Kikuya, M, 21F 4:23:59
16336 Spalding Moreira, C, 47M 4:23:59
16337 Kaehk, P, 49M 4:23:59
16338 Burns, K, 43M 4:23:59
16339 Bruecher, P, 36M 4:23:59
16340 Latigano, R, 55M 4:23:59
16341 Salvati, L, 30F 4:24:00
16342 Schamle, P, 45M 4:24:00
16343 Boham, E, 29M 4:24:00
16344 Melgoza, R, 22M 4:24:00
16345 Costello, J, 22F 4:24:00
16346 Bermudez, L, 54M 4:24:00
16347 Linderoth, S, 48M 4:24:00
16348 Suer, E, 28M 4:24:00
16349 Molin, M, 50M 4:24:00
16350 Koch, J, 31M 4:24:00
16351 Alesevich, S, 44M 4:24:01
16352 Jones, I, 54M 4:24:01
16353 Mohle, L, 29F 4:24:01
16354 Foglia, J, 28M 4:24:01
16355 Mazzotta, A, 28F 4:24:02
16356 Bott, R, 37M 4:24:02
16357 Drazen, R, 56M 4:24:02
16358 Bruno, V, 49M 4:24:02
16359 Cavaliere, L, 42M 4:24:02
16360 Hazan, I, 42M 4:24:03
16361 Rios, F, 46M 4:24:03
16362 Donnelly, P, 43M 4:24:03
16363 Poppa, J, 44M 4:24:03
16364 Weinerth, D, 40M 4:24:04
16365 Cram, J, 23M 4:24:04
16366 Cram, P, 25M 4:24:04
16367 Decruz, L, 30M 4:24:05
16368 Oikawa, Y, 45F 4:24:06
16369 Roman, R, 38M 4:24:06
16370 Melhado, O, 33M 4:24:06
16371 Yasuoka, T, 31M 4:24:06
16372 Carpentier, P, 37M 4:24:06
16373 Sanial, C, 39F 4:24:07
16374 Letellier, B, 42M 4:24:07
16375 Schlesinger, E, 38F 4:24:08
16376 Katras, T, 40M 4:24:08
16377 Johnson, J, 32F 4:24:08
16378 Bucovineanu, V, 42M 4:24:08
16379 Hariveau, S, 43M 4:24:08
16380 Doehring, K, 51F 4:24:09
16381 Aguirre Morgado, R, 52M 4:24:09
16382 Bridgeman, J, 38M 4:24:09
16383 DiMattina, L, 25F 4:24:09
16384 Hall, R, 60M 4:24:09
16385 Becker, B, 32M 4:24:10
16386 DaPrato, J, 41M 4:24:10
16387 Archibald, D, 34F 4:24:10
16388 Tammetta, G, 30M 4:24:11
16389 Dorn, L, 57M 4:24:11
16390 Kuether, J, 37M 4:24:11
16391 Lyons, B, 31F 4:24:11
16392 Ascioti, K, 44F 4:24:12
16393 Swobe, C, 34F 4:24:12
16394 Syre, D, 53M4:24:12
16395 McIntyre, P, 25M 4:24:12
16396 Jones, M, 30M 4:24:13
16397 Lewis, J, 46M 4:24:13
16398 Langendorf, T, 29M 4:24:14
16399 Hojnacki, B, 52M 4:24:14
16400 Sullivan, G, 44M 4:24:14
16401 Testa, R, 36M 4:24:15
16402 Crow, K, 26F 4:24:15
16403 Zampredri, N, 22M 4:24:15
16404 Carey, J, 25F 4:24:16
16405 Brea, A, 33M 4:24:16
16406 Labiner, D, 33M 4:24:16
16407 Jeinsen, A, 30M 4:24:16
16408 Devaud, J, 30M 4:24:17
16409 Zandbergen, M, 33M 4:24:17
16410 Kozera, J, 28M 4:24:17
16411 Schmitz, J, 33M 4:24:18
16412 Cieciuch, E, 19M 4:24:18
16413 Nelson, C, 59M 4:24:19
16414 Shridharani, K, 30F 4:24:19
16415 Mercier, A, 42M 4:24:19
16416 Rimland, S, 32M 4:24:19
16417 Byrne, J, 37M 4:24:20
16418 Dowd, J, 33M 4:24:20
16419 Borrego, R, 35M 4:24:20
16420 Andress, M, 35F 4:24:20
16421 Cleasby, P, 31F 4:24:20
16422 Maher, L, 32M 4:24:20
16423 Furuta, T, 25F 4:24:20
16424 Mullerbeck, E, 29M 4:24:20
16425 Ventrella, D, 44M 4:24:21
16426 Sauve, M, 33F 4:24:21
16427 Hedderman, F, 28F 4:24:22
16428 Kanzler, D, 39M 4:24:22
16429 Dubois, G, 36M 4:24:22
16430 McDonald, K, 32M 4:24:22
16431 Le-Roch, G, 28M 4:24:23
16432 Wolfram, W, 57M 4:24:23
16433 Sicot, J, 60M 4:24:23
16434 Van Der Meij, L, 34M 4:24:23
16435 Hjelde Jr., H, 22M 4:24:23
16436 Lugg, B, 36M 4:24:23
16437 Hansen, M, 27M 4:24:24
16438 Byrne, A, 33F 4:24:24
16439 Turk, P, 51M 4:24:24
16440 Blumstein, K, 35F 4:24:24
16441 Enzweiler, B, 31M 4:24:24
16442 Korner, H, 56M 4:24:24
16443 Orefice, F, 47M 4:24:24
16444 Ferlat, A, 50M 4:24:25
16445 Amato, R, 46F 4:24:25
16446 McGourty, J, 47M 4:24:25
16447 Wijs, C, 42M 4:24:26
16448 Blumstein, S, 61M 4:24:26
16449 Diener, M, 38M 4:24:26
16450 Evanick, E, 42M 4:24:27
16451 Elliott, D, 34M 4:24:27
16452 Lombroso, E, 43M 4:24:27
16453 Hoyle, K, 49M 4:24:27
16454 Schnaitmann, H, 51M 4:24:28
16455 Moran, J, 39M 4:24:28
16456 Wu, R, 40M 4:24:28
16457 Ferrand, A, 48M 4:24:28
16458 Eisert, H, 56M 4:24:29
16459 Hill, A, 26F 4:24:29
16460 Roll, K, 27F 4:24:30
16461 Borg, N, 30M 4:24:31
16462 McCormick, M, 31M 4:24:31
16463 Devlyn Joannis, J, 28M 4:24:31
16464Tarulis III, G, 33M 4:24:31
16465 Van Kalmthout, P, 42M 4:24:31
16466 Kellner, A, 53M 4:24:32
16467 Clairet, M, 48M 4:24:32
16468 Zimmermann, B, 47M 4:24:33
16469 Varga, G, 35M 4:24:33
16470 Merrill, A, 25F 4:24:33
16471 Truman, C, 27F 4:24:34
16472 Puikkonen, O, 32M 4:24:34
16473 Vernon, B, 60M 4:24:34
16474 Gray, D, 42M 4:24:34
16475 Rozema, D, 49M 4:24:35
16476 Fleming, M, 44M 4:24:35
16477 Weber, J, 40M 4:24:35
16478 Stephens, D, 34M 4:24:35
16479 Dake, G, 59F 4:24:35
16480 Picone, V, 37M 4:24:35
16481 Michael, T, 34M 4:24:36
16482 Miller, G, 33M 4:24:36
16483 Stubbs, R, 56M4:24:36
16484 Sternberg, A, 30M 4:24:37
16485 Boschi, D, 31M 4:24:37
16486 Macho, L, 34F 4:24:37
16487 Castillo Hinojosa, J, 44M 4:24:37
16488 Charleston, D, 49M 4:24:38
16489 Martin Jarrand, P, 36M 4:24:38
16490 Garza Leal, J, 57M 4:24:38
16491 Benoit, T, 30F 4:24:38
16492 Cardany, R, 50M 4:24:38
16493 Jelonnek, A, 55M 4:24:39
16494 Wedel, M, 37M 4:24:39
16495 Dolinsky, W, 45M 4:24:39
16496 Parrotto, C, 32F 4:24:39
16497 Ahti, R, 52M 4:24:39
16498 Howard, J, 49F 4:24:40
16499 Rouviere, C, 48M 4:24:40
16500 Arkin, L, 31F 4:24:40
16501 Torres, T, 24M 4:24:40
16502 Gould, S, 47M 4:24:40
16503 Fragetti, A, 51M 4:24:40
16504 Field, R, 38M 4:24:40
16505 Byrne, E, 28M 4:24:41
16506 Blank, D, 35M 4:24:41
16507Meinen, D, 26M 4:24:42
16508 Hoshiai, T, 36M 4:24:42
16509 Habif, N, 32F 4:24:42
16510 Vibe, M, 32M 4:24:43
16511 May, E, 50M 4:24:43
16512 Welo, S, 32M 4:24:43
16513 Grau, W, 51M 4:24:43
16514 Iacopini, R, 35M 4:24:43
16515 Barreau, M, 34M 4:24:43
16516 Cotter, N, 47M 4:24:43
16517 Quezel-Guerraz, G, 41M 4:24:43
16518 Minion, T, 28F 4:24:43
16519 Moline, M, 41F 4:24:44
16520 Seto, K, 40F 4:24:44
16521 Pittaluga, F, 29M 4:24:44
16522 Engle, T, 34M 4:24:44
16523 Kramer, E, 39F 4:24:45
16524 Wittbold, H, 42M 4:24:45
16525 Beltran, A, 45M 4:24:45
16526 Bernstein, D, 49M 4:24:45
16527 Hikisch, F, 57M 4:24:46
16528 Malvasio, P, 48M 4:24:46
16529 Smith, G, 42M 4:24:46
16530 Smits, J, 47M 4:24:47
16531 Hoffmann, G, 43M 4:24:47
16532 Ligorria, E, 46M 4:24:48
16533 Melkmann, B, 28F 4:24:49
16534 Crangle, R, 25M 4:24:49
16535 Sterk, S, 49M 4:24:49
16536 McWilliams, C, 50F 4:24:49
16537 Voorhout, G, 27M 4:24:49
16538 McWilliams, J, 50M 4:24:50
16539 Longin, J, 27M 4:24:50
16540 Zurbuchen, H, 46F 4:24:50
16541 Van Der Heide, F, 53M 4:24:51
16542 Hoffman, K, 21F 4:24:51
16543 Graham, M, 40M 4:24:51
16544 Pariseau, F, 50M 4:24:51
16545 Rasmussen, D, 57M 4:24:51
16546 Carazo, P, 31M 4:24:51
16547 Andersen, E, 39M 4:24:52
16548 Mandsager, A, 34F 4:24:52
16549 Reilly, V, 35F 4:24:52
16550 Ostrenga, R, 38M 4:24:52
16551 Fanter, E, 29M 4:24:52
16552 Gallant, J, 32M 4:24:52
16553 De Wit, J, 45M 4:24:52
16554 Klein, E, 55M 4:24:53
16555 Robert, N, 51M 4:24:53
16556 Lincoln, J, 58M 4:24:53
16557 Brown, R, 47M 4:24:53
16558 Coakley, M, 25M 4:24:53
16559 Hoffman, K, 35M 4:24:54
16560 Bertram, M, 39M 4:24:54
16561 Martinez, M, 27F 4:24:54
16562 Doldo, V, 34M 4:24:54
16563 Hemsley, G, 34F 4:24:54
16564 Lander, R, 29M 4:24:54
16565 Towey, M, 33F 4:24:54
16566 Stewart, P, 38M 4:24:55
16567 Mueller, E, 47M 4:24:55
16568 Wolcott, J, 32F 4:24:55
16569 Baudoin, B, 39M 4:24:55
16570 Wolcott M.D., R, 38M 4:24:56
16571 Cohen, M, 27F 4:24:56
16572 Caisso, R, 44M 4:24:56
16573 Benz, C, 40F 4:24:56
16574 Muller, S, 45M 4:24:56
16575 Sensier, P, 36M 4:24:57
16576 Enquist, S, 28M 4:24:57
16577 Stockemer, J, 33M 4:24:57
16578 Laseux, J, 32M 4:24:57
16579 Spielsinger, N, 41M 4:24:57
16580 Batten, J, 27F 4:24:57
16581 McHugh, M, 29F 4:24:57
16582 Claerhoudt, A, 59M 4:24:57
16583 Chan, R, 24M 4:24:57
16584 Stathopoulos, N, 43M 4:24:58
16585 Harmonay, L, 40F 4:24:58
16586 Stinton, S, 26F 4:24:58
16587Kaser, T, 28M 4:24:58
16588 Ryan, A, 46F 4:24:58
16589 Rose, H, 35F 4:24:59
16590 Venn, B, 32F 4:24:59
16591 Camps, P, 45M 4:25:00
16592 Hamon, B, 39M 4:25:00
16593 Weil, M, 40M 4:25:00
16594 Kulchin, L, 34F 4:25:00
16595 Thornton, J, 42M 4:25:00
16596 O'Hara, T, 37M 4:25:01
16597 Skattum, I, 25M 4:25:01
16598 Skattum, T, 32M 4:25:01
16599 Skattum, N, 30F 4:25:01
16600 Scheers, R, 34M4:25:01
16601 McCallum, S, 32F 4:25:01
16602 Brouwer, W, 46M 4:25:01
16603 Griffin III, A, 30M 4:25:01
16604 Smithwick, B, 30M 4:25:01
16605 Rossi, A, 52M 4:25:02
16606 Duggan, S, 44M 4:25:02
16607 Matabacas Costa, L, 42M 4:25:02
16608 Ondrejack, S, 42M 4:25:03
16609 Clavell Oliveras, J, 46M 4:25:03
16610 Wagner, D, 28M 4:25:03
16611 McOwen, D, 32F 4:25:03
16612 Moriani, J, 37M 4:25:04
16613 Monath, W, 44M 4:25:04
16614 Merlot, J, 44F 4:25:04
16615 Ruiz, F, 62M 4:25:04
16616 Cima, P, 30M 4:25:04
16617 Parkinson, N, 56M 4:25:04
16618 Benbaha, M, 47M 4:25:05
16619 Sery, K, 26F 4:25:05
16620 Duck, T, 38M 4:25:05
16621 Amundsen, T, 62M 4:25:05
16622 Crowe, J, 45F 4:25:05
16623 Brown, E, 46M 4:25:05
16624 Wahl, S, 35F 4:25:05
16625 Jahn, S, 42M 4:25:06
16626 Bush, W, 53M 4:25:06
16627 Davis Jr., G, 27M 4:25:06
16628 Mendoza Mayo, L, 28M4:25:06
16629 Kohli, R, 38M 4:25:07
16630 Miller, R, 26F 4:25:07
16631 Lawesson, U, 52M 4:25:07
16632 Fontaine Jr, R, 27M 4:25:08
16633 Pena, I, 46M 4:25:08
16634 Reidbord, M, 38M 4:25:09
16635 Tapia, J, 23M 4:25:09
16636 Druckman, A, 63M 4:25:09
16637 Salo, P, 35M 4:25:09
16638 Berger, S, 62M 4:25:10
16639 Watanabe Murillo, M, 47F 4:25:10
16640 Ramirez, V, 44M 4:25:10
16641 Roeseler, H, 53M 4:25:11
16642 Toullec, J, 44M 4:25:11
16643 Pastor, G, 54M 4:25:12
16644 Pangilinan, V, 41M 4:25:12
16645 Kapitzke, A, 31M 4:25:12
16646 Sanchez, A, 34M 4:25:12
16647 Quinn, R, 38M 4:25:13
16648 Edtmayer, C, 27F 4:25:13
16649 Vazquez Aldana Sauza, F, 42M 4:25:14
16650 Henze, H, 40M 4:25:14
16651 Tonks, N, 43M 4:25:15
16652 Pobe, R, 50M 4:25:15
16653 Chappuis, P, 37M 4:25:15
16654 Scheibl, P, 47M 4:25:15
16655 Ahlgren, J, 30M 4:25:16
16656 Westervelt, M, 37M 4:25:17
16657 Titelbaum, S, 24M 4:25:18
16658 Barrett, E, 50M 4:25:18
16659 Carey, K, 25F 4:25:18
16660 King, T, 44M 4:25:19
16661 Jordan, D, 35M 4:25:19
16662 Chini, J, 31M 4:25:19
16663 Stranz, U, 42F 4:25:19
16664 Colon Rivera, J, 34M 4:25:19
16665 Mermod, J, 41M 4:25:20
16666 Ohlow, G, 45M 4:25:20
16667 Rowe, M, 23M 4:25:20
16668 O'Brien, M, 40M 4:25:20
16669 Meunier, Y, 44M 4:25:21
16670 Besch, T, 35M 4:25:21
16671 Sakso, R, 33F 4:25:21
16672 Jessor, T, 38M 4:25:21
16673 Mettre, G, 55M 4:25:23
16674 Yverneaux, J, 45M 4:25:23
16675 O'Neill, P, 33F 4:25:23
16676 Rubinton, J, 38M 4:25:23
16677 Carlson, J, 50M 4:25:23
16678 Simmons, R, 43M 4:25:24
16679 Strandwold, K, 34M 4:25:25
16680 Righetto, M, 27M 4:25:25
16681 Arellano, L, 51M 4:25:25
16682 Maniero, L, 33M 4:25:25
16683 Clquell, J, 46M 4:25:25
16684 Santello, N, 38M 4:25:26
16685 Gimeno, A, 51M 4:25:26
16686 Furlanetto, M, 37M4:25:26
16687 Weykamp, H, 38M 4:25:26
16688 Levin, R, 42M 4:25:26
16689 Falzoni, G, 62M 4:25:27
16690 Jordan, D, 41M 4:25:27
16691 Gabarra, V, 46M 4:25:27
16692 Alfara, M, 44F 4:25:27
16693 Nordby, J, 37M 4:25:27
16694 Mjelve, O, 48M 4:25:29
16695 Johnsen, T, 45M 4:25:29
16696 Weissman, J, 26M 4:25:30
16697 Goldstein, A, 42M 4:25:31
16698 Kelly, J, 32M 4:25:31
16699 Dobbs, C, 30F 4:25:31
16700 Nevins, J, 38M 4:25:33
16701 Bigelow, J, 47F 4:25:33
16702 Tizzano, R, 44M 4:25:33
16703 Boland, B, 43M 4:25:33
16704Benbaha, C, 46F 4:25:34
16705 Stephens, J, 29M 4:25:34
16706 Hack, J, 52M 4:25:34
16707 Adornato, B, 36M 4:25:34
16708 Pretini, R, 29M 4:25:34
16709 Quet, J, 44M 4:25:35
16710 Smit, E, 28M 4:25:35
16711 Fischer, M, 58M 4:25:35
16712 Manopla, M, 32M 4:25:35
16713 Ihring, R, 43M 4:25:35
16714 Schwartzbard, R, 52F 4:25:36
16715 Clough, T, 41M 4:25:36
16716 Brennan, N, 32F 4:25:36
16717 Flores Carreola, M, 37M 4:25:36
16718 Wheeler, S, 46F 4:25:36
16719 Gaiani, M, 33F 4:25:37
16720 Kriek, P, 48M 4:25:37
16721 Rose, G, 38M 4:25:37
16722 Soufi-Merzoug, H, 54M 4:25:37
16723 Steigelfest, J, 31M 4:25:37
16724 Landa, A, 60F 4:25:38
16725 Bourgois, L, 50M 4:25:38
16726 Jimenez, D, 23F 4:25:38
16727 Campion, J, 49M 4:25:38
16728 Abraham, B, 33F 4:25:39
16729 Bernstein, R, 31M 4:25:39
16730 Mai, R, 50M 4:25:40
16731 Stassar, B, 30M 4:25:41
16732 Chung, F, 29M 4:25:41
16733 Kamlage, J, 51M 4:25:41
16734 Martinez Trevino, M, 44M 4:25:42
16735 Bearkland, P, 32M 4:25:42
16736 Cedeno Alcala, J, 35M 4:25:42
16737 Ledesma Sarabia, A, 48M 4:25:42
16738 Delaney, M, 29M 4:25:42
16739 Schweitzer, P, 40M 4:25:43
16740 Maikels, A, 40M 4:25:43
16741 Everson, R, 37M 4:25:43
16742 Quinn, M, 38M 4:25:43
16743 Hollick, R, 52M 4:25:43
16744 Adelmann, S, 37M 4:25:43
16745 Levine, J, 45M 4:25:44
16746 Guillouet, P, 28M 4:25:44
16747 Chin, K, 25M 4:25:44
16748 Drost, H, 45M 4:25:44
16749 Fornuff, R, 42M 4:25:45
16750 Kumlehn, H, 71M 4:25:46
16751 Mitchell, J, 27M 4:25:46
16752 Fisher, C, 30M 4:25:46
16753 Bartsch, A, 30F 4:25:47
16754 Devos, D, 33M 4:25:47
16755 Porteix, J, 61M 4:25:47
16756 Rolland, C, 28F 4:25:48
16757 Weaver, K, 28F 4:25:48
16758 Dauer, S, 42M 4:25:48
16759 Boyer, R, 48M 4:25:48
16760 Dugelay, M, 48M 4:25:49
16761 Zeni, A, 58M 4:25:49
16762 Vavrik, C, 41F 4:25:49
16763 Cartwright, F, 37F 4:25:50
16764 Loeb, P, 26M 4:25:50
16765 Lesoin, F, 40M 4:25:50
16766 Cremin, R, 54M 4:25:50
16767 Osha, D, 46M 4:25:50
16768 Schwartz, M, 52M 4:25:50
16769 Bearman, J, 31F 4:25:51
16770 Carrera Rivapalacio, S, 33M 4:25:51
16771 Fibbioli, U, 46F 4:25:51
16772 Contreras Cruz, N, 46M 4:25:52
16773 Liesebach, R, 51M 4:25:52
16774 Slot, O, 27M 4:25:52
16775 Fibbioli, M, 45M 4:25:52
16776 Jenny, A, 50M 4:25:52
16777 Minshall, M, 28F 4:25:52
16778 Ellner, L, 32M 4:25:53
16779 Steinberg, A, 48M 4:25:53
16780 Elkington, B, 58M 4:25:53
16781 Bewersdorff, F, 34M 4:25:54
16782 Arbuckle, V, 58M 4:25:54
16783 Matt, H, 45M 4:25:54
16784 Schernau, D, 56M 4:25:54
16785 Matheron, M, 43M 4:25:54
16786 Cerny, D, 42F 4:25:55
16787 Smith, L, 25F 4:25:55
16788 Vidal, F, 65M 4:25:55
16789 Lategano, C, 29F 4:25:55
16790 Paisner, D, 34M 4:25:56
16791 Pagel, R, 39M 4:25:56
16792 Mendel, S, 31F 4:25:56
16793 Deluga, J, 56M 4:25:56
16794 Vavrik, D, 42M 4:25:57
16795 Swan, S, 52F 4:25:57
16796 Ahlgren, N, 61M 4:25:57
16797 Kiddier, C, 42F 4:25:57
16798 Cordier, P, 40M 4:25:57
16799 Van Rooyen, H, 32M 4:25:57
16800 Hargreaves, M, 50M 4:25:57
16801 Vago-Cauiglia, S, 43F 4:25:57
16802 Brandis, P, 37M 4:25:58
16803 Beerman, N, 31F 4:25:58
16804 Shields, C, 35F 4:25:58
16805 Meyer, F, 48M 4:25:58
16806 Thiel Dr., A, 53M 4:25:58
16807 Berkin, D, 30M 4:25:58
16808 Stewart, D, 32F 4:25:59
16809Hurtado Marquez, A, 42M 4:25:59
16810 McLennan, B, 43M 4:25:59
16811 Van Wieringen, E, 61M 4:25:59
16812 Flynn, J, 45M 4:26:00
16813 Roth, K, 43M 4:26:00
16814 Cardenas, F, 42M 4:26:00
16815 Ford, S, 47M 4:26:00
16816 Diacon, C, 45M 4:26:00
16817 Chue, J, 32M 4:26:00
16818 Hamilton, P, 32M 4:26:01
16819 Eissautier, B, 38M 4:26:01
16820 Lopez, A, 32M 4:26:01
16821 Carlstead, J, 48M 4:26:01
16822 Russell, P, 30M 4:26:02
16823 Valentini, S, 19M 4:26:02
16824 Kogawa, K, 29M 4:26:02
16825 Holbert, F, 27F 4:26:02
16826 Pascal, M, 36F 4:26:02
16827 Jennings, K, 37F 4:26:03
16828 Sullivan, R, 49F 4:26:03
16829 Casey, K, 34F 4:26:03
16830 Howells, N, 42M 4:26:03
16831 Brun, O, 40M 4:26:03
16832 Daneau, M, 34F 4:26:04
16833 Savage, D, 31M 4:26:04
16834 Lockley, J, 49M 4:26:04
16835 Hernandez, M, 23F 4:26:04
16836 Lopez Pena, M, 46M 4:26:04
16837 Johnson, D, 43F 4:26:05
16838 Argence, P, 37M 4:26:05
16839 Barnett, C, 30M 4:26:05
16840 Hein, N, 38F 4:26:06
16841 Aull, J, 42M 4:26:06
16842 Kemper, H, 29M 4:26:06
16843 Wichmann-Eichhorn, D, 56M 4:26:07
16844 Basile, G, 53M 4:26:08
16845 Mello, R, 48M 4:26:08
16846 Ronan, R, 41M 4:26:08
16847 Novograd, N, 30M 4:26:09
16848 Lawton, A, 31M 4:26:09
16849 Sullivan, J, 27M 4:26:09
16850 Duhl, J, 38M 4:26:09
16851 Durst, G, 26M 4:26:10
16852 Del Bravo, S, 26F 4:26:10
16853 Vickery, P, 41M 4:26:11
16854 Rumberger, K, 43F 4:26:11
16855 Campbell, M, 38F 4:26:11
16856 Kurland, E, 29M 4:26:11
16857 Robinson, J, 29F 4:26:11
16858 Robinson, W, 32M 4:26:12
16859 McLaughlin, M, 29M 4:26:12
16860 Kelly, R, 39F 4:26:12
16861 Berard, S, 44M 4:26:12
16862 Stefopulos, C, 29M 4:26:12
16863 Collignon, M, 56M 4:26:12
16864 Brienza Gordon, S, 29F 4:26:12
16865 Besse, D, 33M 4:26:13
16866 Lackenby, L, 25F 4:26:13
16867 Hamersma, D, 56M 4:26:13
16868 Kreps, E, 49M 4:26:13
16869 Colas, P, 31M 4:26:13
16870 Meltzer, N, 41M 4:26:13
16871 Maignan, B, 31M 4:26:13
16872 Laforge, K, 37M 4:26:14
16873 Ray, J, 29M 4:26:14
16874 Balles, G, 30M 4:26:14
16875 Silverberg, J, 34M 4:26:14
16876 Dinneen, J, 44M 4:26:14
16877 Everett, K, 35F 4:26:14
16878 Norwood, C, 30F 4:26:15
16879 Jamieson, C, 56M 4:26:15
16880 Benzeno, E, 25M 4:26:15
16881 McCartney, D, 29F 4:26:16
16882 Yanovsky, S, 47M 4:26:16
16883 Leobon, H, 50F 4:26:16
16884 Leobon, F, 52M 4:26:16
16885 Manning, B, 40M 4:26:16
16886 Bruschi, A, 40M 4:26:16
16887 Wagemaker, R, 51M 4:26:16
16888 Panensky, B, 49M4:26:16
16889 Perche, F, 30M 4:26:16
16890 Cornillet, R, 56M 4:26:16
16891 Connolly, S, 43M 4:26:16
16892 Galeano, D, 51F 4:26:16
16893 Walsh, P, 34F 4:26:17
16894 Shepherd, E, 52F 4:26:18
16895 Perkins, S, 42M 4:26:19
16896 Gallarvardin, M, 50M 4:26:19
16897 Cluxton, R, 44M 4:26:19
16898 Fortier, M, 37M 4:26:19
16899 Singer, G, 24M 4:26:20
16900 Medina, M, 28F 4:26:20
16901 Marrese, L, 26F 4:26:21
16902 Bourgnon, P, 48M 4:26:21
16903 Mote, T, 42M 4:26:21
16904 McIntosh, P, 28F 4:26:21
16905 Stoering, O, 28M 4:26:22
16906 Grossman, B, 39M 4:26:22
16907 Hawley, S, 24M 4:26:22
16908 Reilly, M, 31M 4:26:22
16909 Floret, R, 40M 4:26:22
16910 Suazo, M, 31F 4:26:22
16911 Stokes, J, 48M 4:26:23
16912 Weber, C, 28M 4:26:23
16913 Stets, P, 48M 4:26:23
16914 Gutterman, S, 25M 4:26:23
16915 Scatassa, J, 32F 4:26:23
16916 Gutterman, G, 50M 4:26:24
16917 Haskett, C, 35M 4:26:24
16918 Budny, P, 36M 4:26:25
16919 Pommer, P, 33M 4:26:25
16920 Blot, D, 39M 4:26:25
16921 Pommer, A, 35M 4:26:25
16922 Silva, M, 34M 4:26:25
16923 Poirier, S, 29F 4:26:25
16924 Poirier, G, 31M 4:26:26
16925 Gallagher, J, 48M 4:26:26
16926 Hollinssworth, S, 54M 4:26:26
16927 Dias, S, 40F 4:26:26
16928 Brandon, G, 38M 4:26:26
16929 Schulz, P, 30F 4:26:27
16930 Peirce, R, 42M 4:26:27
16931 Dore, C, 31F 4:26:27
16932 Grierson, P, 49M 4:26:27
16933 Robertson, L, 40F 4:26:27
16934 Wheeler, D, 48M 4:26:28
16935 Diaz, F, 44M 4:26:28
16936 Kaiser, L, 24F 4:26:28
16937 Bruni, E, 32F 4:26:29
16938 Blatter, H, 31F 4:26:29
16939 Dase, M, 42F 4:26:29
16940 Stanton, S, 36M 4:26:29
16941 Kehrel, J, 40M 4:26:30
16942 Marxe, R, 24F 4:26:30
16943Fontaine, R, 40M 4:26:30
16944 Maloney, T, 34F 4:26:30
16945 Ryberg, L, 49M 4:26:31
16946 Hunter, J, 24F 4:26:31
16947 Hawkins, P, 30M 4:26:31
16948 Laforge, L, 47M 4:26:32
16949 Popp, M, 29M 4:26:32
16950 Murray, M, 50M 4:26:32
16951 Liebscher, G, 30F 4:26:33
16952 Montes, H, 46M 4:26:33
16953 Zwick, H, 52M 4:26:33
16954 Oettl, A, 43M 4:26:33
16955 Kasper, S, 33F 4:26:34
16956 Schroeter, H, 41M 4:26:34
16957 Rebich, C, 25M 4:26:34
16958 Wilson, W, 58M 4:26:34
16959 Frain Jr, K, 28M 4:26:34
16960 Hoppe, M, 35M 4:26:34
16961 Cohen, R, 37F 4:26:34
16962 Conner, L, 32F 4:26:34
16963 Kilts, D, 42F 4:26:34
16964 Shabat, B, 44F 4:26:34
16965 Voss, U, 45M 4:26:34
16966 Van Kralingen, J, 27M 4:26:35
16967 Goldfield, H, 32M 4:26:35
16968 Van Den Berg, J, 48M 4:26:35
16969 Kantak, J, 34M 4:26:35
16970 Hack, K, 43M 4:26:35
16971 Henri, R, 44M 4:26:36
16972 Black, R, 41M 4:26:36
16973 Luevano Morales, B, 28M 4:26:36
16974 Rowic, M, 20F 4:26:36
16975 Nakamura, T, 30M 4:26:37
16976 Paquin, A, 34M 4:26:38
16977 Gueguen, J, 31M 4:26:38
16978 Wendland, B, 50F 4:26:39
16979 Dioni, O, 22M 4:26:39
16980Natori, K, 51M 4:26:39
16981 Buchanan, R, 39M 4:26:40
16982 Stephens, J, 39M 4:26:40
16983 Helmers, L, 43F 4:26:40
16984 Huesing, B, 61M 4:26:40
16985 Costello, P, 26F 4:26:40
16986 Marle, M, 57M 4:26:41
16987 Bruckner, M, 50M 4:26:41
16988 Falter, R, 41M 4:26:41
16989 Cohenour, D, 35F 4:26:41
16990 Van Bokhoven, L, 49F 4:26:41
16991 McLoughlin, S, 40F 4:26:42
16992 Palmer, D, 46M 4:26:42
16993 Weiner, M, 29M 4:26:42
16994 Williams, M, 47M 4:26:42
16995 Willis, M, 30F 4:26:42
16996 Smith, M, 40M 4:26:43
16997 Wolff, R, 29M 4:26:43
16998 Pacciani, M, 50M 4:26:43
16999 Goettche, P, 47M 4:26:43
17000 Caceres, R, 50M 4:26:44
17001 Small, G, 38F 4:26:44
17002 Weinstein, L, 55M 4:26:44
17003 Brand, R, 58M 4:26:44
17004 Kugel, C, 32M 4:26:45
17005 Rose, D, 38M 4:26:45
17006Johnson, J, 67F 4:26:45
17007 Viaud, B, 40M 4:26:46
17008 Romano Mussali, A, 27F 4:26:46
17009 Reynolds Canas, M, 29F 4:26:47
17010Rasmussen, S, 51M 4:26:47
17011 Lucchini, M, 21M 4:26:47
17012 Higgins, T, 37M 4:26:47
17013 Delfino, M, 28M 4:26:47
17014 Serlin, F, 57M 4:26:47
17015 Minami, L, 25F 4:26:48
17016 Spaulding, F, 50M 4:26:48
17017 Jenkins, J, 61M 4:26:49
17018 Schenk, L, 32F 4:26:49
17019 Grossman, J, 41M 4:26:50
17020 Farinacci, P, 44F 4:26:50
17021 Blum, W, 38M 4:26:50
17022 Saunders, A, 52M 4:26:50
17023 Allison, W, 30M 4:26:51
17024 King, J, 45F 4:26:51
17025 Allison, J, 36M 4:26:51
17026 Rannala, K, 27F 4:26:51
17027 Kniffin Jr, W, 51M 4:26:51
17028 Holtackers, R, 30M 4:26:52
17029 Borzilleri, M, 32F 4:26:52
17030 Rogers, G, 40M 4:26:52
17031 Wigginton, S, 35M 4:26:52
17032 Netten, E, 35M 4:26:53
17033 Exposito, M, 35M 4:26:53
17034 Kubik, J, 49F 4:26:53
17035 Marshall, C, 25M 4:26:53
17036 Sheinbaum, A, 48M 4:26:53
17037 Boyd, L, 43M 4:26:54
17038 Moseman, E, 40F 4:26:54
17039 Heath, A, 34F 4:26:54
17040 Miyashita, A, 30M 4:26:55
17041 Chang, J, 24F 4:26:55
17042 Calder, J, 36M 4:26:55
17043 Underwood, J, 47F 4:26:56
17044 Laurence, D, 42M 4:26:56
17045 Kenzo, K, 41M 4:26:56
17046 Cynamon, S, 39M 4:26:56
17047 Toersen, H, 57M 4:26:56
17048 Borgman, H, 33M 4:26:57
17049 Chopp, G, 38M 4:26:57
17050 Van Leest, P, 31M 4:26:57
17051 Scanlon, A, 45F 4:26:57
17052 Janson, D, 27M 4:26:57
17053 Bjornland, T, 39M 4:26:57
17054 Maattanen, A, 36F 4:26:59
17055 Novelli, D, 39M 4:26:59
17056 Sommeling, E, 30M 4:26:59
17057 Winkle, R, 46M 4:27:00
17058 Sairamesh, J, 26M 4:27:00
17059 Almgren Gaarder, H, 35F 4:27:00
17060 Chiquetto, V, 41F 4:27:00
17061 Nieuwenhoven, E, 50M 4:27:00
17062 Brown, L, 30F 4:27:01
17063 Rugani, F, 46M 4:27:01
17064 Mendelsohn, S, 36F 4:27:01
17065 Svartveit, K, 52M 4:27:01
17066 Johannessen, F, 54M 4:27:01
17067 Duivenvoorden, H, 49M 4:27:01
17068 Armagno, A, 32M 4:27:02
17069 Barber, N, 30F 4:27:02
17070 Forrester, G, 48M 4:27:02
17071 Viitanen, Y, 45M 4:27:03
17072 Balstra-Spijkers, D, 49F 4:27:03
17073 Lance, J, 46F 4:27:03
17074 Bryant, J, 52M 4:27:03
17075 Pol, E, 36M 4:27:03
17076 Garcia Navarro, E, 39M 4:27:03
17077 Garcia Navarro, G, 35M 4:27:04
17078 Goldberg, D, 25F 4:27:04
17079 Canavan, P, 29F 4:27:04
17080 Phillips, J, 40F 4:27:04
17081 Cowan, C, 42M 4:27:04
17082 Doose, H, 41M 4:27:05
17083 Capuano, E, 31F 4:27:05
17084 Eckels, M, 47M 4:27:05
17085 Barba Ramirez, R, 53M 4:27:05
17086 Hallegouet, M, 55F 4:27:06
17087 Hallegouet, J, 59M 4:27:06
17088 Veninata, R, 30M 4:27:06
17089 Cabrera Torres, C, 53M 4:27:06
17090 Ochoa, A, 45M 4:27:06
17091 Marek, M, 24M 4:27:06
17092 Schmidbauer, W, 50M 4:27:06
17093 Buskermolen, J, 42M 4:27:07
17094 Buettner, A, 60M 4:27:07
17095 Giessinger, B, 28M 4:27:07
17096 Brown, A, 44M 4:27:07
17097 Faidy, D, 36M 4:27:07
17098 Chicha, J, 35M 4:27:07
17099 Engstrom, J, 34M 4:27:07
17100 Nadler, S, 48M 4:27:07
17101 Stembridge, G, 45M 4:27:07
17102 Reiner, G, 29F 4:27:08
17103White, D, 43F 4:27:08
17104 Persson, L, 31F 4:27:08
17105 McManus, J, 35M 4:27:08
17106 Hammarbo, P, 32M 4:27:08
17107 Best, T, 30M 4:27:09
17108 Snoek, E, 25M 4:27:09
17109 Ablondi, K, 39F 4:27:09
17110 Snoek, P, 50M 4:27:09
17111 Homes, J, 47F 4:27:09
17112 Henkel, S, 28F 4:27:10
17113 Nilsand, B, 50M 4:27:10
17114 Vargas Hernandez, C, 45M 4:27:10
17115 McConnell, K, 24M 4:27:10
17116 Da Porto, N, 29M 4:27:10
17117 Calderon, J, 29F 4:27:10
17118 Swearingen, S, 32F 4:27:11
17119 Hartzell, N, 42M 4:27:11
17120 Lysberg, M, 29F 4:27:11
17121 Swinkels, T, 37M 4:27:11
17122 Carter, A, 37M 4:27:11
17123 Stern, M, 79M 4:27:11
17124 Ransweiler, A, 28F 4:27:12
17125 Dillworth, J, 35M 4:27:12
17126 Davidson, G, 38F 4:27:12
17127 Gamez, J, 46M 4:27:12
17128 Harkins, W, 48M 4:27:12
17129 Kirchberger, J, 32M 4:27:12
17130 Tefts, T, 42M 4:27:12
17131 McWhirr, A, 46M 4:27:12
17132 Guldner, A, 49F 4:27:13
17133Roennen Von, K, 54M 4:27:13
17134 Sullivan, S, 30M 4:27:13
17135 Unislawski, E, 38F 4:27:13
17136 Catanzaro, J, 50M 4:27:13
17137 Barney, E, 44M 4:27:13
17138 Macknight, K, 36M 4:27:13
17139 Gaudet, V, 51M 4:27:13
17140 Chan, L, 34F 4:27:14
17141 Barnett, S, 40M4:27:14
17142 Nesline, D, 35M 4:27:14
17143 Rentenaar, D, 48M 4:27:15
17144 Ford, R, 45M 4:27:15
17145 Piedrahita, J, 34M 4:27:15
17146 Barkwell, R, 33M 4:27:15
17147 Steffen, W, 50M 4:27:16
17148 Wcislo, D, 48M 4:27:16
17149 Alvarez Velasquez, G, 39M 4:27:16
17150 Unger, R, 47M 4:27:16
17151 Schwantes, R, 59M 4:27:16
17152 McCaughan, K, 32M 4:27:16
17153 Poppa, T, 41F 4:27:16
17154 Faure, H, 39M 4:27:16
17155 Dubois, C, 37M 4:27:17
17156 Eustace, K, 43M 4:27:17
17157 Armijo, F, 53M 4:27:17
17158 Andrish, S, 25M 4:27:18
17159 Gaddi, A, 42M 4:27:18
17160 Andrish, J, 50M 4:27:18
17161 Longo, D, 33F 4:27:18
17162 Carteris, R, 40M 4:27:19
17163 D'Virgilio, J, 27M 4:27:19
17164 Sinclair, E, 27F 4:27:19
17165Sasson, I, 48M 4:27:19
17166 Kudrna, E, 37F 4:27:19
17167 Auclair, Y, 35M 4:27:19
17168 Lavery, A, 26M 4:27:19
17169 Hein, V, 38M 4:27:20
17170 O'Callaghan, M, 25M 4:27:20
17171 Gauthier, N, 58M 4:27:20
17172 Hoogland, B, 36M 4:27:21
17173 Lehner, H, 54M 4:27:21
17174 Connelly, G, 37M 4:27:21
17175 Araneo, G, 40M 4:27:21
17176 Meel, C, 48F 4:27:21
17177 Anderson, N, 35F 4:27:22
17178 Pugh, H, 47M 4:27:22
17179 Braven, R, 39M 4:27:22
17180 Purcell, T, 23M 4:27:22
17181 Tuch, H, 42M 4:27:22
17182 Kempf, W, 46M 4:27:22
17183 Bouhy, A, 40M 4:27:22
17184 Carr, W, 56M 4:27:23
17185 Derousseaux, M, 44M 4:27:23
17186 Richemann, R, 31F 4:27:23
17187 Riehemann, P, 32M 4:27:23
17188 Glennon, G, 44M 4:27:23
17189 Hart, T, 28M 4:27:24
17190 Barnett, W, 38M 4:27:24
17191 Loughman, P, 24F 4:27:24
17192 Chaffin, T, 47M 4:27:24
17193 Adrian, J, 33M 4:27:24
17194 Murgio, A, 39M 4:27:24
17195 Giles, D, 54M 4:27:25
17196 Mishkin, J, 40M 4:27:25
17197 Mirrielees, B, 45M 4:27:25
17198 Smith-Sands, S, 33F 4:27:25
17199 Berman, G, 36F 4:27:26
17200 Berman, M, 40M 4:27:26
17201 Franzini, F, 27M 4:27:26
17202Schulze, H, 53M 4:27:27
17203 Munk, G, 37M 4:27:27
17204 Quissargues, J, 50M 4:27:27
17205 Arnaud, P, 37M 4:27:27
17206 Guidi, C, 53M 4:27:27
17207 Gundaker, I, 50F 4:27:27
17208 Cateau, P, 44M 4:27:28
17209 Bastianini, L, 47M 4:27:28
17210 Messinger, C, 30F 4:27:28
17211 Weiss, J, 55M 4:27:28
17212 Messinger, D, 32M 4:27:28
17213 Somarriba, D, 34M 4:27:28
17214 Zackeo, D, 28M 4:27:28
17215 Lenhart, M, 36M 4:27:28
17216 Rochegude, B, 55M 4:27:29
17217 Mishaan, S, 40M 4:27:29
17218 Frey, C, 33F 4:27:29
17219 Schoesler, H, 32M 4:27:29
17220 Dryll, C, 30M 4:27:29
17221 Gralley, R, 68M 4:27:29
17222 Meier, R, 34M 4:27:29
17223 Gralley, C, 39M 4:27:30
17224 Quintiliani, D, 50M 4:27:30
17225 Shuji, S, 31M 4:27:30
17226 Shelley, M, 38M 4:27:30
17227 Benson, J, 48M 4:27:30
17228 Wolters, H, 47F 4:27:31
17229 Katz, M, 45F 4:27:31
17230 Karasik, P, 47M 4:27:31
17231 Kuchmeister, L, 39F 4:27:32
17232 Robinson, D, 29F 4:27:32
17233 Yaala Djebli, N, 31F 4:27:32
17234 Apel, I, 53F 4:27:32
17235 Barone, A, 27F 4:27:32
17236 Groth, D, 44F 4:27:32
17237 Selby, S, 32F 4:27:32
17238 Gramer, K, 23F 4:27:32
17239 Lyke, C, 51F 4:27:32
17240 Dreyer, K, 57M 4:27:32
17241 Gates, R, 25F 4:27:32
17242 Russell, H, 25M 4:27:32
17243 Said, N, 26F 4:27:32
17244 Quenot, P, 42M 4:27:32
17245 Perry, R, 55M 4:27:33
17246 Moeller, S, 47M 4:27:33
17247 Neal, T, 34M 4:27:33
17248 Holzer, A, 31F 4:27:33
17249 Allcock, B, 43M 4:27:33
17250Tyler, S, 39M 4:27:33
17251 Clarkson, D, 40M 4:27:33
17252 Angulo, E, 54M 4:27:34
17253 Leroy, J, 45M 4:27:34
17254 Thierry, B, 37M 4:27:34
17255 Kaiser, W, 45M 4:27:34
17256 Tribull, E, 58F 4:27:34
17257 Holden, C, 35M 4:27:34
17258 Kilkelly, B, 34M 4:27:35
17259 Ernst, K, 41F 4:27:35
17260 Tomman, R, 28M 4:27:35
17261 Wessels, W, 35M 4:27:36
17262 Botta, M, 42F 4:27:37
17263 Moran, T, 48M 4:27:37
17264 Crandall, J, 29M 4:27:38
17265 Sokolowski, W, 49M 4:27:39
17266 Romeo, G, 33M 4:27:39
17267 Jones, D, 32F 4:27:39
17268 Sironi, A, 32F 4:27:39
17269 Galliani, A, 58M 4:27:40
17270 Clancy, C, 37F 4:27:40
17271 Mui, E, 35M 4:27:40
17272 Kuhn, A, 47M 4:27:40
17273 Boven, E, 58M 4:27:41
17274 Davenport, B, 34F 4:27:41
17275 Winslow, N, 37F 4:27:42
17276 Kuehn, S, 29F 4:27:42
17277 Berger, C, 44F 4:27:42
17278 Cuesta, F, 64M 4:27:42
17279 Kadwell, S, 37M 4:27:42
17280 Burrows, R, 54M 4:27:42
17281 Harnischfeger, R, 40M 4:27:42
17282 Lewter, M, 48M 4:27:42
17283 Ramirez Ricano, F, 53M 4:27:42
17284 Reid, R, 35M 4:27:42
17285Osborne, J, 41M 4:27:42
17286 Culliton, K, 44M 4:27:42
17287 Santiago, W, 41M 4:27:42
17288 Small, P, 33M 4:27:43
17289 Sardisco, D, 29F 4:27:43
17290 Foloenyi, J, 48M 4:27:44
17291 Bargel, D, 47M4:27:44
17292 Phillips, A, 45F 4:27:44
17293 Valsesia, U, 55M 4:27:45
17294 Geoghegan, P, 38F 4:27:45
17295 Agarwal, V, 52M 4:27:45
17296 Inverno, U, 58M 4:27:45
17297 Blouin, R, 51M 4:27:45
17298 Hayes, F, 37M 4:27:46
17299 Jost, J, 29M 4:27:46
17300 Marroquin Loyola, C, 48M 4:27:46
17301 Laiks, M, 31M 4:27:46
17302 Chacon, R, 31M 4:27:47
17303 Demouge, A, 44M 4:27:47
17304 Finnegan, A, 42M 4:27:47
17305 Finnegan, E, 37M 4:27:47
17306 Van Maanen, J, 44M 4:27:47
17307 Williams, A, 46F 4:27:47
17308 Roennen Von, F, 38F 4:27:48
17309 Stone, W, 31M 4:27:48
17310 Clarkson, C, 32F 4:27:49
17311 Hughes, D, 36F 4:27:49
17312 Usai, F, 26M 4:27:49
17313 Steinlauf, E, 35F 4:27:49
17314 Willemsen, H, 62F 4:27:49
17315 Lynch, K, 22F 4:27:49
17316 Neukam, D, 36M 4:27:49
17317 Scheefhals, J, 39F 4:27:49
17318 Walker, J, 42M 4:27:49
17319 Hass, A, 44F 4:27:49
17320 Davis, M, 46M 4:27:49
17321 Gross, W, 33F 4:27:49
17322 Roderick, S, 45M 4:27:50
17323 Ferrari, G, 40M 4:27:50
17324 Bostrom, D, 34M 4:27:51
17325 Pakvis, E, 47M 4:27:51
17326 Riven, J, 47F 4:27:51
17327 Perlzweig, D, 38M 4:27:51
17328 Michelet, E, 30M 4:27:51
17329 Kundrus, R, 39M 4:27:51
17330 Green, S, 31M 4:27:52
17331 Tirado, J, 52F 4:27:53
17332 Dooley, A, 25F 4:27:53
17333 Luis-Neira, G, 42M 4:27:53
17334 Maitland, C, 42F 4:27:53
17335 Klein, C, 37F 4:27:54
17336 Leeman, M, 39F 4:27:54
17337 Malas, B, 29F 4:27:54
17338 McDonald, K, 25F 4:27:55
17339 Halpin, J, 23M 4:27:55
17340 North, J, 30M 4:27:55
17341 Fischer, T, 31M 4:27:55
17342 Stahl, D, 53M 4:27:55
17343 Kondo, M, 24F 4:27:56
17344 St Martin, W, 57M 4:27:56
17345 Vergori, S, 20M 4:27:56
17346 Auge, B, 46F 4:27:57
17347 Sampaio, A, 44M 4:27:57
17348 Rosen, K, 45M 4:27:57
17349 Stanton, W, 32M 4:27:57
17350 Boaventura, C, 47M 4:27:58
17351 Nora, M, 42F 4:27:58
17352 Cruz, P, 29M 4:27:58
17353 Ware, C, 32F 4:27:58
17354 Petersen, J, 32M 4:27:58
17355 Robinson, V, 36F 4:27:58
17356 Weissman, A, 56M 4:27:59
17357 Prestileo, D, 39F 4:27:59
17358 Ware, J, 47M 4:27:59
17359 Spilman, M, 33F 4:27:59
17360 Aubert, E, 45F 4:27:59
17361Pages, F, 45M 4:27:59
17362 Lopez, D, 31F 4:27:59
17363 Nunez, S, 38F 4:28:00
17364 Oxsher, S, 44F 4:28:00
17365 Van De Walle, C, 41M 4:28:00
17366 Segal, G, 36M 4:28:00
17367 Briggs, S, 25F 4:28:00
17368 Vargas, V, 59M 4:28:00
17369 Greenwald, T, 47M 4:28:01
17370 Lee, C, 47M 4:28:01
17371 Hoffman, L, 48F 4:28:01
17372 Zucker, C, 51M 4:28:01
17373 Zottoli, P, 45M 4:28:01
17374 Moyer, B, 27F 4:28:02
17375 De Rauglaudre, V, 33F 4:28:02
17376 Sourbeer, J, 34M 4:28:02
17377 Kiauciunas, S, 28F 4:28:03
17378 Bondoni, C, 49M 4:28:03
17379 Hearty, G, 32M 4:28:03
17380 Faust, D, 49M 4:28:03
17381 Libin, L, 36M 4:28:04
17382 Pedreira, V, 36F 4:28:04
17383 Morvan, J, 43M 4:28:04
17384 Rivas, E, 50F 4:28:04
17385Tadanaga, I, 50M 4:28:04
17386 Savage, J, 43M 4:28:04
17387 Avrett III, M, 50M 4:28:05
17388 Ripley, R, 47F 4:28:05
17389 Foggo, P, 30F 4:28:05
17390 Walt, C, 50M 4:28:05
17391 Pommier, G, 54M 4:28:05
17392 De Reyes, N, 51F 4:28:05
17393 Porter, T, 35M 4:28:05
17394 Tabash, L, 24M 4:28:05
17395 Celaire, R, 39M 4:28:05
17396 Lynch, J, 46M 4:28:05
17397 Helbert, C, 39M 4:28:05
17398 Stalnecker, M, 41M 4:28:05
17399 Manes, E, 40M 4:28:05
17400 Lambert, P, 53M 4:28:05
17401 Crepet, C, 51F 4:28:06
17402 Meyer, C, 29F 4:28:06
17403 Paranihi, J, 32F 4:28:07
17404 Spoelker, J, 26M 4:28:07
17405 Pedro, J, 29M 4:28:07
17406 Walravens, A, 54M 4:28:07
17407 Smith, A, 27F 4:28:07
17408 Shilling, M, 34M 4:28:07
17409 Paco, J, 45M 4:28:08
17410 Friedman, D, 49M 4:28:08
17411 Rivera Sotomayor, V, 46M 4:28:09
17412 Petrone Northcote, A, 40F 4:28:09
17413 Clark, P, 42M 4:28:09
17414 Nicolas, L, 38M 4:28:10
17415 Carl, D, 43F 4:28:10
17416 Newton, S, 48M 4:28:11
17417 Vrolijk, E, 33F 4:28:11
17418 Bonetti, U, 56M 4:28:11
17419 Mielentz, W, 41M4:28:12
17420 Zwillenberg, J, 27F 4:28:12
17421 Luth, K, 57M 4:28:12
17422 Yagi, M, 62M 4:28:12
17423 Zousmer, M, 44F 4:28:12
17424 Brady, P, 58M 4:28:12
17425 Douglas, S, 47F 4:28:13
17426 Perkins, W, 45M 4:28:13
17427 Missita, J, 54M 4:28:13
17428 McAuliffe, M, 46M 4:28:13
17429 Langan, M, 32F 4:28:13
17430 Stalnecker, J, 40F 4:28:14
17431 Lavelot, A, 38F 4:28:14
17432 Campbell, B, 39M 4:28:14
17433 Girou, P, 36M 4:28:15
17434 Rutz, C, 50F 4:28:15
17435 Reaveley, I, 53F 4:28:15
17436 Portnoy, R, 47M 4:28:16
17437 Smoker, P, 32M 4:28:16
17438 Palu MD, R, 40M 4:28:16
17439 Borne, K, 39M 4:28:17
17440 Musser, K, 26F 4:28:18
17441 Donzelli, R, 38M 4:28:18
17442 Senties, A, 43M 4:28:18
17443 Cox, L, 52M 4:28:18
17444 Hopper, B, 40F 4:28:19
17445 Cohen, S, 44M 4:28:19
17446 Sullivan, K, 29M 4:28:19
17447 Losekoot, H, 34M 4:28:20
17448 Goldberg, D, 27M 4:28:20
17449 Schlemmer, J, 29F 4:28:20
17450 Fourtoy, G, 48M 4:28:20
17451 De La Garza, G, 37M 4:28:21
17452Iodice, G, 56M 4:28:21
17453 Chagoyan, L, 45M 4:28:21
17454 Berenschot, W, 30M 4:28:21
17455 Wohlert, T, 33M 4:28:21
17456 Crump, B, 31M 4:28:21
17457 Stoller, J, 43M 4:28:22
17458 Yamane, T, 36M 4:28:22
17459 Caballero, A, 36M 4:28:22
17460 Clough, B, 32M 4:28:23
17461 Brooks, C, 41M 4:28:23
17462 Sonntag, W, 68M 4:28:23
17463 Karns, L, 33M 4:28:23
17464 Gump, B, 27M 4:28:23
17465 Lindelauf, J, 37F 4:28:23
17466 Lonergan, J, 41M 4:28:23
17467 Donnalley, K, 37F 4:28:23
17468 Warsaw, H, 41M 4:28:23
17469 Peralta R, F, 39M 4:28:23
17470 Curley, C, 38F 4:28:23
17471 Glaise, P, 27M 4:28:24
17472 Howlett, J, 37M 4:28:24
17473 Hayes, T, 38M 4:28:24
17474 Zwipf, A, 34M 4:28:24
17475 Charkiewicz, A, 46F 4:28:25
17476 Grobman, R, 33M 4:28:25
17477 Sorensen, H, 49M 4:28:25
17478 Stanford, C, 48M 4:28:26
17479 Leboeuf, F, 42M 4:28:26
17480 Waxman, S, 49M 4:28:26
17481 Reyes, M, 34M 4:28:27
17482 Hill, M, 26M 4:28:27
17483 Schroder, P, 43F 4:28:27
17484 Herssens, M, 37M 4:28:29
17485 Schweighofer, J, 44M 4:28:29
17486 Cresantidaknis, C, 30M 4:28:30
17487 Ballon, J, 51F 4:28:30
17488 Verhoeve, A, 30M 4:28:30
17489 Rigsby, L, 43M 4:28:30
17490 Price, S, 32F 4:28:30
17491 Van Der Klis, G, 29M 4:28:30
17492 Hannon, W, 46M 4:28:30
17493 Barry, J, 34F 4:28:30
17494 Pocreaux, G, 44M 4:28:31
17495Schafer, R, 54F 4:28:31
17496 Codis, J, 46F 4:28:31
17497 Campi, D, 39M 4:28:32
17498 Hirakata, N, 38M 4:28:32
17499 Price, K, 29F4:28:32
17500 Todoroki, M, 31M 4:28:33
17501 Friedland, D, 55F 4:28:33
17502 Sadowski, G, 44M 4:28:34
17503 Guillaume, Y, 19M 4:28:35
17504 Matthews, D, 22F 4:28:35
17505 Ardt, T, 37M 4:28:35
17506 Capaul, C, 37M 4:28:36
17507 Harris, J, 49M 4:28:36
17508 Vair, M, 25F 4:28:36
17509 Burks, J, 33M 4:28:36
17510 Cohen, R, 44M 4:28:36
17511 Pipher, T, 39F 4:28:36
17512 Schroeder, K, 29F 4:28:37
17513 Lorenz, D, 56M 4:28:37
17514 Lally, B, 31M 4:28:37
17515 Buskirk, J, 31M 4:28:38
17516 Crawford, F, 32M 4:28:38
17517 Koutnik, W, 48M 4:28:38
17518 Robinson, P, 43M 4:28:38
17519 Cox, M, 43M 4:28:38
17520 Gutierrez, E, 49M 4:28:38
17521 Garcia, E, 45M 4:28:38
17522 Olson, J, 44M 4:28:38
17523 Bomhof, J, 44M 4:28:38
17524 Thompson, M, 45F 4:28:38
17525 Thompson, R, 47M 4:28:38
17526 Dixon, G, 27M 4:28:38
17527 Smith, G, 40M 4:28:38
17528 Nielsen, F, 47M 4:28:38
17529 Carter, R, 42M 4:28:38
17530 Salaberry, J, 40M 4:28:38
17531 Hargett, J, 47M 4:28:38
17532 Tixier, S, 48M 4:28:39
17533 Poole MD, J, 38M 4:28:39
17534 Farina, J, 34F 4:28:39
17535 Farina, J, 35M 4:28:40
17536 Rinaldi, P, 47M 4:28:40
17537 McDermott, J, 46M 4:28:40
17538 Hamel, O, 39M 4:28:40
17539 Rannou, G, 58M 4:28:40
17540 Daider, A, 25F 4:28:41
17541 Sartieaux, M, 37M 4:28:41
17542 Buendgen, W, 40M 4:28:41
17543 Kameyama, K, 27F 4:28:41
17544 Stager, C, 45M 4:28:41
17545 Borghetto, D, 26M 4:28:42
17546 De Jong, A, 33M 4:28:42
17547 Blaisse, J, 28F 4:28:42
17548 Pryor, M, 34M 4:28:42
17549 Hicklin, J, 54M 4:28:42
17550 Broekhuizen, M, 27F 4:28:42
17551 Torres II, J, 34M 4:28:42
17552 Richardson, R, 31F 4:28:42
17553 Hanratty, K, 34F 4:28:43
17554 Zoeller, C, 39M 4:28:43
17555 Gannon, S, 33F 4:28:43
17556 Van Cutsem, E, 29M 4:28:43
17557 Johnsen, R, 35M 4:28:43
17558 Donnelly, M, 34F 4:28:43
17559 Ross, J, 49M 4:28:44
17560 Cohen, R, 61M 4:28:44
17561 Peri, T, 45F 4:28:44
17562 Jakich-Browne, L, 41F 4:28:44
17563 Cohen, R, 40F 4:28:44
17564 Balsebre Y Sole, A, 28M 4:28:44
17565 Stephen, R, 41M 4:28:45
17566 Lefevre, L, 26M 4:28:46
17567 Carpinelli, P, 48M 4:28:46
17568 Fontana, A, 26F4:28:46
17569 Uchiki, S, 45F 4:28:46
17570 Westra, J, 43M 4:28:46
17571 Kreloff, S, 42M 4:28:47
17572 Holmes, R, 31F 4:28:47
17573 Ellis, E, 41M 4:28:47
17574 Adams, S, 38F 4:28:47
17575 Turcio*, J, 29M 4:28:47
17576 Beaudart, G, 49M 4:28:47
17577 Dolnick, W, 38M 4:28:48
17578 McGrath, M, 38F 4:28:48
17579 Murzeau, P, 31M 4:28:48
17580 Spinozzi, B, 51M 4:28:48
17581 Jobe, J, 38M 4:28:49
17582 James, J, 39F 4:28:50
17583 Truquet, C, 48M 4:28:50
17584 Maresca, S, 37M 4:28:50
17585 Munoz, A, 32M 4:28:51
17586 Vall Borda, J, 45M 4:28:51
17587 Van Beek, C, 48F 4:28:51
17588 Barash, H, 55M 4:28:51
17589 Piekarski, T, 43M 4:28:51
17590 Balland, M, 42M 4:28:51
17591 Diamond, L, 41M 4:28:52
17592 Culver, T, 33M4:28:52
17593 Hazard, S, 49M 4:28:52
17594 Girard, J, 40M 4:28:53
17595 Roche, R, 39M 4:28:53
17596 Botero, E, 34M 4:28:54
17597 Gross, B, 55M 4:28:54
17598 Pancani, G, 27M 4:28:54
17599 Gilbert, D, 48M 4:28:55
17600 Evans, P, 28M 4:28:55
17601 Wilken, M, 39F 4:28:55
17602 Altman, S, 35F 4:28:55
17603 Stratmann, R, 44F 4:28:56
17604 Heflin, A, 36F 4:28:56
17605 Band, S, 34M 4:28:56
17606 Sluka, M, 35M 4:28:56
17607 Kjellberg, E, 37F 4:28:56
17608 Rohde, S, 34F 4:28:56
17609 Swanson, C, 32M 4:28:56
17610 Chinoy, K, 26M 4:28:56
17611 Devilee, W, 45M 4:28:57
17612 Schwarz, P, 34M 4:28:57
17613 Gaffney, C, 51M 4:28:57
17614 Lekkerkerker, E, 39M 4:28:57
17615 Horgan, J, 40M 4:28:57
17616 Reynoso, P, 41F 4:28:57
17617 Voetberg, J, 53M 4:28:57
17618 Hashimoto, M, 50M 4:28:58
17619 Martin, L, 58M 4:28:58
17620 Ferguson, W, 59M 4:28:58
17621 Chinellato, G, 42M 4:28:59
17622 Costantin, J, 52M 4:28:59
17623 Frostick, K, 47M 4:28:59
17624 Kane, K, 34M 4:28:59
17625 Boileau, S, 36F 4:28:59
17626 Erickson, L, 40F 4:29:00
17627 Miller, M, 23F 4:29:00
17628 Patz, W, 47M 4:29:00
17629 Fitzgerald, B, 37M 4:29:00
17630 Gill, F, 31M 4:29:01
17631 Ramo, F, 48M 4:29:01
17632 Adel, L, 50M 4:29:01
17633 Fagan, G, 45M 4:29:02
17634Milligan, M, 46F 4:29:02
17635 Mollers, F, 31M 4:29:02
17636 Martinez, L, 35M 4:29:02
17637 Quinn, D, 39M 4:29:02
17638 Mack, J, 42F 4:29:02
17639 Mueller, C, 42F 4:29:03
17640 Thirion, L, 70M 4:29:03
17641 White, J, 40M 4:29:03
17642 Salvato, D, 36M 4:29:04
17643 Bortz, R, 64F 4:29:04
17644 Taubes, T, 27M 4:29:04
17645 Schollaert, L, 23F 4:29:05
17646 Crane, R, 34M 4:29:05
17647 Howard, T, 29F 4:29:05
17648 Ferriss, D, 52M 4:29:05
17649 Willi, H, 34M 4:29:06
17650 Di Ferdinando, D, 43M 4:29:07
17651 Loprete, R, 46M 4:29:07
17652 Wheeler, M, 44M 4:29:07
17653 Kolimago, C, 24F 4:29:08
17654 Shouldis, K, 57M 4:29:08
17655 Sherman, L, 38M 4:29:08
17656 MacInnis, M, 37M 4:29:09
17657 Farris, M, 29F 4:29:09
17658 Harrod, G, 45M 4:29:10
17659 McKenna, K, 30M 4:29:10
17660 Naillon, E, 46F 4:29:10
17661 Rentfro, R, 49M 4:29:10
17662 Ehlert, G, 48M 4:29:10
17663 Portillo, J, 44M 4:29:11
17664 Le Couls, H, 47M 4:29:11
17665 Riiser, S, 48M 4:29:11
17666 Satoru, S, 31M 4:29:11
17667 Ploski, W, 55M 4:29:12
17668 Romanchuk, R, 37M 4:29:12
17669 Fernandez D Castillo, S, 55M 4:29:12
17670 Volkers, J, 57M 4:29:13
17671 Gatlin, B, 45M 4:29:13
17672 Hurley, D, 36M 4:29:13
17673 Deur, J, 33M 4:29:13
17674 McPhillips, F, 53M 4:29:13
17675 Reemtsma, R, 48M 4:29:13
17676 Kaspatis, O, 23M 4:29:14
17677 Payne, M, 46M 4:29:14
17678 Berrios, R, 41M 4:29:14
17679 Petrini, M, 31F 4:29:14
17680 Kane, M, 42M 4:29:14
17681 Priess, A, 35M4:29:15
17682 Burbano, G, 31M 4:29:15
17683 Curci, F, 43M 4:29:15
17684 Haig, R, 47M 4:29:15
17685 Scancarella, F, 38M 4:29:15
17686 Leventhal, T, 25F 4:29:16
17687 Audette, M, 35M 4:29:16
17688 Leventhal, L, 25F 4:29:16
17689 Reilly, G, 28M 4:29:16
17690 Ruhmkorff, P, 38M 4:29:18
17691 Martin, D, 30F 4:29:18
17692 Jurquet, J, 48M 4:29:19
17693 Bernes, J, 58M 4:29:19
17694 Gomez Galeano, E, 25M 4:29:20
17695 Carr, C, 26M 4:29:20
17696 Schoenbein, R, 50M 4:29:20
17697 Carey, B, 33M 4:29:20
17698 Schwab, D, 25M 4:29:20
17699 Fisher, M, 27F 4:29:21
17700 Labaye, E, 33M 4:29:21
17701 Fisher, M, 37M 4:29:21
17702 Tulley, D, 25M 4:29:21
17703 Murphy, P, 46M 4:29:21
17704 Pyle, W, 38M 4:29:22
17705 Emert, J, 52M 4:29:22
17706 Danford, A, 55F 4:29:22
17707 Curran, B, 34F 4:29:22
17708 Watkins, P, 37M 4:29:23
17709 Curran, K, 33M 4:29:23
17710 Motta, F, 40M 4:29:23
17711 Morales, R, 50M 4:29:23
17712 Valentin, J, 52M 4:29:23
17713 Bohse, J, 56M 4:29:23
17714 Otto, H, 53M 4:29:24
17715 Benz, M, 33M 4:29:24
17716 Fontaine, E, 44F4:29:24
17717 Van Zwieteren, J, 45M 4:29:24
17718 May, T, 29M 4:29:24
17719 Tschepke, H, 55M 4:29:24
17720 Antoon, S, 29F 4:29:25
17721 Muratori, B, 62M 4:29:26
17722 Hillen, L, 46M 4:29:26
17723 Levinson, R, 48M 4:29:26
17724 Halsey, T, 36M 4:29:27
17725 Purdy, S, 33M 4:29:27
17726 Lipton, L, 26M 4:29:28
17727 Sutphin-Scopetto, D, 37F 4:29:28
17728 Petrock, B, 43F 4:29:28
17729 Huff, E, 45F 4:29:29
17730 Seitz, M, 28M 4:29:29
17731 Lee, R, 52M 4:29:29
17732 Cockburn, W, 52M 4:29:30
17733 Hikiji, S, 50M 4:29:30
17734 Reedy, R, 48M 4:29:31
17735 Peppler, D, 51M 4:29:31
17736Missbrenner, P, 24F 4:29:31
17737 Flynn, B, 53M 4:29:32
17738 Spinner, K, 23M 4:29:32
17739 Moss, S, 30F 4:29:32
17740 Weber, K, 39M 4:29:32
17741 Kortenoever, R, 36M 4:29:33
17742 Larno, P, 38M 4:29:34
17743 Link, B, 44M 4:29:35
17744 McGowan, J, 31M 4:29:35
17745 Heylen, M, 38M 4:29:35
17746 McGuire, F, 51M 4:29:35
17747 Bonzi, F, 56M 4:29:35
17748 Wolk, J, 30F 4:29:35
17749 Lipinski, B, 35M 4:29:35
17750 Alexander, L, 30F 4:29:35
17751 Outen, D, 44F 4:29:35
17752 Van De Parre, L, 55M 4:29:35
17753 Wensink, J, 41M 4:29:36
17754 Durand, D, 42F 4:29:36
17755 Riedl, J, 40M 4:29:36
17756 Detwiler, L, 29F 4:29:36
17757 Levine, M, 31M 4:29:36
17758 Davlin, H, 32F 4:29:37
17759 Jones, L, 37M 4:29:37
17760 Diaz Gonzalez, R, 44M 4:29:37
17761 Simon, L, 31F 4:29:37
17762 Postema, P, 37M 4:29:37
17763 Miranda, J, 69M 4:29:37
17764 Keshauarz, H, 19M 4:29:38
17765 Auten, T, 33F 4:29:38
17766 Masset, F, 41M4:29:38
17767 Alves, M, 32F 4:29:38
17768 Tennen, D, 30F 4:29:38
17769 Gummelt, U, 34F 4:29:38
17770 Carter, J, 27M 4:29:38
17771 Brunet, A, 34M 4:29:39
17772 Cramer, J, 41M 4:29:39
17773 Shimotori, A, 23F 4:29:39
17774 Eagleton, M, 39M 4:29:40
17775 Tanzer, R, 36M 4:29:40
17776 Carey, A, 43M 4:29:40
17777 Oliveira, R, 28F 4:29:40
17778 Ansuini, V, 50M 4:29:41
17779 Tsubata, K, 52M 4:29:41
17780 Martelli, M, 37M 4:29:41
17781 Karlsson, O, 50M 4:29:41
17782 DiGiansante, M, 33F 4:29:41
17783 Morales, M, 52M 4:29:42
17784 Ishikawa, M, 35M 4:29:42
17785 Tanaka, N, 30M 4:29:42
17786 Mizukami, I, 50F 4:29:43
17787 Andersen, K, 41F 4:29:43
17788Jennings, R, 39M 4:29:44
17789 Fujii, M, 40M 4:29:44
17790 Giraud, F, 26M 4:29:45
17791 Orioli, G, 61M 4:29:45
17792 Saba, C, 47M 4:29:45
17793 Ishihara, T, 56F 4:29:45
17794 Baker, B, 49M 4:29:45
17795 Epervrier, J, 41M 4:29:46
17796 Amara, K, 42M 4:29:46
17797 Nagler, S, 56M 4:29:47
17798 De Vito, G, 38M 4:29:48
17799 Maciel, M, 38M 4:29:48
17800 Sussman, L, 23F 4:29:49
17801 Rodriguez, J, 52M 4:29:50
17802 Sherburne, P, 50M 4:29:50
17803 Williams, D, 32M 4:29:50
17804 Manner, G, 28M 4:29:51
17805 Neubauer, H, 47M 4:29:51
17806 Goldfarb, L, 38F 4:29:52
17807 Zan, L, 25M 4:29:52
17808 Roose, J, 24F 4:29:52
17809 Mendes, N, 51M 4:29:52
17810 Neumair, G, 31M 4:29:53
17811 Lessel, J, 33F 4:29:53
17812 Lore, A, 31M 4:29:53
17813 Jansen, J, 54M 4:29:53
17814 Katayama, Y, 50M 4:29:53
17815 Coquant, L, 35M 4:29:54
17816 Paccaud, C, 50F 4:29:54
17817 Ravinet, L, 43M 4:29:54
17818 Paccaud, J, 50M 4:29:54
17819 Valerino Jr, F, 36M 4:29:54
17820 Weller, T, 43M 4:29:54
17821 Bilsland, W, 54M 4:29:54
17822 Debruyn, A, 28F 4:29:55
17823 Reparon, A, 46M 4:29:55
17824 Roodbeen, J, 52M 4:29:55
17825Comolatti, A, 41M 4:29:55
17826 Moreau, C, 47M 4:29:56
17827 Chmil, S, 44M 4:29:56
17828 Arroyo, R, 38M 4:29:56
17829 Borelli, A, 48M 4:29:56
17830 Hoogstra, M, 53M 4:29:56
17831 Roques, J, 46M 4:29:56
17832 Yamazaki, M, 29M 4:29:56
17833 Lane, J, 40M 4:29:56
17834 Sullivan, F, 40M 4:29:56
17835 Serrano, J, 45M 4:29:56
17836 Liss, M, 38F 4:29:57
17837 Ashworth, M, 45M 4:29:57
17838 Tiseo, M, 32M 4:29:57
17839 Du Chene, R, 36M 4:29:57
17840 Laucks, P, 29F 4:29:57
17841 Boehm, S, 28F 4:29:57
17842 Ringuede, J, 48M 4:29:58
17843 DeMarco, J, 50M 4:29:58
17844 Driscoll, D, 31M 4:29:58
17845 Perry, P, 41M 4:29:58
17846 Regan, M, 31M 4:29:58
17847 De Groot, T, 27F 4:29:58
17848 Shapiro, B, 38M 4:29:59
17849 Sassone, J, 46M 4:29:59
17850 Barran, R, 35M 4:29:59
17851 Gjedrem, O, 45M 4:29:59
17852 Reynolds, D, 48M 4:29:59
17853 Kowalewski*, P, 36M 4:29:59
17854 McQueary, G, 45F 4:30:00
17855 Collins, R, 40M 4:30:00
17856 Flume, D, 34F 4:30:00
17857 Bordeau, M, 30M 4:30:00
17858 Rowe, V, 41F 4:30:00
17859 Brault, G, 38M 4:30:00
17860 Roehrig, J, 54M 4:30:00
17861 Monaia, E, 36F 4:30:00
17862 Palumbo, M, 30M 4:30:00
17863 Berg, S, 36M 4:30:01
17864 Berg, P, 31M 4:30:01
17865 Turro, A, 41M 4:30:01
17866 Drennan, T, 34F 4:30:01
17867 Schnaubelt, P, 48M 4:30:02
17868 Wright, R, 25F 4:30:02
17869 Foley, B, 36M 4:30:03
17870 Bivens, R, 53M 4:30:03
17871 Williamson, R, 28M 4:30:03
17872 Vongermeten, L, 28F 4:30:03
17873 Tessarek, I, 44F 4:30:03
17874 Spitzer, R, 32M 4:30:04
17875 McCroskey, D, 50M 4:30:04
17876 Mueller-Zurkinden, S, 30F 4:30:04
17877 Caviglia, E, 56M 4:30:04
17878 Regoli, J, 32M 4:30:04
17879 Kutter, S, 36F 4:30:05
17880 Bellack, L, 31M 4:30:05
17881 Bartel, W, 57M 4:30:07
17882 Ternstrand, K, 49M 4:30:07
17883 Suzuki, M, 59M 4:30:08
17884 Hasli, J, 49M 4:30:08
17885 Cervantes, F, 37M 4:30:08
17886 Paros, J, 35M 4:30:08
17887 McConaty, B, 40M 4:30:08
17888 Burrell, D, 49M 4:30:09
17889 Silverman, L, 40F 4:30:09
17890 Swildens, A, 45M 4:30:09
17891 Flood, S, 35M 4:30:09
17892 Kleinjan, P, 46M 4:30:09
17893 Carlsson, H, 50M 4:30:10
17894 Swildens, R, 44M 4:30:10
17895 Swildens, J, 40M 4:30:10
17896 Hedrick, M, 30F 4:30:10
17897 Pachter, K, 32F 4:30:11
17898 Feldman, D, 22M 4:30:11
17899 Kunz, R, 46M 4:30:12
17900 Artzer, C, 23M 4:30:12
17901 De Montjoye, H, 42M 4:30:12
17902 Fucci, L, 47F 4:30:12
17903 Assenmacher, B, 54M 4:30:12
17904 Tuinzing, B, 46M 4:30:12
17905 Palmer, C, 41M 4:30:13
17906 Martini, J, 38M 4:30:13
17907 Fernandez D Castillo, A, 50M 4:30:13
17908 Mellor, M, 39F 4:30:13
17909 Ware, P, 46F 4:30:13
17910 Schoenmaker, R, 33M 4:30:14
17911Pages, P, 37M 4:30:14
17912 Daniel-Six, M, 18F 4:30:14
17913 Wong, K, 36M 4:30:14
17914 Kirk, L, 54M 4:30:15
17915 Villasmil, A, 66M 4:30:15
17916 Diaz Gomez, S, 31M 4:30:15
17917 Mickey, L, 36F 4:30:15
17918 Van Der Pal, A, 53M 4:30:15
17919 Thuault, D, 40M 4:30:16
17920 Crossman, C, 29F 4:30:16
17921 Losee, S, 26F 4:30:16
17922 Freitag, R, 49M 4:30:17
17923 Santos, M, 29F 4:30:17
17924 Santos, E, 33M 4:30:17
17925 Moser, K, 61M 4:30:18
17926 Maas, E, 49M 4:30:18
17927 Felix, F, 42M 4:30:18
17928 Andersson, L, 38M 4:30:18
17929 Balter, A, 31M 4:30:18
17930 Fogarty, K, 31M 4:30:19
17931 Donnellan, D, 59M 4:30:19
17932 Meier, S, 33M 4:30:19
17933 Erhardt, H, 49M 4:30:19
17934 Audibert, M, 50M 4:30:19
17935 Abbriano, S, 42M 4:30:19
17936 Indahl, K, 27M 4:30:19
17937 Llewellyn, P, 50M 4:30:19
17938 Spingler, C, 33M 4:30:20
17939 Cacciuttolo, R, 42M 4:30:20
17940 Diglio, B, 24F 4:30:20
17941 Indahl, K, 45M 4:30:20
17942 Evans, J, 23F 4:30:20
17943 Ferrell, D, 33M 4:30:21
17944 Happy, J, 51M 4:30:21
17945 Aus Der Fuenten, M, 48M 4:30:21
17946 Groves, E, 32M 4:30:21
17947 Nowottny, G, 47M 4:30:21
17948 McCloskey, M, 28M 4:30:22
17949 Rayder, J, 45M 4:30:22
17950 Koh, B, 55M 4:30:22
17951 Echt, A, 32F 4:30:22
17952 Calkins, D, 46M 4:30:22
17953 Valdez, V, 23F 4:30:23
17954 Szirmak, J, 34F 4:30:23
17955 Nemecek, M, 23M 4:30:23
17956 Subak, K, 32F 4:30:23
17957 Amato, D, 28F 4:30:23
17958 Schmidt, R, 53F 4:30:24
17959 Lupberger, E, 25M 4:30:24
17960 Goldstein, A, 56M 4:30:24
17961 Arnoux, J, 28M 4:30:24
17962 Gonzalez Rizo, J, 23M 4:30:25
17963 Moreno, V, 55M 4:30:25
17964 Smith, C, 44F 4:30:25
17965 Smith, C, 45M 4:30:26
17966 Flynn, D, 52M 4:30:26
17967 Konzet, Y, 31F 4:30:26
17968 McCabe, C, 25F 4:30:26
17969 Drozd, J, 30M 4:30:26
17970 Goldman, R, 52M 4:30:26
17971 Winkler, L, 33M 4:30:27
17972 Mercier, M, 45F 4:30:27
17973 Hermanns, H, 42M 4:30:27
17974 Midenet, J, 49M 4:30:27
17975 Katz, R, 46M 4:30:27
17976 Orem, B, 24M 4:30:27
17977 Kelliher, T, 49M 4:30:27
17978 Brauchli, R, 26M 4:30:28
17979 Keyes, T, 28M 4:30:28
17980 Connelly, R, 37F 4:30:28
17981 Chillemi, D, 34M 4:30:28
17982 Mulcahy, B, 48M 4:30:29
17983 Hernandez, R, 50M 4:30:29
17984 Gerwe, K, 33F 4:30:29
17985 Pomponio, G, 31F 4:30:32
17986 Tennant, J, 29M 4:30:32
17987 Janet, A, 44M 4:30:32
17988 Foidl, K, 29F 4:30:32
17989 Rivera, A, 35M 4:30:33
17990 Dosedel, M, 32M 4:30:33
17991 Habran, B, 28M4:30:33
17992 Arnold, C, 29F 4:30:33
17993 Kapovich, D, 39M 4:30:34
17994 Salaun, D, 44M 4:30:34
17995 Arnold, C, 30M 4:30:34
17996 Franz, S, 46M 4:30:34
17997 Badia Conesa, R, 33M 4:30:35
17998 Dudra, M, 46M 4:30:35
17999 Westacott, M, 27M 4:30:35
18000 Fitzkee, S, 24F 4:30:35


National Western Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On the Trail
Developments yesterday in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. NEW YORK
Governor: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki spanned the state, the Governor talking about abortion rights and Mr.
Pataki about tax cuts.
Comptroller: Another crack in the G.O.P. front: John Daly, a Republican State Senator from Niagara, endorsed Comptroller H. Carl McCall, a Democrat, over the Republican, Herbert London.


Mylan Laboratories Inc.(MYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foley Wages Lonely Fight To Keep Job Of 30 Years
As President Clinton campaigned today on the western side of this state, his party's leader in the House of Representatives, Speaker Thomas S. Foley, went looking for votes in the most remote, snowbound region of eastern Washington.
Keeping that sort of distance from the President has been Mr.
Foley's strategy since last month, when polls had him 18 points behind.
Mr.
Clinton was at a rally for several other Democrats.


Commuting
Continuing a trend that began last winter, ridership is up on the region's commuter railroads and bus lines while vehicle traffic into Manhattan is down.
Transit officials largely credited last winter's harsh weather with enticing commuters out of their cars and onto trains and buses.
But aggressive marketing campaigns, the improving economy and improved service are also factors in reversing years of declining ridership.
Traffic at toll bridges and tunnels into Manhattan was down about 4 percent in the first eight months of 1994 from the first eight months of 1993.
The figure does not include statistics for the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, which had abnormally low volume in 1993 because of the World Trade Center bombing.


A Busy Day for Emergency Crews
The more than 500 medical personnel -- doctors, paramedics, medical technicians and volunteers -- clustered near the finish line of the New York City Marathon were ready for anything yesterday.
And they got it.
The combination of the 68-degree temperature and unusually high humidity produced two fatal heart attacks, dozens of cases of heat stroke and hundreds of lesser cases of dehydration, heat exhaustion and leg cramps.


Clinton Tries Candor About Low Standing in Pitch for Party
On the final Sunday of the campaign, President Clinton flew here and even appeared on "Larry King Live" in hopes of aiding embattled Democratic Congressional candidates around the country.
It was Mr.
Clinton's second visit to the state in just two weeks, and the obstacles he faced were emblematic of all he has had to battle in what has been an unpleasant election season.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the race in New York's 14th Congressional District misstated an assessment of the Republican candidate, City Councilman Charles Millard, by the New York Public Interest Research Group.
The group cited Mr.
Millard in March 1993 as having cast the most dissenting votes on the mostly Democratic Council; it did not call him its most independent member.


The Woman Who Invented Scarlett
This being a sweeps month, in which ratings determine future ad revenues, the networks are struggling to think big in terms of prime-time programming.
And what could be bigger than "Gone With the Wind"?
There's no competing, of course, with the 1939 Oscar-laden movie classic adapted from Margaret Mitchell's best-selling novel, but don't underestimate the rip-off wiles of the entertainment industry.
On Sunday, CBS introduces its eight-hour mini-series "Scarlett," based on Alexandra Ripley's recent sequel to the Mitchell story.
And tonight, not to be outdone by a multi-million-dollar production, NBC rushes obliquely into the Scarlett O'Hara sweepstakes with a drably modest television movie called "A Burning Passion: The Margaret Mitchell Story."


Last-Ditch Efforts Begin To Get People to Polls
He is a bridge inspector by trade.
But yesterday at an intersection in Forest Hills, Queens, Tom Murphy sat at a table in the driving rain and with his "Cuomo '94" hat turned backward, played the role of carnival barker.
"Vote for Cuomo!" his booming voice yelled to passersby.
"If you value your children, Vote for Cuomo. Re-elect Mario Cuomo."


MDU Resources Group Inc.(MDU,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Day After Is Tough for Both the Winners (Flanders) and the Losers (Devil His Due)
On the day after the Breeders' Cup, only one issue was unassailable: the 3-year-old champion and the Horse of the Year was the great gray colt Holy Bull, untouched and undisturbed in his stall a thousand miles away in Florida while the toll was being counted at Churchill Downs.
The chief victims of the day were Lure, who lost the chance to become the leading grass horse when he ran ninth in the Mile, and Devil His Due, who may have lost the chance to become the leading older horse when he ran 11th in the Classic.
And adding insult to injury, the Devil was ordered to stay at Churchill Downs during the tax dispute between the Internal Revenue Service and the Lion Crest Stable, which won't be resolved for three weeks.


Few Knew of White House Suspect's Turmoil
Until he fired 27 rounds from a semiautomatic rifle at the White House last Saturday, the plainest indication that Francisco M. Duran had a violent edge came on a summer night in 1990, when a fight outside a bowling alley led to his dishonorable discharge from the Army.
Yet few of those closest to him knew exactly what had happened -- not his mother, not his brothers.
They knew his service as an Army medic had been his proudest achievement.
They would only find out later about what Frank Duran regarded as his biggest failure.


Gentra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Cruz Operation Inc.(SCOC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


E-Z Serve Corp.(EZS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Rock-Tenn Co. (RKTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreman Strikes A Solid Blow For the Ages
George Foreman crossed the line between athlete and icon Saturday night.
And he did it with a punch he had been saving since the 1970's.
The 45-year-old evangelical preacher, his body a portly 250 pounds, became the oldest fighter ever to win a title in any weight class.


Maps and Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation has acquired the right to incorporate geographic-analysis tools developed by the Mapinfo Corporation into Microsoft's Excel spreadsheet program, the companies said in a statement released over the weekend.
Microsoft, of Redmond, Wash., did not announce a schedule for marketing the technology.
Mapinfo, of Troy, N.Y., and Strategic Mapping Inc. of Santa Clara, Calif., are the leaders in the desktop-mapping market.
In August the Lotus Development Corporation of Cambridge, Mass., included Strategic Mapping's technology in the newest version of its 1-2-3 spreadsheet, the main rival to Excel.


McDonald Savors A Long Journey
"Jim," shouted a friend, "Virginia has finished!"
Jim McDonald of Marlboro, N.J., raced over to embrace his 44-year-old wife at the finish line of the New York City Marathon yesterday.
"Where were you?" he wondered.


Video Lottery Tech (VLTS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
On about three-quarters of all bridge deals, neither partnership owns the 26 high-card points indicating that game should be bid.
And on those deals it is more likely than not that both sides will be bidding.
Judging how far to bid in these competitive auctions is crucial, and not well understood.
The first major book on this subject was the best-selling "To Bid or Not to Bid: The Law of Total Tricks," by Larry Cohen, published two years ago.
The sequel, "Following the Law," deals with refinements of the basic idea.
It is available for $15.95, including mailing, from the author at 181 Longhill Road, Bldg.
I-6, Little Falls, N.J. 07424.


U.S. Filter Corp.(USF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guardians of Castro's Cuba Have Fallen on Hard Times
On a night black enough to give the most timid conspirator some courage, guardians of the Cuban Revolution were nowhere to be found on Oquendo Street.
"La vigilancia?" a young man named Jorge asked, smiling at a stranger's question and looking around for the neighborhood watch patrol from the beach chair that was his seat during a friend's sidewalk party.


INSIDE
A Military and Political Move
President Clinton has decided to bring home thousands of troops from Kuwait and Haiti, producing a burst of pre-election good news.
Page A12.
Fatal Floods in Italy
Heavy rains caused fast-rising floods in northern Italy, with more than 30 deaths and fears that the toll could go much higher.
Page A3.
Drowned Boys Are Buried
The funeral of two boys whose mother is accused of killing them drew hundreds of people whose common bond was their sorrow.
Page A14.


London and McCall Clash As Tough Race Nears End
The candidates for state comptroller, looking weary near the end of a hard-fought race, worked to shore up their core constituencies yesterday as the incumbent Democrat returned to his old State Senate district in Harlem and his Republican rival shook hands with Jewish voters on bustling 13th Avenue in Brooklyn.
It was a fitting closing image in a campaign that has turned more on race and personal attacks than on the duties of office.
But the politicking yesterday was aimed at the necessities of solid turnout in a tight contest: H. Carl McCall, the Democrat, who is black, needs to insure his supporters will go to the polls, and Herbert London, the Republican who is white and Jewish, wants to sway crucial undecided voters.


Stepan Co.(SCL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shippers Wary of a Rail Merger
Many freight shippers who rely heavily on railroads have grave doubts about whether the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway, the object of a takeover battle, should be allowed to merge with anyone.
"We are better off being able to play them off against each other," said James Terry, manager of corporate transportation for Owens-Corning Fiberglas, which currently has the choice of using either Burlington Northern or Santa Fe lines for shipping raw materials to a factory in Amarillo, Tex.


Bills See Downside Of Being On Top
It has been a long time since the Buffalo Bills have found themselves in this position.
So long, in fact, that none of them can tell you precisely when the last time was.


When TV Series Fail, Viewers See Double
Television reruns used to be confined mainly to the summer vacation months, but now they are surprising and annoying viewers by turning up year-round on prime-time network schedules.
The fall television season has barely begun, but already several failed new series have been replaced by reruns of current hit shows, whose fresh episodes are being shown at other times.


Weary of Chemotherapy, Teen-Ager With Cancer Runs Away
Tired of the nausea, the exhaustion, the aches and the malaise caused by his chemotherapy treatments, Billy Best, a 16-year-old high school student who is battling cancer, apparently decided to try to run away from his troubles.
Billy, who is suffering from Hodgkin's disease, a form of lymphatic cancer, left his home in this town 20 miles southwest of Boston 10 days ago.
"The reason I left is because I could not stand going to the hospital every week," he wrote in a farewell note, his parents said.
"I feel like the medicine is killing me instead of helping me."


Turn Up Street Lights To Make City Safer
To the Editor:
I agree with Andrea Chait (letter, Nov. 1) that lighting around the Central Park Reservoir is inadequate.


Foreman's Midlife Fantasy May Have Marketing Cachet
George Foreman has just lived the 40-something fantasy: He squared off against the strong, supple, unwrinkled embodiment of youth -- and, against all odds, he won.
The strength of that fantasy, as sports marketing experts see it, may be enough to lift the new heavyweight champion of boxing into stardom in the lucrative business of celebrity endorsements.


Kenyan Runs Far Away From Doubts
Tegla Loroupe, a woman of such disarming diffidence that it took her two years to tell New York City Marathon officials they were misspelling her name, stamped her mark on road-racing history yesterday when she became the first black African woman to win a major marathon.
Typically, Loroupe, a 21-year-old Kenyan who had won the 6.2-mile Advil Mini Marathon in 1993 as Tecla Loroupe but had never run more than a half marathon, had given herself no chance yesterday.


High School Rivalry Gets Personal; Cross-Country Teams Caught in Dispute Fueled by Adults
On the grassy, softly sloping field of the State University campus here, hundreds of teen-age boys and girls competed today in a state cross-country championship.
For the girls' teams from Saratoga Springs High School and Shenendehowa High, the rivalry was particularly sharp.
Off the track, the Saratoga Springs runners are enmeshed in a conflict over whether their coaches, Linda and Arthur Kranick, are dedicated, health-conscious mentors or control freaks who have forced their runners to take large doses of vitamins.
The chief accusers are Camille and William Karl, whose three daughters once ran for the Kranicks and now run for Shenendehowa High, 20 miles away in Clifton Park.
The key question regarding them is: Are they motivated purely out of concern for their children's health or are they seeking revenge for a decision by Mrs.
Kranick that pushed their daughter Elizabeth off the cross-country varsity squad last fall?


Public Service Co. of New Mexico (PNM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Many corporate buyers, companies that sell computers and industry consultants say they welcome the new machine that I.B.M. and Apple Computer are planning to make together, which will be officially introduced today.  [ Page B13. ]


Mr. Pataki's Odd Attack
State Senator George Pataki has chosen an odd case to dramatize his stand for the death penalty and attack Gov.
Mario Cuomo as soft on crime.
The case of Thomas Grasso, a twice-convicted murderer, is not a test of toughness but rather a test of fidelity to law, and the winner is the Governor.
Last week the Republican challenger stood outside a Staten Island boarding house where Mr.
Grasso killed an 81-year-old fellow resident in 1991 and accused Governor Cuomo of refusing, arbitrarily and on ideological grounds, to send Mr.
Grasso to Oklahoma where he is under a death sentence for a murder there.
He repeated the bogus charge over the weekend, perhaps hoping to close the campaign with a last round of death-penalty politics.
The facts show that Mr.
Pataki's charge is simplistic and fanciful.


Legal Euthanasia Imperils Medical Integrity; Pain Management
To the Editor:
I am responding to Dr.
Thomas A. Preston's thought-provoking, troubling and ultimately misleading Op-Ed article ("Killing Pain, Ending Life," Nov. 1).
The case he describes is far from adequate for making medical and ethical decisions about appropriate care.
From the short description given, I wonder why a person with "intermittent" pain was placed on a continuous infusion of morphine.
In addition, morphine drips for pain management are supposed to be adjusted to maintain patient comfort, not to intentionally decrease respiration.
I wonder if the case described was an example of poor medical management rather than an appropriate indictment of an extremely valuable and perhaps underused therapy.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes
The schedule of Treasury financings this week includes only bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will auction three-year notes on Tuesday and 10-year notes on Wednesday.
On Thursday, the Government will auction 37-day cash-management bills and one-year bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate for the outstanding three-month bill was 5.17 percent and the rate for the six-month bill was 5.61 percent; the rate for a one-year bill was 5.98 percent.
In when-issued trading, the three-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 7.40 percent and the 10-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 8.02 percent.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ResultsPlus
TENNIS  Navratilova Loses Final  Arantxa Sanchez Vicario defeated Martina Navratilova, who was playing in her next-to-last tournament, 1-6, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-3), yesterday in the final of the Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif.
The 38-year-old Navratilova, who twice served for the match, was up by a set and leading 4-1 in the second set.
But Sanchez Vicario, the No. 2 player in the world, rallied to force a tie breaker and did the same after trailing by 5-3 in the third set.
Sanchez Vicario has won 21 straight matches and is chasing Steffi Graf for the No. 1 ranking. (AP)


NewTel Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Petroleum Geo-Services (PGSAY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raul Julia Is Remembered, With All His Panache
The actor Raul Julia's energy in work and play -- in everything from acting Shakespeare to playing chess to smoking cigars -- was recalled yesterday at a memorial tribute in the East Village.
Mr.
Julia, who was 54, died on Oct. 24 at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., of complications of a stroke.


After 3 Years, Abducted Girls Return to Mother
A New Jersey mother's determined struggle to find her two young daughters, abducted by her estranged husband nearly three years ago and taken to Pakistan, ended happily yesterday with tears of joy when they were reunited at Kennedy International Airport.
"This is the happiest day of my life," said the mother, Virginia Ramos, of Union City.
"My only fear is that their father will try to take them away from me again."


LCF&amp;L Chosen By Mercedes Dealers
The Mercedes-Benz Washington Independent Dealer Group has named LCF&amp;L in New York as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.
LCF&amp;L was awarded the account for the four Washington-area Mercedes-Benz dealers without a formal review.
The agency's sibling agencies, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York and the Martin Agency in Richmond, handle Mercedes-Benz's estimated $120 million American account; local dealer associations have begun hiring agencies after Mercedes-Benz ended a dealer program, with advertising from Martin, in July.
A campaign is expected to begin in January.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Lyrical Soloist in Command Of an Unruly Instrument  Alice Tully Hall
Giovanni Bottesini's Double-Bass Concerto No. 2 seemed oddly out of place in the program of the Juilliard Symphony on Friday evening, with bright, brassy proclamations by William Schuman and Jean Sibelius on either side.
Then again, it is hard to imagine a program in which a double-bass concerto would not seem peculiar.


Wicor Inc.(WIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quebec Separatists Drive Out English Speakers; Equality for French
To the Editor:
Re "Tired of Separatism" (Op-Ed, Oct. 31): Although Mordecai Richler was born in Montreal and has built his career writing about this city, he has never learned a word of French and confines himself to its English-speaking districts.
He cannot so much as understand Celine Dion singing in the language of Mr.
Richler's own country.
Such an ethnocentric has no right to damn others with faint praise for supposed bigotry.


Worthen Banking Corp.(WOR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hal Ellson, Novelist, 84
Hal Ellson, a prolific writer of novels and short stories, died on Oct. 31 at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Chip-Making's Towers of Power
As cities ran out of space a century ago, urban builders turned their eyes to the sky.
Today, electrical engineers are doing the same thing, in the quest for more computing muscle.
Teams of engineers in the United States and Japan are starting to build microscopic three-dimensional computing systems that rise from the surface of silicon chips the size of a fingernail.
The first models are just now being produced in chip- making factories.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.66
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.17
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.61
3.28
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.02
8.01
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.16
8.15
6.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.98
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.23
7.10
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Ann Taylor Stores (ANN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Cowboys Also Lose Big: Harper
"We suffered a tragic loss," Dallas Coach Barry Switzer said after the game tonight.
He was not referring, of course, to the final score, a 38-10 victory for the Cowboys over the Giants at Texas Stadium, and for which he took understandable delight.
Switzer, however, drew a sanguine breath after the game in regard to his superb wide receiver, Alvin Harper, who suffered a torn anterior cruciate knee ligament and, he said, "will probably be out for the rest of the season."


Cuomo and Pataki End Bitter, Costly Race
Mario M. Cuomo and George E. Pataki ended the most expensive -- and arguably the most negative -- gubernatorial campaign in state history yesterday with passionate entreaties for unity and bold predictions of victory, leaving 8.8 million New York registered voters to choose whether to end or extend 20 years of Democratic rule in Albany.
In casting their ballots today, voters also will determine whether New York will elect a black official to statewide office for the first time and whether it will become the first state in the country to elect an openly homosexual candidate to statewide office.
The results are likely to leave their imprint on the state's politics for years and could have a lasting impact on the careers not only of the candidates but also of their leading surrogates, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the state's Republican Senator, Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Mutual Antipathy in Hebron
The religious shrine in the West Bank where an Israeli settler killed 29 Muslims is still divided, with neither side accepting the right of the other to be there.
Page A10.


Italy's Public Health-Care System Is Doing Poorly
The signals coming down from what Italians sometimes call "planet health," meaning a health-care system that seems ever more remote from their needs, had not been too reassuring.
First, there was the hunger strike by patients at a Naples hospital protesting bad food cooked in rusting pots.
This followed separate protests about fleas in the beds, fecal traces in fish served to patients and a wheeled stretcher that collapsed under a patient, causing head injuries.


Ex-Officer Is Charged In Abduction
A retired Garden City police sergeant was charged today with kidnapping and sexually abusing a 13-year-old boy he "arrested" for stealing a pocketbook, the police said.
The suspect, Robert Freeman, 64, was held on $600,000 cash bail after his arraignment this afternoon on eight counts, including one count of kidnapping, four counts of sodomy, two counts of sexual abuse and one count of criminal impersonation.


INSIDE
Weighing Early Cancer Tests
As scientists learn to detect smaller and smaller cancers, some are concerned that patients will be asked to undergo unnecessary treatments.
Science Times, page C1.
A Downward Trend in Crime
A New York Police Department survey of the nation's 22 biggest cities found that murder, robbery and assault had declined in almost all, especially in Western cities.
Page A14.
Prison Escape Thwarted
Four convicted killers broke out of a high-security unit inside one of New York State's most tightly guarded prisons, but all were recaptured by the end of the day.
Page B1.


Beazer Homes USA Inc.(BZH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Runners Who Died Weren't Novices
Both of the men who died of heart attacks on Sunday after running in the New York City Marathon were experienced marathoners, according to the information they provided before the race to the New York Road Runners Club.
One of the men, Pierre Marquet, 27, who lived at 46 Bay Street Landing, Staten Island, had been a member of the club since 1993 and ran in last year's marathon, finishing in 3 hours 32 minutes 24 seconds.


ESPN Plans To Purchase Sports Wire
ESPN expanded its sports-information domain yesterday by agreeing to acquire 80 percent of Sports Ticker, a sports-wire news service, from Dow Jones &amp; Company.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Sports Ticker, based in Jersey City, transmits scores, statistics, news and features to radio and television stations, news wire services and newspapers like USA Today, The Los Angeles Times and The Baltimore Sun.
It provides information for professional sports teams and restaurants that display it on electronic sign boards.


Corrections
A picture caption in the fashion pages on Saturday with a report about the scene at the Seventh on Sixth fashion shows misidentified a model with a plastic-wrap hairdo.
She was Shiraz Tal, not Jill Wolfe.


Morgan Products Ltd.  (MGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Synopsys Inc.(SNPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pittway Corp.(PRY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Bill Haselman, catcher, to a one-year contract.


Digital Blue Jeans Pour Data and Legs Into Customized Fit
Weaving together two basic threads of American life -- creeping computerization and the quest for a perfect fit in blue jeans -- the world's biggest jeans maker has begun selling made-to-order Levi's for women.
Sales clerks at an Original Levi's Store can use a personal computer and the customer's vital statistics to create what amounts to a digital blue jeans blueprint.
When transmitted electronically to a Levi's factory in Tennessee, this computer file instructs a robotic tailor to cut a bolt of denim precisely to the woman's measurements.


Runners Finished In Record Numbers
It may not be more important than an Olympic victory, as previous champions have suggested, but a day after they won the New York City Marathon over top international competition, German Silva of Mexico and Tegla Loroupe of Kenya had ample evidence yesterday that winning in New York can be a transforming experience.
They found themselves at the center of far-reaching attention that included almost nonstop international television interviews, an invitation to run with President Clinton, either today or tomorrow, and, in the case of Silva, who had to overcome an errant detour, a comic television turn -- a wrong one, to be sure -- with David Letterman last night.


RLI Corp.(RLI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sierra Pacific Resources (SRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Campaigns End, the Voting Begins
Cuomo and Pataki Finish Bitter and Costly Battle
Mario M. Cuomo and George E. Pataki ended the most expensive -- and arguably the most negative -- gubernatorial campaign in New York history with passionate entreaties for unity and bold predictions of victory, leaving 8.8 million voters to choose whether to end or extend 20 years of Democratic rule in Albany.
PAGE B1.
Weak Mandate Seen For Connecticut Victor
While the four major candidates continued to debate the issue of tax cuts, only one thing seemed to be clear about today's gubernatorial election: a majority of the voters will cast their ballots against the victor.
And that means that the next governor is not likely to have much of a mandate to follow through on promises either to cut taxes or to maintain the status quo.
PAGE B5.
Most G.O.P.
Governors In Good Shape
The country's best-known Republican governors seem to be in little danger; not so for their Democratic counterparts.
Republicans like William F. Weld of Massachusetts and the governors of Illinois, michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin are running well ahead in polls.
Prospects are less certain for Democrats like Ann W. Richards of Texas and Lawton Chiles of Florida.
PAGE A20.
Haytaian and Lautenberg Seek New Jersey Votes
Crisscrossing the state, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic and his Republican challenger, Chuck Haytaian, wound up their campaigns with frenetic schedules.
Mr.
Haytaian appeared with both Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole.
Mr.
Lautenberg campaigned alone on a five-county swing.
PAGE B5.
VOTING . . .
Polls are open today:
NEW YORK: 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
NEW JERSEY: 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
CONNECTICUT: 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
For information on poling places:
NEW YORK CITY: (212) 868-3692
WESTCHESTER: (914) 285-5700
LONG ISLAND: (516) 571-2411
New Jersey and Connecticut voters can calltheir local Boards of Elections. . . .
AND WATCHING
The first results of the general election will come from parts of Kentucky and from Indiana, where the polls close at 6 P.M.
Results in four close Indiana races may portend the national trend.
An hour later, the polls will close in Virginia and Florida, where Republican victories in Senate and governor's races, respectively, would be telling.
A guide to following the returns, PAGE A21.


Sun Distributors L.P. (SDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Titan Wheel Int'l.(TWI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Georgia Tech Coach Steps Down
Georgia Tech Coach BILL LEWIS resigned last night and the school named the defensive coordinator, GEORGE O'LEARY, to finish out the season.
The athletic director, HOMER RICE, said a search committee would be formed to seek a permanent replacement.
"Late last week it was made clear to me that a decision had been made to make a coaching change," Lewis said.
"What I needed to do was to step down as of today."


Talley Industries(TAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Security Capital Corp.(SECP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


6 Years After Squeaker, Lieberman's Star Rises
Talking about his race for the Senate six years ago, Joseph I. Lieberman recently recalled one of the lower moments.
He had just left another fruitless meeting in Los Angeles to raise money, and, utterly exhausted, lay down to nap in a park, wondering if he was about to be humiliated at the polls.
"I felt like Willy Loman," Mr. Lieberman said.


Corrections
The Voters' Guide page on Sunday, summarizing major races in Connecticut, reversed the photographs of two candidates for Congress in the Second District.
Edward W. Munster, the Republican, was on the left; Sam Gejdenson, the Democrat, was on the right.
The Voters' Guide page yesterday, about major New York races, misstated the party affiliation of a Senate candidate, Norma Segal.
Her party is Libertarian, not Tax Cut Now.


Russ Berrie &amp; Co. (RUS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hotel Threatened as Building Burns in Manhattan


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Different Approaches To Church Texts  The Unitarian Church of All Souls
To open the 18th season of his Musica Viva series on Sunday evening, Walter Klauss conducted works that approached church texts from very different esthetic perspectives.
Franz Schubert, setting the Mass in 1815, needed only to present the text as beautifully and as dramatically as his art allowed.
No need to fuss over questions of language; what could be more straightforward?


Driver Tells How Gunman Fired at Van
The driver of the van that was raked with gunfire while transporting a group of Jewish students across the Brooklyn Bridge in March testified yesterday how he saw the defendant through the open window of his car and later picked him out in a police lineup.
The driver, Sholom Wilhelm, a 22-year-old Lubavitcher rabbinical student, identified the defendant, Rashid Baz, as the man who fired on the van, killing one student, Aaron Halberstam, and wounding three others.


Males May Want to Heed A Tip From the Guppies On How to Attract a Mate
GENTLEMEN!
Ask yourselves the following question.
If you were hoping to attract the woman of your fantasies over to your table in a bar, would you rather be sitting next to a guy who looks like Mel Gibson, or like Jerry Lewis in "The Nutty Professor"?
Against which backdrop are you likelier to shine, or even appear visible at all?
Think carefully and realistically -- the future of your chromosomes may depend upon it.
Scientists have devoted thousands of hours studying the details of how female animals choose their mates and how that pickiness drives the evolution of male finery and flamboyance.
They have also looked at how males fight one another for access to those females, engaging in ritualistic displays of sound and fury known among biologists as male-male competition.


Tractor Supply Co.  (TSCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Ralston Purina Group (RAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White Sox Counting on Jordan
The Chicago White Sox hope MICHAEL JORDAN can make the big leagues late next season, the president of their Class AAA team said yesterday.
"I'm sure their goal is for him to be a September call-up next year," LARRY SCHMITTOU of the Nashville Sounds said.


Market Place; Election attacks are the least of National Education's problems.
YOU would think that investors in the National Education Corporation -- pilloried in political advertising by Michael Huffington in the California race for the United States Senate -- could take solace that the end is in sight.
But long after the polls close tonight and the mud-slinging ads aimed at the husband of Mr.
Huffington's opponent, Dianne Feinstein, go off the air, National Education stockholders are still likely to be suffering.
Indeed, the attacks may turn out to be least of the company's problems.


Students Injured in Bus Crash


McHenry Boatwright, 74, a Baritone
McHenry Boatwright, a baritone who appeared in opera and concerts, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 74.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ruth, the sister of Duke Ellington.


Medusa Corp.(MSA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Handy &amp; Harman (HNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Navy Facing a New Sexual Harassment Case
Still struggling to move beyond the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal and the attitudes that caused it, the Navy is now investigating accusations that instructors at a major training center in San Diego pressured female students for sex.
The case involves at least 16 young enlisted women who were learning to operate the Navy's computer and telephone networks at the Naval Training Center in San Diego, Navy officials said today.


4 Men Caught After Fleeing State Prison
Four convicted killers broke out of a high-security unit inside one of New York State's most tightly guarded prisons early yesterday, but all were recaptured by nightfall, the authorities said.
It was the first time anyone had escaped from the Shawangunk state prison in Ulster County since it opened in 1986.
A fifth man, a convicted kidnapper who had been paroled from another prison in July, was caught just outside the Shawangunk grounds and charged as an accomplice, said Michael Kavanagh, the Ulster County District Attorney.
The man was discovered in a wooded area carrying a gun and several maps, Mr.
Kavanagh said.


A Low-Key Queen Of Country's Kingdom
Mary-Chapin Carpenter, whose newest album, "Stones in the Road," has been No. 1 on Billboard's country-album chart for the last three weeks, is an unlikely candidate for the queen of country music.
This 36-year-old singer and songwriter, who gave a sold-out concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday evening, does not come from the South.
Born in New Jersey and based in Washington, she makes music that is closer in style to urban folk than to contemporary Nashville.
Her medium-soft contralto has no ingrained rural twang, and the instrumentation on her records avoids the steel guitars, banjos and mandolins that stamp the products of Nashville as authentic country.


United Industrial Corp.(UIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vote!
The weather has been near-perfect for weeks.
In most other respects this has been an exhausting and gloomy campaign season, marked by a poisonous mood among many voters and relentless negative advertising from the candidates.
The poll results have gyrated wildly, and as late as last night there was still a large undecided vote in many crucial contests across the nation.
Today -- Election Day -- the advertising will mercifully end and so, finally, will the suspense.
Suddenly, all those opinion polls do not mean anything.
Just ask President Dewey: What really matters is who turns out to vote.
People who stay home, either out of indifference or overconfidence, can in fact make a huge difference.
To take an example close to home, the volatile races for governor and comptroller in New York State could be decided by a small number of votes.


Serb Is First to Face Post-World War II War-Crimes Indictment
The first international war crimes tribunal since the end of World War II made its first indictment today, charging the former commander of a concentration camp operated by the Bosnian Serbs with murder, torture and mutilation of Muslim prisoners.
The Yugoslav War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague, formed by the United Nations a year ago, accused the commander, Dragan Nikolic, of killing eight Muslim prisoners, torturing seven others and illegally imprisoning more than 500 other Bosnian Muslims.


Peekskill Finds That Fame Can Be a Pain
THE things Joseph Seymour has read and heard about Peekskill in the last few weeks make him glad the election is here today and gone tomorrow.
Yesterday he was still seething about a two-week-old article that mentioned that downtown had been "shabby."


Just One Big, Neurotic Family In a Musical on Group Therapy
Group therapy is a humiliating ritual in which whining neurotics sit around in a circle tearing one another to shreds until everyone is reduced into a quivering heap of guilt and shame.
Right?
Wrong.
As "Inside Out," a smart, spunky little musical at the Cherry Lane Theater shows, the typical therapy group is more likely to be a sympathetic, supportive extended family whose members are everyday people with everyday hang-ups.
As in any family, squabbles are inevitable.
But as the group members work on their issues, sometimes by pretending to exchange identities in carefully supervised confrontations, they develop broader and healthier views of themselves.


United Asset Management Corp.(UAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Election Day Choices
This list summarizes our recommendations for noteworthy races.
Poll hours in New York State are from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.; in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M., and in Connecticut from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
NEW YORK GOVERNOR and LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR  Mario Cuomo and Stanley Lundine (D-L) U.S.
SENATE  Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-L) COMPTROLLER  Carl McCall (D-L) ATTORNEY GENERAL  Karen Burstein (D-L) U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  First District (Suffolk County): George Hochbrueckner (D); Fourth District (Nassau County): Philip Schiliro (D); Fifth District (Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties): Gary Ackerman (D-L); 14th District (Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn): Carolyn Maloney (D); 18th District (Westchester, the Bronx and Queens): Nita Lowey (D); 19th District (Dutchess, Orange, Putnam and Westchester Counties): Hamilton Fish Jr. (D).
STATE SENATE  23d District (Brooklyn and Staten Island): Vincent Gentile (D-L); 26th District (Manhattan): Roy Goodman (R-L); 37th District (Dutchess, Putnam and Westchester Counties): Alfred DelBello (D).
STATE ASSEMBLY  38th District (Queens): Anthony Seminerio (D); 73d District (Manhattan): John Ravitz (R-L); 80th District (Bronx): Jeffrey Klein (D); 89th District (Westchester County): Naomi Matusow (D).
NASSAU COUNTY  Yes to a charter revision that would create a new 19-member legislature to replace the six-member Board of Supervisors.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNOR and LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR  Bill Curry and Joseph Ganim (D) U.S.
SENATE  Joseph Lieberman (D-ACP) U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  First District (Hartford area): Barbara Kennelly (D-ACP); Second District (eastern Connecticut): Sam Gejdenson (D); Third District (New Haven area): Rosa DeLauro (D); Fourth District (Fairfield County): Christopher Shays (R); Fifth District (west-central Connecticut): James Maloney (D-ACP); Sixth District (northwest Connecticut): Nancy Johnson (R).
NEW JERSEY U.S.
SENATE  Frank Lautenberg (D) U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  Eighth District (parts of Essex and Passaic Counties): Herb Klein (D); 11th District (Morris County and parts of adjacent counties): Frank Herbert (D).
BALLOT ISSUE  Yes to a $160 million bond issue that would build group homes for the mentally ill and disabled, victims of domestic violence and abused children.


Syracuse And B.C. Duel for Bowl Bids
When asked yesterday if he had heard any bowl-game talk, Boston College's Dan Henning said: "I don't know anything about bowls. All we know about is Syracuse."
It was a predictable reply as Henning is one of those coaches who hates to look beyond Saturday's game for fear the future might bite him.
Nevertheless, the bowl season has begun -- at least the speculative part -- and the outcome of the Eagles' game against the Orange at Chesnut Hill, Mass., will figure in the picture.


Stewart Information Services Corp.(STC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Lawn Assault
Q. Why do swarms of crows sometimes attack lawns?


Players International Inc.(PLAY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Silicon Valley Group (SVGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paragon Trade Brands Inc.(PTB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


The Full Report: Two Sides Meet Again
Negotiators for the National Hockey League and the league's locked-out players met secretly for the third successive Monday yesterday, but unlike the previous Monday meetings, this one did not produce a "no-progress" report.
The latest meeting, in fact, didn't produce a report of any kind other than the negotiators plan to meet again later this week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  OPENING UP NORTH KOREA  South Korea will ease curbs on doing business with North Korea, opening one of the world's last closed economies.
The prospect seems bound to pique the kind of international interest that has been whetted by China and Vietnam.
A1


Reagan and Alzheimer's: Following Path His Mother Traveled
Before Ronald Reagan was elected President in 1980, he said publicly he wanted to be watched for senility, in part because his mother, Nellie, had been senile for several years before her death at the age of 80.
Now, nearly six years after he left the White House, after serving two terms as President, Mr.
Reagan has said he has Alzheimer's disease.
A statement from his doctors said he was "entering the early stages of this disease." It is characterized by progressive mental and physical deterioration, which can occur swiftly or over a period of years.


Angolan Rebels Said to Begin Retreat From Last Stronghold
The rebels who have locked Angola in a ruinous power struggle for two decades have begun an orderly retreat from their last important bastion, the city of Huambo in the central highlands, according to reports today from relief workers there.
The aid workers disputed claims by the Angolan military that the rebel stronghold had already fallen, but they said there seemed to be no doubt that the army was sweeping slowly toward the city and would have full control within a day or two.


Corrections
A sports chart on Sunday tracing the history of the New York City Marathon referred incorrectly to the first marathon run by a woman in under three hours.
The runner was Adrienne Beames of Australia, in 2 hours 46 minutes 30 seconds, on Aug. 31, 1971.
Beth Bonner and Nina Kuscsik were the first American women to break the three-hour mark -- two days later, in New York.


NS Group Inc.(NSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Sunrise Medical Inc.(SMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge in Simpson Trial Allows TV Camera in Courtroom
To the relief of millions of voyeurs, court buffs and civic-minded students of the criminal justice system, Judge Lance A. Ito ruled today that a single television camera can remain in his courtroom for the trial of O. J. Simpson.
While some pretrial hearings could still conceivably be closed, continuous coverage of the eventual trial now seems all but certain.
As Mr.
Simpson sat nearby, intermittently attentive, Judge Ito spent much of the morning invoking the perils of television, including nervous witnesses, grandstanding lawyers and salacious sound bites.
He repeatedly referred to the carnival-like televised trials a generation ago of Dr.
Sam Sheppard on murder charges and Billie Sol Estes on charges of fraud.
At his side were 21 boxes filled with more than 15,000 letters, most of which, he said, had urged him to pull the plug.


Candidates Crisscross the State In Whirlwind End for Campaigns
With 16-hour days and frenetic schedules that had them crisscrossing the state, Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic incumbent, and his Republican challenger, Chuck Haytaian, wound up their campaigns today for the United States Senate.
Mr.
Haytaian's last full day on the campaign trail began and ended in his political base of Warren County in northwest New Jersey and included appearances with both Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and the minority leader of the Senate, Robert Dole of Kansas.


E. E. Kelm, 83, Chief Executive Of Cargill, Dies
Erwin E. Kelm, who led Cargill Inc. through a period of rapid growth in the 1970's that helped propel the agribusiness giant to its position as the nation's largest family-owned company, died on Sunday at his home in Minneapolis after a lengthy struggle with heart disease, the company said yesterday.
He was 83.
Mr.
Kelm spent his entire career at Cargill, joining the company as a barley and grain trader after graduating from the University of Minnesota in 1933 with a marketing degree.
As chief executive from 1961 until his retirement in 1977, he was the only person to head Cargill who was not a Cargill or a MacMillan, the two families related by marriage that own the 129-year-old company.


Canadian Pacific (CP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
"Tomorrow is another day," Scarlett O'Hara said, and now it seems there may be endless tomorrows for her.
EMMA TENNANT, an English author of more than 20 books, has been chosen to write a second sequel to "Gone With the Wind." She was picked by a committee representing Margaret Mitchell's estate, OWEN LASTER, executive vice president of the William Morris Agency and the agent for the project, said yesterday.


A Gtech Executive To Resign
The Gtech Holdings Corporation said yesterday that Leonard J. LeBlanc, the company's chief financial officer, would resign effective Dec. 31.
Robert Rendine, a spokesman for the company, which is based in West Greenwich, R.I., and is the nation's largest operator of state-run lotteries, said Mr.
LeBlanc had decided to move back to California, where his family lived.
Mr.
LeBlanc joined Gtech last year.


Two Airlines To Sell Miles
United Airlines and American Airlines are planning to start selling frequent-flier miles in booklets to companies to use as incentives for their employees or customers.
The airlines said they would sell miles in various denominations.
Sixty United certificates, each for 500 miles, sell for $600, for example, or 2 cents a mile.


Quebec Separatists Drive Out English Speakers
To the Editor:
Re "Tired of Separatism" (Op-Ed, Oct. 31): Quebec separation from Canada is premature.
What is needed is a comprehensive plan to redraw the map of North America.


Windmere Corp.(WND,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patterns
Resisting the Tide
It is an ususual position for the woman who has designed paper dresses and tri-sleeve jackets to be in, but Rei Kawakubo this season seems the voice of fashion reason amid corsets, fishnet and stilettos.


METRO DIGEST
AIDS RESEARCH GRANTS CUT IN NEW YORK
As a patient in AIDS research trials, Gilbert Jackson receives a level of care he hardly knew existed: vitamins, information about his disease, gentle handling and the possibility that the experimental drugs will prolong his life.
But the study is being phased out.
New York City is losing three of its four community-based clinical trials, a decision that is prompting outrage and igniting a debate on whether there is a right to participate in clinical trials.
A1.


Clinton Makes Final Push to Stem Democratic Losses
President Clinton made an election eve dash to Minnesota, Michigan and Delaware, hoping that he could turn a Senate race in at least one of those states to the Democrats' favor and save his party from substantial losses across the country today.
But a hint of bitterness, if not resignation, crept into Mr.
Clinton's hoarse voice as he wound up his eighth straight day criss-crossing the nation on behalf of imperiled Democrats.
Sounding alternately upbeat and frustrated, the President implored people to vote and spoke almost retrospectively of a tormented electorate, and of how Republicans had spoiled his legislative agenda.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Another Recorder Group From the Low Countries  The Frick Collection
Recorder ensembles, though rarities on this side of the Atlantic, seem to be flourishing in the Netherlands and Belgium, thanks in some measure to the influence of Frans Bruggen.
A few seasons ago the Loeki Stardust Quartet impressed American listeners with its performances of Baroque repertory.
Now there is a challenger, the Flanders Recorder Quartet, which made its New York debut on Sunday afternoon.


Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc.(WG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Uni-Marts Inc.(UNI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Champ, Until May
All right, so the punch did look a little leisurely.
Still, it was harder than the one that knocked out Sonny Liston in 1965.
Obviously, Michael Moorer has one of the glassier chins ever worn into combat by a heavyweight boxing champion.
Otherwise he would not have found himself staring upward into HBO's overhead camera on Saturday night.
All that said, George Foreman is now the legitimate champion -- or, more accurately, he comes as close to legitimacy as it is possible to get in a corrupt, brutal and greedy business.
For a few moments it was thrilling to watch Mr.
Foreman, at 45, relieve the 26-year-old Mr.
Moorer of the title that was not, in any event, going to be his for very long.


United Water Resources (UWR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Howl From the Jungle
It wasn't an election. It was an assault.
It was indecent and brutal. It was disgusting and depressing. It made you sick.


Jews and Muslims Pray Again at Shrine, Resentfully
They did not have much in common, the old Arab man and the younger Jewish woman, except perhaps for two things:
They both went to pray today under a tightly woven security blanket at the newly reopened Cave of the Patriarchs shrine.


Milton J. Petrie, Philanthropist, Is Dead at 92
Milton J. Petrie, the retailer and philanthropist who gave to charities, arts institutions and people he read about in the newspaper, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 92.
Mr.
Petrie, who had been ill most of this year, died of lung and kidney problems, his wife, Carroll, said.


Moving Into A New Venue
Warrington and Reginald Hudlin have been making films for well over a decade.
Appearing as a floating head, Mr.
Clinton plays the host, a doctor offering to be a seeing-eye dog for a journey "beyond the Twilight Zone, deeper than deep, into the black hole." Much of the trip, though, turns out to be either rather ordinary or irritatingly predictable.
"Space Traders," adapted from a sour parable by Derrick Bell, has aliens, whose spokesman looks and sounds like Ronald Reagan, offering Americans a future of unpolluted prosperity in exchange for the delivery to spaceships of every person classified as black.


Harrowston Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"This is revolutionary. It has the potential to change the way people buy clothes, and it will allow stores to cut down on inventory." -- WALTER LOEB, a financial analyst, describing a plan for custom-made Levi's.  [ D8:4. ]


Political commercials during this election season have been overwhelmingly negative.
ONCE again, political advertising has accomplished a feat that Madison Avenue has never been able to achieve: making conventional product advertising look good, if only by comparison.
Imagine, for a moment, if consumer marketers were to adopt the negative, mean-spirited tactics that pervade political advertisements.
Would Lever Brothers reinforce the scurrilous rumors linking Procter &amp; Gamble's logo to Satanism by playing the rock tune "Bad Moon Rising" during All commercials?
Would Warner Brothers remind moviegoers of "Ishtar" every time Columbia Pictures brings out a comedy?


Saturday Movies and Sunday Moves
The Jets, like all other pro football teams, have a pre-game ritual -- "Saturday Night at the Movies." For most teams, these movies or videotapes feature the next day's opponent.
They are more "Basic Blocking and Tackling" than "Basic Instinct."
Pete Carroll, the Jets' first-year coach, believes in keeping his players relaxed, so his Saturday night movies have been different.
One night, a Three Stooges show was spliced into the middle of football sequences.
Another night, there were cut-ins of Ronnie Lott riding a motorcycle in a B movie.


Senate Candidates Trade Bitter Exchanges Over Immigration
The California Senate race, the most expensive Congressional race ever and one of the most vituperative, ground through its last full day of campaigning today, with the outcome of Tuesday's voting but a guess.
The race, in which Senator Dianne Feinstein, a liberal Democrat, is seeking re-election in the face of a strong challenge from Representative Michael Huffington, a conservative Republican from Santa Barbara, was marked in its final hours by more bitter exchanges over illegal immigration.


Leo Lerman Remembered for Buoyant Style, Wit and Elegance
Leo Lerman, the writer and editor who worked for Conde Nast magazines for more than 50 years, was remembered at a memorial service yesterday for forming friendships with famous actresses and opera stars, for nurturing generations of young editors and, above all, for a buoyant personal style typified by his final act.
After his death from pulmonary failure at the age of 80 on Aug. 22, his body was returned home to the Osborne Apartment House on West 57th Street, where, as he had instructed, he lay in his bed for two days dressed in lavender socks, a night shirt and one of his trademark Turkish skull caps.
A stream of friends visited him, surrounded by his precious collections of antique pill boxes, Tiffany lamps and pictures of erupting volcanoes.


By Design; Spring Forecast: Snaky
There's no doubt about it.
The accessories to have for spring 1995 are high-heeled ankle-strap sandals and skinny belts.
After appearing in every European show last month, they turned up again in last week's Seventh Avenue collections.
Patent leather is the choice of most designers, chiefly in black, white or red, but the real news is the return of snakeskin.
Gray-and-white snakeskin is the perfect complement to all the spring pastels, and the natural texture and pattern of the reptile contrast well with the plain fabrics and monotone colors of the clothes.
There were also some flesh-toned sandals at Calvin Klein, which may be prophetic, considering the popularity of bare legs and sheer hosiery.


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Clubhouse' Helps Mentally Ill Find the Way Back; At Fountain House, the Emphasis Is on Jobs, Education and Friendship
There were inklings of trouble when Gloria Horowitz was as young as 9 and the heroines of the short stories she wrote kept killing themselves.
Now 41, she has coped with a mental illness most of her life and has tried to commit suicide a number of times.
Morris Holmes started hallucinating and hearing voices when he was 18, the morning after an acid trip.
The high wore off, but the symptoms didn't, and for years his schizophrenia kept him isolated either in a single room in Far Rockaway, Queens, or in a hospital.


Sports of The Times; Switzer's 'Big Game' Burden
EVER since Barry Switzer succeeded Jimmy Johnson as the Cowboys' coach, his burden has been obvious: win the Super Bowl.
But whatever happens in the Super Bowl XXIX playoffs, this slick slab of tooled leather who titled his autobiography "Bootlegger's Boy" has found it "so much easier" to coach the Cowboys than he did in developing three national championship teams at Oklahoma.
Then again, the National Football League doesn't look to put teams on probation.


TransTexas Gas Corp.(TTXG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ralston-Continental Baking Group (CBG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reeves, Ready to Look Ahead, Sees a Lot to Do
After the Giants' 38-10 rout by the Cowboys tonight, Dan Reeves surrendered to the reality of a 3-6 record with six straight losses.
"You got to keep fighting, you can't quit," the Giants' coach said, "but it's not too early to think about next year. We've got to assess what we've got, where we are, and what areas where we need help. Tonight it looked like we've got a lot of those areas."


Scotsman Industries(SCT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


The 4 Major Candidates Debate Tax Cut to the End
From the beginning of the race for governor of Connecticut, the four major candidates have been debating tax cuts, and today, the final day of the campaign, was no different.
Once again, John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate, and Tom Scott, an independent candidate, talked about repealing the income tax, which constitutes about one-third of the state's revenues.
William E. Curry Jr., the Democrat, said that the focus should be on a 25 percent cut in the property tax, which he believes weighs more heavily on working people.


Cold-Shooting Nets Warm Up Far Too Late
They were handed the sheets bearing their statistics.
Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman viewed the woeful numbers in front of them.
Coleman: 2 of 15 from the field.
Anderson: 5 of 16.
The Nets All-Stars had combined for a 7-for-31 night, and now all they could do was let out a cathartic laugh, the way people laugh when they understand nothing else can go wrong because everything else already has.


Talisman Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Showbiz Pizza Time Inc.(SHBZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


6 Years After Squeaker, Lieberman's Star Rises
Talking about his race for the Senate six years ago, Joseph I. Lieberman recently recalled one of the lower moments.
He had just left another fruitless meeting in Los Angeles to raise money, and, utterly exhausted, lay down to nap in a park, wondering if he was about to be humiliated at the polls.
"I felt like Willy Loman," Mr. Lieberman said.


Corrections
An obituary on Oct. 26 about the actress Mildred Natwick referred incorrectly to her debut in a singing role in a musical.
It was in "Stars in Your Eyes" in 1939, not in "70, Girls, 70" in 1971.


Torstar reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celtics' Douglas Out for 4-8 Weeks
Point guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS, injured in the Boston Celtics' loss to Indiana last Saturday, will be sidelined from four to eight weeks with a sprained left knee.
A magnetic resonance imaging test showed Douglas had suffered a sprained medial collateral ligament.
He will have to wear a brace for three weeks.
DEE BROWN will move to starting point guard and DAVID WESLEY will be the backup. (AP)


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medical Fellowships Didn't Benefit in Zion Case
To the Editor:
While every medical resident in New York City and all their patients owe Sidney Zion an immeasurable debt (news article, Nov. 1), it should be noted that the work hours in medical fellowships (subspecialty training following residency) were largely unaffected by the Zion case.


Tucson Electric Power (TEP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Editorial Notebook: Rethinking Nuclear Diplomacy; The Bold Premises Of the North Korea Deal
The diplomatic accord recently signed in Geneva to make North Korea nuclear-free contains some important lessons for the way Americans might think about stopping the further spread of nuclear arms.
For many Americans, North Korea, along with Iraq and Iran, is the archetypal rogue state.
Indeed, they regard anyone who violates the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as an outlaw to be rounded up by the sheriff and punished.


Monarch Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harsh Words In Final Day Of Campaign For the Senate
On the final day of a campaign notable for its harsh invective and political hyperbole, Senator Charles S. Robb and his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North, crossed Virginia today trying to paint their fight for the Senate as a referendum on the future of the country.
Recent polls show the race still a virtual dead heat, despite the apparent surge by Mr.
Robb in the last 10 days.
J.
Marshall Coleman, a Republican running as an independent, remains a distant third.


Service Merchandise Gets a President From Saks
The Service Merchandise Company said yesterday that Gary M. Witkin, until recently vice chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, had joined the catalogue showroom retailer in the new position of president and chief operating officer.
The announcement confounded retailing-industry analysts, who were surprised that Service Merchandise had selected a veteran of the department-store business as the heir apparent to Raymond Zimmerman, one of the company's founders and its chairman and chief executive.


Knicks' First Warning Flag Rises: Mason Unhappy With Contract
A frustrated Anthony Mason spoke out today, disappointed that the Knicks have not signed him to a contract extension with Tuesday's deadline just hours away.
Mason, in the final year of a $1.3 million contract, can become an unrestricted free agent after the season.
And according to the National Basketball Association's no-strike, no-lockout agreement, no contract extensions can be negotiated after Tuesday until a new collective bargaining agreement is signed, or until the last game of the finals -- whichever comes first.


Merisel Inc.(MSEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vigoro Corp.(VGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clean Up Reactors In East Europe Too
To the Editor:
"East Europe Still Choking on Air of the Past" (news article, Nov. 3) provides a compelling description of the difficulties facing Eastern European countries in abandoning the dreadfully polluting plants and practices of their Communist past.


Garan Inc.(GAN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Urban Crime Rates Falling This Year
The number of incidents of murder, robbery and assault has declined in almost all the nation's largest cities, most markedly in the West, according to a survey by the New York City Police Department.
Twenty of the 22 police departments that were surveyed said there were fewer felonies in the first six months of this year than there were in the same period last year.
The cities showing the greatest declines in felonies were San Francisco, Seattle, Los Angeles, El Paso and San Antonio, in descending order.
San Francisco reported a 25.2 percent decrease in total felonies, with better than 20 percent decreases each in murder, rape, robbery, burglary, larceny theft and motor vehicle theft.


Milton Taylor, 86, a Co-Owner Of Caswell-Massey Pharmacies
Milton Taylor, who with his brother Ralph took over the venerable Caswell-Massey pharmacy on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan in 1936 and helped build it into an international purveyor of fashionable toiletries, died on Saturday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack, said Mr. Taylor's son Adam.


Sam Francis, 71, Abstract Artist Celebrated for His Use of Color
Sam Francis, a painter known for lyrical, color-drenched abstractions, died on Friday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 71 and had homes in Santa Monica, Point Reyes Station, Calif., and Paris.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Andre Emmerich, whose New York gallery has represented the artist since 1971.


RightChoice Managed Care Inc.(RIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Information On Voting
Today is Election Day.
Polling places will be open 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York State; 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey, and 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. in Connecticut.
For polling-place information, call the Voter Information Hot Line of the New York City Board of Elections, (212) 868-3692; the League of Women Voters, (212) 674-8484, or the New York Public Interest Research Group, (212) 349-6986.
The Board of Elections line for the hearing-impaired is (212) 487-5496.


Foreman Makes HBO a Winner, Too
Riddick Bowe was HBO's heavyweight champion.
So was Evander Holyfield, and Lennox Lewis, too.
All lost.
Michael Moorer beat Holyfield -- then disappeared as if he were too shy or too busy watching reruns of "Top Cops."
When Oliver McCall upset Lewis in September, he gleefully shouted, "I'm a Showtime fighter!" Put together, the scenario promised HBO little in heavyweight land.
Then along came George Foreman Saturday, in the grandest battle of bald men since the 1956 Eisenhower-Stevenson bout, leveling Moorer in the 10th.
Then he thanked Seth Abraham, the president of HBO Sports.


Dow Up 1.35 as Market Awaits the Election
The stock market was mixed ahead of today's midterm Congressional elections, in which Democratic incumbents were expected to fare worse than their Republican counterparts, further hobbling the Clinton Administration.
If the Republicans win decisively in the House and Senate, some traders are sure to bid up stocks on the theory that future Clinton initiatives interpreted as bad for business will also be decisively defeated.
But some of the major unpopular-with-the-market initiatives, like health care reform, are already all but dead, so the market reaction may be muted.


Listening to Schumann's Mental Changes
Romanticism was in its way a form of insanity.
It played the violent Ping-Pong game of polarities, bouncing from the eloquence of melancholy to the boundless energies of the ecstatic.
With its gray vocabulary and tools of measurement, psychiatry reduces these exalted states to "depression" and "mania," and in the process has squeezed a lot of romance out of our lives.
Science, indeed, has a hard time dealing with the human spirit.
Do the 1960's, for example, represent a grand social upheaval or simply a documentable nervous breakdown?
Was the age of Berlioz and Wagner artistic liberation or a plunge into the mood swings of the manic-depressive condition?


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lubavitchers Learn to Sustain Themselves Without the Rebbe
For as long as almost any of them can remember, Lubavitch Hasidim looked to Grand Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson for vision and leadership.
Now his followers are looking inward as they adjust to a world without their rebbe, who died in June.


30-Second TV Spot: The Chicken Pox of Politics
Television watchers, whatever their political leanings, ought to be able to join today in celebration: the campaign of 1994 is over.
For weeks there has been lamentation on all channels about the nastiness of the advertising on all channels.
Except for the professionals who turn out the stuff (and for whom every negative is a positive on their balance sheets), campaign commentators have chorused their disgust at charges and countercharges that have little to do either with truth or with issues that really touch voters' lives.


Thorn Apple Valley Inc.(TAVI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 16


The Candidates Debate
Mario M. Cuomo -- Democrat, on a fourth term One person's lame duck is the other person's liberated executive.
If you assumed it was my last year, that could make me stronger a whole lot of ways because it frees you from any necessity to cater to any political influence.
You can go in there and swing with both hands.
I think the Senate Republican majority, and I'm assuming it's going to continue to be a Senate Republican majority, may be easier for me to handle next year if I do what I've proposed to do and that is to go directly to the Senate members.


Teleglobe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World News Briefs; Ireland Says It Will Free Some Members of I.R.A.
The Government announced today that it would release some of the members of the outlawed Irish Republican Army being held in Irish prisons before Christmas, and before their terms expire.
The announcement by the Justice Minister, Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, was seen as modest but significant step toward speeding the Northern Ireland peace effort begun last December by Prime Ministers Albert Reynolds of Ireland and John Major of Britain.


Big Multimedia Noise from Bedford
I HAVE seen the future of interactive multimedia, and it rocks.
The Virtual Guitar from Ahead Inc. of Bedford, Mass., costs about $90, weighs about five pounds and looks like a regular electric guitar with an oddly stringless, fretless fingerboard.
Its heft and aggressive purple and yellow color scheme make it about as real as a computer peripheral can get.
The virtual part is the way it makes music.


SNC-Lavalin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Techniques Hold Promise in Fighting AIDS
Scientists are looking at promising new approaches for combating the AIDS virus by undermining the processes controlling its reproduction and activation in the body.
A discovery that a cancer drug may block replication of the human immunodeficiency virus (H.I.V.), which causes AIDS, and the finding that a protein from the virus affects latency of the disease in the body after infection could lead to ways of controlling AIDS without directly attacking the virus, according to new research reports.


U.S. Cuts AIDS Research Grants in New York City
Once a week, Gilbert Jackson, a recovering heroin addict who has tuberculosis and AIDS, picks up medication at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan and happily submits to poking and prodding as part of a Federal study of new AIDS therapies.
The study in which Mr.
Jackson is enrolled began in 1989, part of an effort to insure that minorities, women and people who inject drugs were included in AIDS research trials.


Chess
Can a strategy that was long ago outmoded as primitive and crude flourish in today's sophisticated tournament play?
Don't reject the idea without taking a look at the current adventures of that ancient opening, the Center Game.
Its strategy is to bring out the queen, the most powerful piece, right at the start.
Beginners do this because it is easier to move the queen around the board than it is to coordinate the moves of bishops, knights and rooks.
The drawback of early deployment of the queen is, however, that it becomes vulnerable to the jabs of the enemy's lesser pieces and pawns.
Thus, time is lost guarding the queen from mishaps and the brave beginning often degenerates into cringing.


Stein Mart (SMRT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


New Ability to Find Earliest Cancers: A Mixed Blessing?
AS scientists develop ingenious techniques to detect smaller and smaller cancers, some investigators are voicing a note of caution.
Finding a cancer early may not be better, they say, unless it is one that will progress if left untreated.
It sounds heretical but, these critics say, studies show that many, if not most, early cancers do not grow large and dangerous and would never be noticed unless doctors with an early detection method went looking for them.
Yet tiny cancers are so common that autopsy studies of middle-aged and older people have found that almost everyone's body contains them.
If the cancers are harmless, treatment could be useless or possibly even harmful because it might subject people to needless surgery or chemoterapy.
The skeptics add that even with cancers that do become life-threatening, early detection and treatment do not always help.


Brotherhood of Anger -- A special report.; Palestinian Religious Militants: Why Their Ranks Are Growing
On the second day of Nidal Tamimi's funeral at the end of October, mourners arrived by the hundreds.
They climbed a hill to where his parents, relatives and friends accepted condolences over the death of the 22-year-old Hamas member, shot at a checkpoint in Hebron by Israeli soldiers.
But this was not merely a gathering of angry militants capitalizing on the death of one of their own.
The mourners came from every walk of life, young and middle-aged, representing virtually every family of Hebron as they patiently wended their way to the funeral site above the city.


Nac Re Corp.(NREC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pacific Telecom (PTCM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Can You Deal With a Friend's Death Too Well?
An intensely personal book about Gilda Radner has turned into one of the hottest properties in town.
But its author, Alan Zweibel, isn't quite sure he's happy with all the attention.
The book, "Bunny Bunny," subtitled "Gilda Radner: A Sort of Love Story," consists almost entirely of dialogue between Radner and Mr.
Zweibel, and it has had a half-dozen readings, including two today at the Walter Kerr Theater in New York.
Julia Louis-Dreyfus plays Radner, the comedian who died of ovarian cancer in 1989, and Jason Alexander is Mr.
Zweibel, a writer for television and film.
Both have done the reading before, but other well-known actors have also played Radner, who was in the original cast of "Saturday Night Live," and Mr.
Zweibel, one of the show's first writers.


South Korea to Lift Curbs On Business Ties to North
South Korea said today that it would begin lifting restrictions on business dealings with North Korea, clearing the way for economic cooperation between the two countries still divided by the legacy of the cold war.
In short North Korea, one of the world's most isolated nations and a last bastion of Stalinism, looks open for business.


A Reassignment For Coca-Cola
The Coca-Cola Company has confirmed the reassignment of one brand account but would not discuss the possible reassignment of a second.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for Coca-Cola in Atlanta, yesterday confirmed a report this week in Adweek that the Martin Agency in Richmond, which handles the Mello Yello brand, had also been awarded the Mr.
Pibb brand without a review.
Billings were not disclosed.
Mr.
Pibb was at GSD&amp; M Advertising in Austin, Tex., until that agency resigned its Coca-Cola assignments last year to become the Royal Crown Cola Company agency.


6 Candidates Thrash Out The Issues on TV (Sort Of)
With two television sets and the attention span of a channel surfer, it was possible to imagine that there was a debate between the candidates for governor of New York last night.
Unquestionably, on the night before the election, all six candidates were on TV at the same time, for the first time.
That they happened to be on different channels was something of an impediment to meaningful dialogue, but by using a fistful of remote controls to selectively raise and lower the volume, one could pretend that they were talking to one another.


Big, Bad Cowboys Knock Giants Into Next Season
When the Dallas Cowboys were ahead by 14-3 in the second quarter, ABC-TV's cameras panned to the team owner Jerry Jones in his box in Texas Stadium.
He was smiling and laughing as if the game had already been won.
When those same cameras showed the Giants' braintrust of the Mara family and General Manager George Young, they caught a group of men who looked as if they were at a funeral.
In a way they were.
The Giants' season is dead.
As one player said, it looks like he is going to be home for Christmas.
As Giants Coach Dan Reeves said, it's time to look to next year.
The Giants were overmatched, overwhelmed, and beaten down in a 38-10 hammering before a sellout crowd of 64,836 here and a national television audience that witnessed the Giants' sixth straight defeat.


Executive Changes
HUFFY CORP., Dayton, Ohio, named Thomas Frederick vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
SYSCO CORP., Houston, promoted Bill M. Lindig, its president and chief operating officer, to chief executive, succeeding John F. Woodhouse, who will continue as chairman.
Also, Charles H. Cotros, its executive vice president, was promoted to succeed Mr.
Lindig in the additional responsibilities as chief operating officer.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about intimidation of the press by the Government of Singapore referred incorrectly in some copies to an article written by an American economist and published in The International Herald Tribune.
The article criticized "intolerant regimes" in Asia, but did not single out any country.


Watching the Results: Tout Sheet for Players
How to watch the election, presuming you can put up with still more learned commentary about voter alienation, President Clinton's stunning unpopularity and the omnipresence of bilious television ads: Early Trends
The polls close at 6 P.M., Eastern standard time, in Indiana and in part of Kentucky.
And Indiana, in particular, has a well established reputation as a swing state in House elections.
Results in four closely fought races may give a clue to the national trend.


I.B.M.-Apple PC Deal Meets With Skepticism
Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M. formally announced today their plan to build a personal computer that will run either company's software.
But many experts remained skeptical about the companies' chances of dominating the computer industry unless they also eventually agreed to pursue a single software strategy.
"They actually need the same software on every machine," said Phil Lemmons, editor in chief of PC World magazine, a trade publication.


Top Rwandan Criticizes U.S. Envoy
Rwanda's most powerful leader harshly criticized the American Ambassador today and said he hoped that Washington would name someone new to the post.
The Rwandan leader, Gen.
Paul Kagame, said that Ambassador David Rawson had been too sympathetic to the former Hutu Government and that this had resulted in his failing to advise Washington accurately about the political situation earlier this year.


Canandaigua Wine Co.  (WINEA,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Exploring Old English Songs, With Emphasis on Purcell  St. Michael's Church
In a concert on Saturday night, Gwendolyn Toth's intrepid Artek ensemble turned its sights on the 17th-century English song repertory.
Music of Henry Purcell predominated, with 13 songs, both famous and obscure.
Alongside favorites like "If Music Be the Food of Love," "Sweeter Than Roses," "Oh! Lead Me to Some Peaceful Gloom" and the lustrous "Evening Hymn," Ms.
Toth explored some lesser-known duets: "The Dialogue Between Thirsis and Daphne," the mischievous "I Spy Celia" and the plaintive "For Love Ev'ry Creature," with its characteristic Purcellian ground bass.


Elscint Ltd. (ELT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wainoco Oil Corp.(WOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRYSTAL OIL CO., Shreveport, La., reached a definitive agreement to sell nearly all of its United States oil and gas properties to the Apache Corp. for about $101 million in cash.
FTD, Southfield, Mich., accepted a $150 million offer for its floral distribution system from the Perry Capital Corp., New York.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  South Korea said it would ease restrictions on business with Communist North Korea.
Little is known about the workings of North Korea, but the chance to open one of the world's last closed economies seems likely to pique international business interest of the kind whetted by China and even Vietnam.  [ Page A1. ] Losses at Carl Zeiss reflect the difficulties in reuniting economies of eastern and western Germany.
The lenses and optics company says it faces collapse unless it further slashes jobs.  [ D1. ]


Teck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the Clinton Administration's decision to withdraw some American troops from Haiti and Kuwait misstated the source of the disclosure in some copies.
The decision was reported by Administration officials; President Clinton did not formally announce it.


Zeiss Bears Brunt of German Unity
It seemed to be a corporate merger tailor-made for the deep emotions and hopes of post-Communist Germany.
Carl Zeiss, the world-renowned lens and optics company, had been sundered after World War II, with one part remaining in East German hands and another part formed by Zeiss scientists who were whisked out of Communist territory.


Hubble Maps Face Of a Moon Of Saturn
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope have mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that is the size of Australia.
The researchers said today that they had used special filters aboard the Hubble to detect infrared light radiated by Titan and to produce 50 images of the smog-shrouded moon that reveal some surface detail.
The atmosphere of methane gas and suspended hydrocarbon particles scatters visible light and makes Titan appear to be a fuzzy orange ball under normal observation.


TIG Holdings Inc.(TIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flanders Has Surgery
Flanders, who won the Breeders' Cup race for juvenile fillies, underwent surgery yesterday in Lexington, Ky., to repair a fractured bone in her right front leg.
The veterinarians L. R. BRAMLAGE and R. W. COPELAN inserted two cortical bone screws across the fracture to stabilize the portion of the cannon bone that Flanders fractured Saturday at Churchill Downs.
Several fragments of bone were removed from the injured area, according to the veterinarians.
Here racing future is uncertain at this point.


Treasuries Are Flat in Quiet Day
Prices of government securities were flat in quiet trading yesterday.
After large losses last week, the market took a breather yesterday in one of the quietest sessions of the year.
Investors were jolted on Friday by the October employment report, seeing hints of inflation in the data on wages and the workweek.
Yesterday, a decline in commodity markets helped to calm some of the inflation jitters.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities fell 1.15 points, to 233.01.


Of Time, Loss and Death: The Vista Is Lengthening
THE AFTERLIFE And Other Stories By John Updike  316 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Variations on the theme of middle age, the stories in John Updike's new collection, "The Afterlife," are accompaniment pieces to his last Rabbit novel, the melancholy "Rabbit at Rest" (1990).
Like that novel, these tales are elegies for lost youth and receding passions; like that novel, they are written in a minor but melodic key.
The themes in this volume are also familiar ones that Mr.
Updike has dealt with throughout his 35-year career: the pleasures and disillusionments of marriage, the lure of adultery, the continuing conflict between man's vague spiritual yearnings and importunate fleshy desires, between his need for safety and his longing for freedom.


Raymond James Financial Inc.(RJF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Riverside Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former Councilman Sentenced in Fraud
A former New York City Councilman was sentenced yesterday to two to six years in prison for padding his payroll with ghost employees and cashing the paychecks for himself.
Prosecutors charged that the former Councilman, Rafael Castaneira-Colon, 58, illegally netted $390,000 over seven years.
Beginning in 1986, he routinely filed false time sheets for three employees who did not exist, according to the office of the Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson.


Off the Bench, Into the Frying Pan
The salary cap has overturned all of the conventional notions about backup quarterbacks in the National Football League.
Perhaps we will never see a Steve Young back up Joe Montana or a Jeff Hostetler come off the bench for Phil Simms.
The Bills' Frank Reich, the backup to Jim Kelly, is expected to be one of the most highly sought-after free agents in February.
In seven games on Sunday, pro football fans saw how valuable these low-priced backups were when they were thrust into the starting lineup.


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.(VSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Here's the Right Way to Restore Westhampton Barrier Island
To the Editor:
The Federal Government's agreement to spend $80 million more for beach and dune repairs on Long Island's Westhampton barrier island (news article, Nov. 1) is but the latest of many futile, expensive projects undertaken by the Army Corps of Engineers to ease the damage caused by improper construction of 15 rock jetties.


Geico Corp.(GEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Community in Pain


Appeal of 'Direct-to-Video' Grows Among Film Studios
Alongside advertisements for "Interview with the Vampire" in newspaper movie sections this week are those for "Texas." But don't look for any theater listings in the promotions; this film is available only on video.
"Texas," based on the James A. Michener novel, has never played in theaters or on television.
And unlike low-budget kung-fu, horror and sex thrillers -- so-called grade B titles -- which typically cost less than $500,000 to make, "Texas" cost $12 million and signals a sea change in movie-making economics, raising the stature of video stores as showcases for programming.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Tu, 16, Upsets Coetzer for First Victory Meilen Tu, a 16-year-old high school student from Northridge, Calif., upset Amanda Coetzer, 6-1, 6-3, yesterday in the opening round of the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia for her first victory as a professional.


F.A.A. Urged to Act on Commuter Plane
The National Transportation Safety Board said tonight that the Federal Aviation Administration "should take immediate action" to prevent another crash of the type of commercial aircraft that plummeted into an Indiana cornfield last week, killing 68 people.
The safety board recommended that the F.A.A. temporarily prohibit the aircraft, Avions de Transport Regional models ATR-72 and ATR-42, from flying in conditions where ice might build up on its wings.


Youth, 14, Draws 9 Years to Life in Killing of 4-Year-Old
Eric Smith, the baby-faced teen-ager convicted in the fatal bludgeoning of a 4-year-old boy in western New York, in 1993, was sentenced yesterday to a maximum prison term of 9 years to life.
"We got what we came for," said Dale Robie after sentence was passed on the 14-year-old, who was convicted of killing Mr.
Robie's son, Derrick, on Aug. 2, 1993 in Savona, about 11 miles northwest of Corning.


Designing For Women's Various Lives
The woman envisioned by European designers lives in an idealized world where she spends her days relaxing and her evenings at glamorous parties.
At least that's the message that came through in last month's spring shows in Paris and Milan, Italy.
But in last week's Seventh on Sixth shows in New York, several different women materialized.
American designers see women who work, women who go to social lunches, women who go to elegant dinners and women who dance the night away in sleazy clubs.
And they provided clothes for these various lives: suits, dresses with jackets, sweater sets, satin jeans, slip skirts, slinky bias-cut evening dresses, see-through chiffons and bouffant-skirted ingenue dresses.


Mercury General Corp.(MRCY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


T. Rowe Price Associates Inc.(TROW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
JUDY COLLINS returned from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia last week carrying something for her friends, Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton: drawings made by children.
The singer, who went on the trip as a spokeswoman for Unicef, sees a powerful message in the words and pictures of children living in those war-torn locales.
She also gave drawings to the mayors of the divisions of the Bosnian city of Mostar during her visit.


Mississippi Chemical Corp.(MISS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Varco International Inc.(VRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quebec Separatists Drive Out English Speakers
To the Editor:
Re "Tired of Separatism" (Op-Ed, Oct. 31): Mordecai Richler echoes a sentiment common among English-speaking Montrealers when he speaks of the sense of frustration over Quebec separatism.


Immigration Agency Works at Equality
To the Editor:
Your article on equal opportunity at the Immigration and Naturalization Service ("Black Officers in I.N.S. Push Racial Boundaries," Oct. 30) describes a situation that we found just as disconcerting 18 months ago.


Wyle Laboratories (WYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Boito's 'Mefistofele' As a Test for Basses  New York State Theater
The New York City Opera's hoary production of Boito's "Mefistofele" has proved a worthy showcase over the years for the company's excellent basses past, Norman Treigle and Samuel Ramey, and even some better-than-average ones.
But this is no place, surely, for an ordinary bass.


Fairfax Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weatherford Int'l.(WII,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moscow Journal; Where Soviets Strutted, Capitalism Sets Up Shop
Move over, Mall of America.
Moscow now boasts a giant shopping paradise of its own, built where a shrine to the Soviet Union's economic triumphs once stood.
From tennis balls and televisions to lingerie and limousines, almost every item legally available in Russia is for sale at a sprawling complex that embraces more than 70 buildings.
Nowhere else in this country can one find such a vast selection of goods.


NEC Says Its Computer Is Fastest
The NEC Corporation announced a new supercomputer today that it said was the fastest of its kind in the world, capable of a peak speed of one trillion calculations a second.
Some American companies, using a relatively new technique called massively parallel processing, have already said they could reach one teraflop, or one trillion floating-point operations a second.
But NEC uses a more conventional technology.


Sonat Offshore Drilling (RIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baseball Talks Go North
In an effort to move the stagnant baseball talks, the mediator has moved them from Washington to Westchester.
Bill Usery Jr. initially scheduled the resumption of talks for Washington, but the owners and the striking players preferred New York.
They compromised on Westchester County, arranging for four days of meetings at Arrowwood, a resort and conference center in Rye Brook.
The talks, the first effort at negotiating in two months, will resume Thursday.
Usery and the negotiators have agreed to remain at Arrowwood and meet daily through Sunday.
The schedule could be undermined if the two sides discover after the first couple of days that they have nothing constructive to discuss.


Theory on Human Brain Hints How Its Unique Traits Arose
THE answer to one of the thorniest questions in evolution -- how did Homo sapiens develop language, musical ability and other uniquely human traits? -- may at last be at hand.
The key may lie in an ancient brain structure thought to coordinate body movements, according to a brash theory on brain evolution that has gained backing from new research.
The theory holds that modern humans evolved when areas of the cerebellum, the part of the brain just above the brain stem that controls movement, and frontal parts of the higher cortex both expanded.
At the time, rudimentary connections between them also expanded, forming a unique circuit.
This expanded circuit, which is not found in other primates or vertebrates, may have resulted from a mutation in one or more genes that help shape the developing brain, said Dr.
Henrietta Leiner, who developed the theory a decade ago with her husband, Dr.
Alan Leiner.
The part of the brain that gives humans motor dexterity enlarged to give them mental dexterity, she said.


More Than Decoration, Songbirds Are Essential to Forests' Health
THE migrating songbirds that brighten North America's forests each spring with dazzling colors and melodious strains have been regarded by many scientists as mere decorative frills that play a limited role, if any, in the functioning of their ecosystems.
But a new study provides what researchers say is the first evidence that these birds, some of which are in decline, play a crucial role in maintaining the health and productivity of forest trees.
In the study, in the current issue of the journal Ecology, two researchers have shown that these voracious predators can protect trees by eating the bugs that chew the leaves.
As a result, scientists are predicting that the decline of these birds could eventually threaten the productivity of forests in the United States as well as in the birds' wintering grounds in the tropical forests of Central and South America.


National HealthCorp L.P.  (NHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwestern Energy Co.  (SWN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


U.S. Trying New Tactic With Zaire
The Clinton Administration, hoping to avert economic and political disintegration in Zaire, has adopted a new strategy that seeks to strengthen that country's Prime Minister and isolate its longtime President.
But many Africa experts and Zairians say the Administration's tentative embrace of Prime Minister Leon Kengo wa Dondo will do the opposite of what it intends: rehabilitate Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire's dictator, whom the Administration has shunned in recent years because of his human-rights abuses and large-scale corruption.


Executive Leaves Campbell Mithun
A top executive at Campbell Mithun Esty in New York has left the agency and brought one of its biggest accounts with her to a small shop headed by her husband.
Patricia Stewart, who had been executive vice president and account director on the Travelers Insurance account at Campbell Mithun, has joined MacNamara Cilo in New York in the new position of president.
As a result, that agency has been awarded the Travelers account, the company said yesterday, after nine years at Campbell Mithun.
Billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.


As Democrats Struggle, G.O.P.'s Gubernatorial Stars Seem to Lead Their Races
While many of the country's most prominent Democratic governors are in close races for re-election, the best-known Republican governors seem to be comfortably ahead of their challengers.
Democrats whose futures are in doubt include Mario M. Cuomo of New York, Ann W. Richards of Texas, Lawton Chiles of Florida and Zell Miller of Georgia.


Growing Importance Of Being Integrated
AN integrated program, one that combines several applications into one piece of software, is often the best choice for the home, home office and small office.
Microsoft Works is a fine program, but Clarisworks is the favorite around this home office.
Clarisworks has just gone into version 3.0, for both Microsoft Windows and Macintosh computers.
It has grown in both usability and size.


Rights Group Seeks Distance From N.A.A.C.P.'s Troubles
Trying to find ways to differentiate itself from the financially troubled National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, officials of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund are considering changing their organization's name.
Officials from the Legal Defense Fund said they feared the N.A.A.C.P.'s troubles were hurting their fund-raising efforts.
The Legal Defense Fund was begun by Thurgood Marshall, who became the first black Justice of the Supreme Court, as an offshoot of the N.A.A.C.P. in 1940.
The fund, a nonprofit organization that litigates on behalf of people it believes are being discriminated against because of their race, has been separate from the N.A.A.C.P. since 1957.


Celadon Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Omnicare Inc.(OCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Atlantic Coast Conference  North Carolina State captured the regular-season title with a record of 5-1 and was awarded a bye in the first round of the conference tournament, which will be staged at Clemson starting Thursday.


Question Haunts a Candidate: 'Didn't You Just Run?'
As he campaigned throughout the various neighborhoods on Staten Island's south shore, Vito J. Fossella Jr., a City Councilman up for re-election today, was frequently asked about burning issues like overcrowded schools.
But he was also haunted by one unrelenting question from voters: "Didn't you just run for office a few months ago?"
Indeed, Mr.
Fossella, the Republican and Conservative incumbent who is the newest member of the City Council, did win a special election in the 51st Council District in April, after Councilman Alfred C. Cerullo 3d left to become Commissioner of Consumer Affairs in the Giuliani administration.
But under a provision in New York's four-year-old City Charter, Mr.
Fossella had to run again in this election.


Trust Gets Skyscraper From Sears
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company has washed its hands of the 110-story Sears Tower, handing over ownership of the world's tallest skyscraper today to a trust set up to benefit the building's mortgage holders.
The deal reduces Sears's debt by $850 million and frees the company of a burden that had grown worse as real estate values fell in downtown Chicago, making the building worth hundreds of millions less than its mortgage.


High Court Hears Case on Amtrak Rejection of Penn Station Ad
There was no dispute in a Supreme Court argument today that the National Railroad Passenger Corporation, usually known as Amtrak, was created by the Federal Government, kept financially afloat by the Federal Government and is run by a board whose members, including the Secretary of Transportation, are appointed by the President.
Nor was there any disagreement about the Government's ownership of all of Amtrak's preferred stock and the mortgages on the railroad's major properties, including Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan.


ICI Selects Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
ICI Paints in Cleveland said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York to handle consumer advertising for its Glidden paint brands in North America, which had been handled by Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications in Cleveland for the last 61 years.
Though billings on brands including Glidden, Spred and Delux had been estimated at $5 million, they are expected to increase during the next four years to perhaps as much as $15 million.


Baby Ruling Sets the Stage For New Fight
For most of his life, grownups have been fighting here over the right to love, cherish and rear a 3 1/2-year-old boy known to the world as "Baby Richard." So bitter is the custody battle, between the boy's adoptive and biological parents, that it reached the United States Supreme Court.
But the High Court said today that it would not be the final arbiter in the dispute.
It refused to hear the case.


Conversing With Hampson
The baritone Thomas Hampson is to be the first artist to appear in Lincoln Center's Off Stage series of conversations with performers, tomorrow at 6 P.M. in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse of the Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street.
The one-hour discussion is to be followed by an informal wine-and-cheese reception with Mr.
Hampson.
Others in the series are to be the actor Dom DeLuise (Dec. 14), the actor and musician Clifton Davis (Jan. 10) and the violin teacher Dorothy DeLay along with a student, Sarah Chang (Feb. 21).
Tickets to the entire series are $45; single tickets are $14.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Scott Paper Shifts Accounts
In a major worldwide agency roster realignment, the Scott Paper Company said yesterday that it would eliminate two shops and redistribute their assignments among Bozell Worldwide, McCann-Erickson Worldwide and the J. Walter Thompson Company.
While Scott did not disclose total billings involved, which included overseas reassignments, domestic billings were estimated at $60 million to $75 million.
The agencies eliminated, which handled American accounts only, were Publicis/Bloom in New York, with brands like Baby Fresh wipe products and Cottonelle bathroom tissue, and Weightman Advertising in Philadelphia, with brands like Scott bathroom tissue.
Conill Advertising in New York continues to handle campaigns aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
&gt;


Strong-Side Linebacker With a Soft Side
Bobby Houston stood beside his locker at Jets camp here Monday, looking over a teddy bear somebody had sent to him as a present for his infant daughter, Taylor.
For a guy who is working on a reputation as a hard hitter, Houston has his soft moments.
But one would never guess that by seeing what happened to Don Beebe after Houston leveled him on Sunday.


Restraints for Elderly
In a pioneering program begun several years ago, the Jewish Home and Hospital for Aged in Manhattan and the Bronx showed that it was rarely necessary to restrain nursing home patients who suffered from mental confusion or extreme physical weakness.
Use of restraints is commonplace in nursing homes and at one time homes were cited for neglect when frail or agitated patients were not restrained.
Believing this practice to be inhumane and psychologically damaging to residents, the Jewish Home made a concerted effort to reduce it, first by extensive talks to change attitudes and erase fears among the staff, residents and families and then by working to increase the strength and mobility and improve the gait and balance of residents through exercise and physical rehabilitation.


New York Congressional Races
14th DISTRICT  Campaigning on Her Experience, Maloney Defeats Millard
Congresswoman Carolyn B. Maloney, a Democrat, bucked a national trend and overwhelmed her Republican challenger, City Councilman Charles Millard, by almost 2 to 1.


An Emergency Forges a Bond Of Tenants in a Common Faith
Rabbi Rolando Matalon remembers that night as if it were yesterday.
It was in the pre-dawn darkness of May 25, 1991 when the roof of Congregation B'nai Jeshurun's 77-year-old Moorish-style temple on West 88th Street suddenly collapsed.
"Thank God nobody was hurt," the rabbi said.
"It happened between Friday night services and Saturday morning services. Tons came down, large pieces that would have killed somebody, no doubt about it."


Penguin Owner Peeved By the Puck-Dragging
Bargainers for the National Hockey League and its locked-out Players Association will meet again tomorrow in Toronto.
Although it is a positive sign that the two sides are meeting twice in the same week, it's not often enough or soon enough for Howard Baldwin, owner of the Pittsburgh Penguins.
"It should be today, it's a ticking clock," Baldwin said yesterday, which was supposed to be the 39th day of the season.
"We should all be ashamed. It's a great crime. I hope to God they stay in the room until something is done."


New York Results - The Race for Comptroller
Results at 1:30 A.M.
RPTNG.
Burstein
Vacco
Albany
45.6
35,077
17,764
Allegany
100.0
3,401
9,231
Bronx
100.0
138,762
34,723
Brooklyn
99.0
261,908
87,118
Broome
99.5
27,373
34,517
Catargus
100.0
7,627
15,690
Cayuga
100.0
8,691
15,106
Chataqua
100.0
16,852
24,186
Chemung
100.0
10,325
14,894
Chenang
100.0
4,440
9,830
Clinton
100.0
9,214
11,538
Columbia
100.0
9,175
12,685
Cortland
100.0
4,763
8,333
Delaware
98.4
4,477
9,882
Dutchess
97.9
30,115
46,592
Erie
98.2
143,013
147,270
Essex
100.0
3,613
7,738
Franklin
98.0
5,104
6,442
Fulton
100.0
5,004
9,898
Genesee
100.0
5,695
11,670
Greene
0.0
0
0
Hamilton
100.0
775
1,815
Herkimer
100.0
6,320
11,988
Jefferson
100.0
8,053
15,077
Lewis
100.0
2,032
5,001
Livingston
100.0
6,289
11,969
Madison
100.0
6,872
12,977
Manhattan
100.0
265,628
57,423
Monroe
99.1
97,737
117,416
Montgomery
95.9
5,865
8,728
Nassau
43.1
81,690
97,936
Niagara
100.0
26,687
37,107
Oneida
100.0
29,197
44,504
Onondaga
98.6
63,294
83,571
Ontario
100.0
10,316
18,290
Orange
100.0
31,980
45,194
Orleans
100.0
3,352
7,617
Oswego
96.8
12,924
21,439
Otsego
100.0
6,583
10,934
Putnam
100.0
9,956
18,100
Queens
99.9
221,307
110,463
Rensselaer
100.0
26,463
28,062
Rockland
100.0
38,839
41,518
StLawrence
0.0
0
0
Saratoga
99.4
25,311
38,524
Schenectdy
100.0
25,885
26,184
Schoharie
100.0
4,482
6,280
Schuyler
100.0
1,946
3,697
Seneca
100.0
3,198
6,405
StatenIsl
99.1
40,820
46,312
Steuben
98.8
8,192
18,642
Suffolk
96.9
145,869
200,300
Sullivan
92.1
7,645
10,081
Tioga
100.0
5,239
10,701
Tompkins
100.0
12,719
11,307
Ulster
98.8
23,511
32,395
Warren
100.0
6,487
11,625
Washington
100.0
5,715
10,845
Wayne
100.0
7,274
18,468
Wstchester
92.8
130,335
113,976
Wyoming
100.039
3,488
7,945
Yates
100.0
2,065
4,845
Totals
93.0
2,157,293
1,920,768


A Newspaper Labor Dispute Spawns an On-Line Rivalry
The strike blocking deliveries of both of San Francisco's major daily newspapers has provided an unexpected but revealing test of electronic publishing.
The strike, which entered its second week yesterday against The San Francisco Chronicle and The San Francisco Examiner, has deprived more than 600,000 newspaper readers of election accounts, sports scores, comics and columnists.


Spielvogel Will Run United Auto Group
Carl Spielvogel, the longtime advertising executive, yesterday was named chairman and chief executive of United Auto Group Inc., a fast-growing private operator of multiple-franchise auto dealerships.
The move comes less than three weeks after Mr.
Spielvogel startled Madison Avenue by announcing his resignation as chairman of Bates Worldwide Inc., one of the largest advertising agency companies.


West
ALASKA
A Democrat, Tony Knowles, went into Election Day with a big lead in the polls in his bid for re-election as Governor despite an acerbic campaign run by his Republican opponent, Jim Campbell, a retired Anchorage businessman.
One advertisement, which the Campbell campaign ran briefly in October, created a flurry of concern among Mr.
Knowles's supporters, who complained that it wrongly accused him of womanizing.


Making Peace With Death, Going On With Life
The dance floor was once a symbol of pleasure and possibilities: a place to flaunt physicality and meet new partners.
The AIDS epidemic has changed that, lending every new encounter an element of danger, bringing a sense of loss to clubs that once were carefree.
Seal, the English singer and songwriter who started a two-night engagement at the Beacon Theater on Monday, captures that new mood of somber revelry, a mixture of hope and mourning.
His songs struggle to make peace with mortality, yearning for "life without the pain" and insisting that for the living, "It's time to move on."
Seal, who this year released his second album, "Seal" (ZTT/Sire/ Warner Brothers), is on his first American tour, and his concert preserved the mystique of his video clips.
Onstage, he was shrouded in smoke and darkness; he wore black until, near the end of his 90-minute set, he stripped down to a white sleeveless T-shirt, ignoring the squeals of the many young women in the audience.
Seal's voice was husky and melancholy, restraining itself and staying low, revealing a soul singer's tenor range only near the end of the concert.
Even when his band played dance rhythms, he moved in slow motion, striking sculptural poses with his tall, lean frame.


G.O.P. Takes 2 Senate Seats, and More
The Republicans swept both of Tennessee's seats in the United States Senate today and, for good measure, took the governor's office from the Democrats and seized a majority in the state's delegation to the House of Representatives.
The most dramatic result of Election Day here was the victory by a political newcomer, Dr.
William Frist, a surgeon who until eight years ago had not even registered to vote, over a three-term Democratic incumbent, Senator Jim Sasser, who had hoped to become Senate majority leader in the next Congress.


Medieval Marketing: A Rare-Book Copy For a Mere $16,425
Act now while the supply lasts, and you can buy a rare facsimile of an 11th-century, illuminated German manuscript for only $16,425.
After March 15, the price will rise to $19,205.
This is what S. Fischer Verlag of Frankfurt, the publisher, has told prospective German buyers interested in acquiring a 410-page, gilded copy of a pericope, a collection of richly illustrated Latin scriptural passages commissioned by Emperor Henry II of Germany in 1012 and now the property of the Bavarian State Library in Munich.


Governor, Philosophical, Concedes and Soldiers On
He never prayed for victory on his final Election Day, the most sorrowful day in a career that had known few such moments of defeat.
Instead, said Mario M. Cuomo, he fashioned a different prayer.
"The prayer we say is not, 'Lord, let me win,' " he said, "but the prayer we say is 'Lord, let me understand the outcome and deal with it.' "


South
ALABAMA
Trying to act as a counterweight to the anti-Clinton sentiment in Alabama, Gov.
James E. Folsom Jr. was neck and neck with his Republican opponent, Fob James Jr.
Mr.
Folsom, 45, a former lieutenant governor, became governor last year after Gov.
Guy Hunt, a Republican, was convicted of ethics violations.
Mr.
James, 60, governed the state from 1979 to 1983 as a Democrat, but switched parties for this race.
In a hotly contested House battle in the northern Fifth District, Wayne Parker, a Republican banker, was in the midst of a tight race with a two-term Democratic incumbent, Robert E. Cramer.
Mr.
Parker counted on powerful party ties to help him.


Wolohan Lumber Co.(WLHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Kenneth Branagh; How 'Frankenstein' Has Created a Hunk
SHE hovers, dark and forbidding.
Dressed in black, moving in shadow, she watches, waits, while he sits in the light and laughs, beguiles.
And then, inevitably perhaps, she strikes, rushing toward him, drawing back her arm.
He faces her, gravely now.
She lunges at his heart.
With a lint brush.


George D. Sands, 75, A Scientist at NASA
Dr.
George D. Sands, a NASA project scientist who was the spokesman for the Viking spacecraft missions to Mars in 1976, died on Nov. 2 at his home in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 75.
He died after a long illness, said his daughter, Kimberley Sands of Maryville, Tenn.


Rev. Philip Dobson, 85, Is Dead; Fordham Business School Dean
The Rev.
Philip E. Dobson, an expert on industrial relations and a former dean of the Fordham University School of Business, died on Sunday at Fordham's Murray-Weigel Hall, a Jesuit infirmary in the Bronx.
He was 85 and lived in Linden, N.J., most of his life.
He suffered a long illness, according to the Jesuit community in Jersey City.


U.S. Robotics Inc.(USRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Dumars 3-Points the Way As Pistons Defeat Wolves
Pistons 126, Wolves 112
Joe Dumars tied the National Basketball Association record for most 3-pointers in a game last night, making 10 and scoring 40 points as the host Detroit Pistons beat the Minnesota Timberwolves by 126-112.
Dumars made 10 of 18 3-point attempts and all 10 of his foul shots.
He missed his only 2-point attempt.


PAGE BY PAGE
CONGRESS
Republican candidates triumphed in the Senate, picking up Democratic-held seats in Tennessee, Ohio, Michigan, Maine and Oklahoma in an election that will determine the fate of President Clinton's legislative agenda.
A1
News Analysis: For Clinton, a sharp rebuff at the polls  A1


Results - New Jersey Senate Race
Results at 1:00 A.M.
Rptg.
Lautenberg
Haytaian
Others
Atlantic
100
28,014
23,976
1,201
Bergen
100
131,182
122,466
4,175
Burlington
97
47,852
45,396
3,762
Camden
99
68,116
43,228
4,828
Cape May
100
14,398
16,932
1,078
Cumberland
100
14,859
14,458
1,190
Essex
99
103,995
59,062
3,061
Gloucester
100
34,458
30,429
3,231
Hudson
98
66,865
33,770
2,411
Hunterdon
100
11,812
21,983
1,128
Mercer
100
46,170
37,257
2,414
Middlesex
100
97,208
72,716
6,025
Monmouth
100
75,243
83,041
3,887
Morris
100
49,228
76,018
2,246
Ocean
100
59,306
76,061
4,143
Passaic
100
48,039
47,034
2,555
Salem
100
8,876
9,577
906
Somerset
100
32,150
43,045
1,719
Sussex
100
11,332
24,024
1,195
Union
95
64,666
55,215
0
Warren
99
9,484
16,518
909
Totals
99
1,023,253
952,206
52,064


Cablevision Systems Corp.(CVC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Becton Dickinson &amp; Co.  (BDX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


High Court Considers Limits of Congress's Power
Congress was on the defensive in arguments before the Supreme Court today as the Justices expressed doubt about the constitutionality of two recent Federal laws.
One prohibits Federal civil servants from accepting pay for single speeches or articles, whether or not connected to their work.
The other bans the possession of guns within 1,000 feet of a school.
Federal appeals courts declared both laws unconstitutional last year.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit found that the ban on honorariums, part of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989, violated Federal employees' First Amendment right of free speech.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, ruled that the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 was a Federal intrusion on state sovereignty for which Congress had failed to provide an adequate rationale.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 2 about a drive to help schools take advantage of a Federal program that provides breakfast for needy children misidentified the school in lower Manhattan where the picture, which showed the actress Rosie O'Donnell playing with children, was taken.
It was Public School 63, not Public School 3.


Magma Power Co.(MGMA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Republican Gains and Obligations
"I need help, folks," said President Clinton during his final, desperate burst of campaigning.
He did not get it.
The result was a historic shift of power to the Republicans, in Washington and in statehouses throughout the nation.
The consequences of the weak Democratic showing were particularly painful in New York State.
It lost a Governor of great stature, Mario Cuomo, in favor of an untested newcomer, George Pataki.
Mr.
Pataki's promise of a sweeping tax cut poses a clear threat to New York City.
Its Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, responded heroically to this threat with his endorsement of Mr.
Cuomo.
The first test for Mr.
Pataki will be to show that he is not vindictive toward the city or the Mayor, and that he is independent of his political sponsor, Senator Alfonse D'Amato.


New Jersey Congressional Races
2d DISTRICT  Lobiondo, the Republican, Wins Over Democratic Newcomer
Frank A. Lobiondo, a Republican running with widespread Democratic support, handily captured the Second Congressional District seat being vacated by William J. Hughes, the Democrat, who is retiring.


Justice Breyer Takes Ethics Seriously
To the Editor:
During Justice Stephen Breyer's confirmation hearings, I opposed him, expressing concern that he would be insensitive to ethical issues on the Supreme Court.
I am very pleased to say that I have been proved wrong.


Lautenberg Edges Out Haytaian For 3d Term
Frank R. Lautenberg won a third term as a United States Senator from New Jersey yesterday by defeating Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian in a campaign that focused on abortion, gun control and taxes.
The 70-year-old Senator drew heavily on the support of a state Democratic Party that was motivated by severe defeats in recent years for the governor's office and the State Legislature.
Union members and women voted strongly for the Senator, and he benefited from big turnouts in the Democrats' traditional strongholds, Essex and Hudson counties, to overcome Mr.
Haytaian's support in the suburbs and the vigorous campaign aid of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.


Otter Tail Power (OTTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Score One for Helms
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 3 news article on the National Endowment for the Arts: Score one for Senator Jesse Helms and the religious right.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.69
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.25
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.63
5.68
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.98
8.02
5.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.12
8.16
6.14
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.98
7.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.26
7.23
5.58
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


INSIDE
A Boost for Israel Talks
Israel agreed to pick up the pace of talks on Palestinian self-rule in an effort to blunt pressure from Islamic militants on Yasir Arafat.
Page A10.
Black Ownership at Denny's
The Denny's chain, which has been accused of bias, said a black-owned company would run up to 47 outletsin the New York area.
Page B15.
Bosnian Capital Bombarded
In its worst attack since February, Sarajevo was hit yesterday afternoon by artillery fire, probably from Bosnian Serb positions.
Page A8.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In Bitter Cola War, Coke Takes a Less-Sweet Tack
For almost a year, the Coca-Cola Company has talked up the return of its familiar contoured bottles as part of efforts to differentiate its flagship soft drink from competitors.
Now Coca-Cola is talking up what's inside those bottles, too.
Coca-Cola is injecting new fizz into the cola wars by stressing Coke's less-sweet taste in a significant multimillion-dollar advertising campaign on the Univision and Telemundo Spanish-language television networks.
It's likely to be introduced sometime soon in a mainstream- market, English-language version.


Fred (Sonic) Smith, 44, Guitarist With Rock Bands of 3 Decades
Fred (Sonic) Smith, a guitarist for the influential rock band the MC5, died on Friday at St.
John's Hospital in Detroit.
He was 44 and lived in St.
Clair Shores, a suburb of Detroit.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Patti Smith, the poet and musician.


Who Won Where - Connecticut Congressional Races
Results at 1:40 A.M.


After a Bitter Campaign, Voters Stick With Robb
Senator Charles S. Robb beat back a ferocious challenge yesterday by his Republican opponent, Oliver L. North, after one of the bloodiest and most closely watched campaigns in the country.
With Republicans winning elsewhere, analysts here were surprised by how quickly Mr.
Robb's victory became evident tonight.
Virginia is a conservative state, and Mr.
Robb, a Democrat, was thought to be hobbled not only by reports about his personal life but also by his association with President Clinton, whose standing here is relatively low.


Food Notes
Ordering for Thanksgiving
For some, Thanksgiving dinner is the annual occasion to cook.
For others, it's business as usual, with some or all of the dinner ordered from catering shops, bakeries and restaurants.
Anyone interested in buying prepared food for Thanksgiving should be deep into the planning.
Holiday menus have been posted at just about every catering shop and bakery and at many restaurants -- too many excellent ones, in fact, to begin recommending particular places or dishes.
Most places have set the middle or the end of next week as the deadline for accepting orders.


Control of Law-Making Now Tilts Conservative
With Republicans in control of the Senate next year, the legislative schedule and the chairmanship of the committees where laws are written will be in the hands of a group of politicians much more conservative than the Democrats who have run the Senate for the last eight years.
Bob Dole of Kansas, who is contemplating a run for the Presidency in two years, will become majority leader, a post he held in 1985 and 1986 and relinquished after Democrats took the Senate in the 1986 elections.
His deputy will be Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming.
Both are known for their tart tongues and their skill in debate.


Mason Feels Unloved As Starks Signs Pact
In a surprising development that threatens the Knicks' chemistry this season, John Starks was signed to a three-year, $13.1 million contract extension yesterday, and Anthony Mason's bid for a new deal was denied.
How Mason, who is in the final year of a $1.3 million contract, will handle this remains to be seen, but he said Monday that he felt unappreciated by the team.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
From Madrid, Flamenco Put to Dramatic Effect  Lehman College
Choreographic fires blazed cheerily away in "Cafe del Puerto," one of the two works Teatro de Danza Espanola presented on Sunday afternoon.
But what made the matinee especially noteworthy was the melancholy of "Luna de Sangre."


2 Medical Companies To Merge
The Boston Scientific Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Scimed Life Systems Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $870 million.
With combined sales exceeding $700 million, the two medical device companies would continue the growing trend toward one-stop shopping demanded by hospitals and large managed health care buyers.


Black Investors Buy Franchises From Denny's
The Denny's restaurant chain, which for years has been accused of widespread prejudice against black customers, announced yesterday that a black-owned company in Atlanta had agreed to buy and operate as many as 47 Denny's restaurants in New York and New Jersey.
The arrangement moves Denny's close to meeting a goal the chain established with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to add 53 minority-owned restaurants by 1997.
Only a few months ago, none of the more than 1,500 Denny's restaurants were owned by blacks.
One black franchisee was added in June and a second one last week.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
An Indian summer Saturday.
The No. 1 uptown subway, bulging with families and shoppers, is hot and sticky.
At 59th Street and Columbus Circle the doors open but they do not close.
Five minutes pass, 10, perhaps 15.
The doors remain open.
Everyone is becoming cranky, fidgety.
No announcement is made.
An accident?
A fire?
A schedule adjustment?
Who knows?


In Chicago (Truly!), Many Stay Home
Precinct captains stood outside nearly empty polling places.
They looked at their lists and checked off names.
They got people rides to the polls.
They got babysitters for voters' children.
They slipped reminders on front porches and palm cards in people's hands.
They got doors slammed in their faces and weak promises from voters who vowed they would vote but did not.
By the end of Election Day in a city where politics is a blood sport more important than even baseball, less than half of the voters had cast ballots for state and Congressional races that politicians said could change the face of Washington.


Nets Return, But Bulls Await
The favorite early season opponent for the state of Texas has come home 0-3, groggy and disheveled.
In search of an awakening, the Nets will play in their own building for the first time in six months.
But they face a daunting task Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Their opponent?
The Chicago Bulls.


Michigan State Fires Perles as Football Coach
GEORGE PERLES, wiping away tears, was fired as Michigan State's football coach yesterday by a university president tired of losing.
PETER McPHERSON, Michigan State's president, said Perles would coach the team's last two games of the season.
The Spartans (4-5) play Purdue on Saturday and at Penn State on Nov. 26.


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; In Crumbling Embassy, Echoes of a Fateful Day
Nearly 20 years after the end of the war, there are still places in Vietnam that can make an American shudder.
The battlefields of Khe Sanh.
The village of My Lai.
The prison known as the Hanoi Hilton.
The rooftop of the United States Embassy in Saigon.
Today, the killing grounds of Khe Sanh and My Lai are grown over in places with rice paddy, verdant proof of the desire of the Vietnamese to put the war behind them, and much of the Hanoi Hilton is destined for the wrecking ball to make way for a modern office building.


Computer Glitch Stalls Federal Express
The Federal Express Corporation, which built its reputation by promising timely delivery of packages, stumbled on its pledge yesterday when a computer glitch interrupted pickup services for some of its customers.
For most of the day, the glitch forced the company, the world's largest express mail service, to suspend "on-call pickups" -- those from occasional business and residential customers, who call for a Federal Express courier to pick up letters and packages.


Off the Menu
Movable Feasts
Daniel Boulud, the chef and co-owner of Restaurant Daniel at 20 East 76th Street, has joined with Jean-Christophe Le Picart to form a catering company called Feast and Fetes.
Mr.
Le Picart had been a partner in a catering company in New York called Tentation, which is no longer in business.
The new company, which will cater small dinner parties and larger events, is now based in the Hotel Surry, where Restaurant Daniel is situated, but is looking for larger quarters.
Information: (212) 737-2224.
Downtown Dining
When the Vista Hotel reopened last week, nearly two years after it was severely damaged in the bombing of the World Trade Center, two of its restaurants also reopened.
The Greenhouse Cafe is serving breakfast, lunch and dinner, and the Tall Ships Bar and Grill serves lunch and dinner from a hearty American menu.
The hotel is replacing its American Harvest restaurant with three private dining rooms called the Harvest Rooms.
The rooms are to open in January with the 16,000 or so bottles of wine from Windows on the World, which used to be run by Hilton International, the owner of the Vista.
When Windows reopens, it will be run by the Joseph Baum &amp; Michael Whiteman Company.
The Stanhope Reopens
This is preview week at the Restaurant in the Stanhope Hotel, East 81st Street and Fifth Avenue.
Scott Cohen, the new executive chef, is putting the finishing touches on his American menu prior to the restaurant's official reopening on Saturday evening.
The dining room, now on two levels, with a view of Fifth Avenue, has a less formal look and serves lunch and dinner, with dinner entrees from $17.50 to $25.
That's Italian!
This evening, Tony May's Hostaria and Gastronomia will open in Port Chester, N.Y., at 25 South Regent Street.
Mr.
May, who owns San Domenico in Manhattan, has every Italian dining trend covered in his new restaurant and catering shop, including a vast antipasto display, designer pizzas, family-style platters and old-fashioned comfort food like spaghetti and meatballs.
There is even a bank of television sets tuned to news and sports over the bar.
For those whose idea of a spectator sport is watching chefs flinging pizza dough in the air, video cameras will also bring that activity to the screen.
A Tavern or Two or Three
Tavern (of one sort or another) is definitely the hot restaurant name.
Mrs.
Park's Tavern, a lower-priced spinoff of New York's Park Avenue Cafe, has just opened in the Doubletree Guest Quarters, in Chicago just off Michigan Avenue.
In January, a Chicago clone of Park Avenue Cafe is also to open in the adjacent space.
Alan Stillman, the president of the New York Restaurant Group, which owns the restaurants, said that there were plans to open Park Avenue Cafes in Philadelphia and Boston.
White Truffles for Dinner
On Nov. 29 at 7 P.M., Ristorante Barolo, 398 West Broadway (near Prince Street), is holding a five-course white truffle dinner paired with wines from the Piedmont region of Italy.
The cost of the dinner is $100 a person.
Reservations: (212) 226-2055.
Sweet Truffles for Dessert
Speaking of truffles, the chocolate variety is much in evidence this fall.
A menu of chocolate desserts and drinks, including truffles to nibble, is served on Friday and Saturday evenings from 6 to midnight in the Lobby Lounge at the Four Seasons Hotel, 57 East 57th Street.
At Mark's Restaurant in the Mark Hotel, East 77th Street and Madison Avenue, a teatime all-you-can-eat chocolate menu is served every afternoon from 3 to 5:30.
And Tavern on the Green, at West 67th Street and Central Park West, now serves desserts that have been featured in Chocolatier magazine.


Algo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maurice Robert Smith; Balloon Unit Commander, 100
Maurice Robert Smith, who commanded an Army balloon unit in World War I, died on Oct. 30th at his home in Lake Wales, Fla.
He had turned 100 on July 4.
Mr. Smith had been in declining health for the last six months, his family said.


Corrections
The Peripherals column in Science Times yesterday, about an integrated software program called Clarisworks, misstated the telephone number of its maker, the Claris Corporation.
The number is (800) 325-2747.


Albany's Kingmaker Now Sets Sights on Giuliani
Even before the voters' verdict was in and his success sealed in New York's shadow slugfest of political surrogates, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was viewing Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as a driven enemy certain to persist beyond their bruising gubernatorial conflict.
"He's a master," the Senator conceded of the Mayor yesterday morning, their feud deepening with each crossover vote instigated by the Republican Mayor's shocking endorsement of the Democratic Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, in his knife-edged defeat by George E. Pataki.


New York Results - The Race for Attorney General
Results at 1:30 A.M.
RPTNG.
Burstein
Vacco
Albany
45.6
31,387
35,729
Allegany
100.0
3,552
9,127
Bronx
100.0
119,578
39,119
Brooklyn
99.1
223,532
101,196
Broome
99.5
22,838
40,752
Catargus
100.0
7,687
15,822
Cayuga
100.0
7,363
14,483
Chataqua
100.0
15,511
25,011
Chemung
100.0
8,197
16,535
Chenang
100.0
3,990
10,161
Clinton
100.0
9,267
10,666
Columbia
100.0
8,806
13,104
Cortland
100.0
4,944
7,816
Delaware
98.4
4,420
9,443
Dutchess
97.9
28,767
46,079
Erie
98.2
104,099
197,228
Essex
100.0
3,825
7,306
Franklin
98.0
5,272
5,813
Fulton
100.0
5,237
10,030
Genesee
100.0
5,122
12,229
Greene
0.0
0
0
Hamilton
100.0
767
2,011
Herkimer
100.0
6,321
12,215
Jefferson
100.0
8,127
14,849
Lewis
100.0
2,080
4,826
Livingston
100.0
6,620
11,573
Madison
100.0
7,566
12,185
Manhattan
100.0
253,789
59,744
Monroe
99.1
97,731
114,447
Montgomery
95.9
5,622
9,026
Nassau
43.1
76,398
100,764
Niagara
100.0
22,064
43,352
Oneida
100.0
26,982
45,449
Onondaga
98.6
67,286
78,503
Ontario
100.0
14,341
16,159
Orange
100.0
28,209
46,079
Orleans
100.0
3,342
7,835
Oswego
96.8
11,528
19,467
Otsego
100.0
6,403
10,944
Putnam
100.0
9,610
17,866
Queens
99.9
198,565
121,418
Rensselaer
100.0
24,307
50,315
Rockland
100.0
35,434
42,863
StLawrence
0.0
0
0
Saratoga
99.4
24,408
40,185
Schenectdy
100.0
23,917
29,050
Schoharie
100.0
3,566
6,671
Schuyler
100.0
1,812
3,571
Seneca
100.0
3,691
5,900
StatenIsl
99.1
33,577
54,543
Steuben
98.8
7,651
18,737
Suffolk
96.9
134,504
205,054
Sullivan
92.1
7,680
9,738
Tioga
100.0
4,355
11,301
Tompkins
100.0
12,828
11,065
Ulster
98.8
23,741
31,734
Warren
100.0
6,069
11,957
Washington
100.0
5,580
11,088
Wayne
100.0
8,251
17,370
Wstchester
92.8
119,110
120,896
Wyoming
100.039
3,024
8,200
Yates
100.0
2,334
4,448
Totals
93.0
1,962,584
2,071,047


Cincinnati Milacron Inc.(CMZ,N) reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 8


Judges Err on Whitewater
The behavior of Judge David Sentelle, which put a cloud over the appointment of a new independent prosecutor in the Whitewater case during August, was bad in itself.
But the justification for that behavior now offered up by Chief Judge Harry Edwards of the U.S.
Court of Appeals is equally appalling.
Judge Sentelle headed a three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals that appointed Kenneth Starr, a former judge and U.S.
Solicitor General, as independent counsel last summer, replacing Robert Fiske.
The court, which makes the selection under the independent counsel law, decided that because Mr.
Fiske had been recommended by the Clinton Administration's Justice Department, he should be removed to avoid any possible appearance of partiality to President Clinton in the inquiry into Arkansas land dealings.


United Cos. Financial Corp.(UCFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Cold Remedies Harm the Young
FOR parents, there is no greater impulse than the desire to make their children well when they are sick.
And no illness has parents reaching for medicine more often than the common cold, a recent national survey found.
More than a third of 3-year-olds had been given an over-the-counter cough or cold drug in the month before the survey, The Journal of the American Medical Association reported earlier this fall.
The problem is that these preparations may do more harm than good.
Even those made specially for children have never been tested for safety on them, and studies show not only that these drugs do not relieve children's cold symptoms but that they can make them worse, causing side effects like drowsiness.


Who Won Where - The Races for Governor
Results at 1:35 A.M.
ALABAMA Reporting: 91 %


Upstart Lakers Control the Tempo
It was midway through the second quarter and Cedric Ceballos was still waiting.
When would the Knicks put a stop to the Lakers' wild runs up and down the court?
When would they no longer be able to go to the net with such impunity?
When would that infamous New York defense kick in?
Ceballos knew those things would happen sooner or later.
So did Nick Van Exel, his Laker teammate.
So did Del Harris, their coach.
In the meantime, the young, up-tempo Lakers were going to have a little fun.


Daniel Seacord, 73, Nuclear Physicist
Daniel Freeman Seacord, a nuclear physicist who took part in atomic tests at Los Alamos, N.M., and in the Pacific in the early 1950's, died on Saturday at Milford-Whitinsville Regional Hospital in Milford, Mass.
He was 73 and lived in Medway, Mass.
The cause was respiratory failure, his family said.


For Mail-Order Food Gifts, Sweets Top the Wish List
THIS year, this annual mail-order column has almost twice as many sweets as savories.
That is in part because there are many more mail-order desserts than there are mail-order vegetables, meat, cheese or grain dishes.
But after watching the guests at a mail-order party at my home a few months ago, it was easy to conclude that people are far more interested in sweets as gifts than they are in, say, the best buffalo-milk mozzarella or smoked fish.
They are also less discriminating about sweets than they are about any other category of food.


P.&amp;G. Official Joins Microsoft
William H. Gates turned to an expert in computers and consumer-products marketing today to fill a longstanding opening in the top management ranks of the Microsoft Corporation.
The company, based in Redmond, Wash., announced that it had appointed Robert J. Herbold, a senior vice president at the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, as its executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Northeast
CONNECTICUT
Joseph I. Lieberman, one of only a half-dozen Senate Democrats with seemingly secure seats, trounced his challenger, Gerald Labriola, a retired pediatrician and former State Senator who made little headway against the popular incumbent.
Mr.
Labriola had promised to serve only one term if he won.
With the retirement of Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the race for governor was a muddled four-way contest won by John G. Rowland, a former Republican Representative.
His opponents were William E. Curry Jr., a Democrat who is the state comptroller; Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark of Mr.
Weicker's A Connecticut Party, and an anti-tax crusader, Tom Scott, running as the long-shot Independence Party candidate.
Mr.
Rowland overcame a late setback when it was disclosed that he had tried to suppress a police report about a marital dispute.


Midwest
ILLINOIS
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the 18-term Chicago Democrat who stepped down as the head of the Ways and Means Committee after his indictment earlier this year on corruption charges, lost to a relative unknown, Michael P. Flanagan.
Mr.
Rostenkowski had run a low-profile campaign and, sensing his vulnerability, the national Republican Party last week sent his campaign more than $50,000 for an advertising blitz.
Gov.
Jim Edgar, a Republican in his first term, trounced the state's comptroller, Dawn Clark Netsch, whose campaign never got off the ground after she staged an upset victory in the primary last spring.


Twyla Tharp to Perform
Twyla Tharp and her dancers are to perform at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in mid-January in a program called "Twyla Tharp Red, White and Blues New Works." The new dances were recently presented as works in progress at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
They are performed to 1950's doo-wop, excerpts from the soundtrack of "The Civil War" and music by Duke Ellington, Bartok, Gluck, the Drummers of Burundi and Wynton Marsalis.
The company of eight dancers is to perform at the academy's Opera House on Jan. 16 to 21 and 23 to 28.
Tickets are $15, $20 and $25.
Ticketmaster: (212) 307-4100.
Information: (718) 636-4129.


As G.O.P. Gains, Clinton Mood Dampens
President Clinton did not stop campaigning until midafternoon today.
But even as he urged radio listeners around the country to get out and vote, there was an air of resignation in his voice, and at the White House tonight the mood edged toward despair.
As it became clear that Republicans were making substantial gains in the Senate, Mr.
Clinton kept a public silence.
Aides said the President had retreated to his private quarters in the White House to monitor the returns with his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, and a few advisers, and was making telephone calls to winners and losers in his party.
He is scheduled to hold a news conference on Wednesday afternoon at which he is expected to say he recognizes voters' desire for change.


Girl Reports Rape In School Bathroom
A 14-year-old girl reported that she was raped on Monday in a bathroom of George Washington High School in upper Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The girl told the police her attacker was wearing a ski mask and was hiding inside a stall of a bathroom of the school when she entered at 10 A.M. on Monday, a police spokeswoman, Officer Bernadette Rainy, said.
The police did not know whether the attacker was a student at the school.
Officer Rainey said the victim went home without telling school officials.
When her mother came home from work on Monday evening, she took the girl to Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.


For Rangers, the Cup Wasn't a Pot of Gold
Winning the Stanley Cup did not make the Rangers profitable last season.
Documents prepared by Viacom for its sale of Madison Square Garden estimate a $7.7 million loss for the Rangers for the year ended Dec. 31, 1994.
But the figure includes revenue and profits from only the first two playoff series.


Results - New York: The Race for Governor
% RPTG.
Cuomo
Pataki
Golisano
Other
'94 N.Y.C.
91
942,565
370,128
14,900
14,191
Bronx
100
154,669
46,504
2,087
2,519
Brooklyn
89
256,046
99,859
3,494
3,458
Manhattan
99
284,025
62,741
3,603
3,075
Queens
88
214,309
122,900
4,505
4,068
Staten Island
70
33,516
38,124
1,211
1,071
'94 Suburbs
74
376,231
463,220
16,472
17,244
Nassau
57
116,204
131,234
4,184
4,535
Rockland
100
37,832
48,720
1,517
1,445
Suffolk
67
95,479
148,005
6,665
7,014
Westchester
93
126,716
135,261
4,106
4,250
'94 Upstate
86
659,001
1,257,902
153,561
40,668
Albany
56
36,839
32,329
3,177
1,142
Allegany
100
2,606
10,581
1,000
349
Broome
72
14,757
30,608
4,676
947
Cattaraugus
100
5,851
18,768
1,463
802
Cayuga
100
5,795
18,560
1,689
722
Chataqua
100
12,505
30,845
1,692
800
Chemung
100
7,771
19,833
2,050
686
Chenango
100
3,071
12,090
971
277
Clinton
70
6,559
9,740
934
403
Columbia
67
4,609
9,989
589
43
Cortland
100
3,344
10,116
813
378
Delaware
98
2,800
12,546
636
212
Dutchess
97
17,153
40,689
2,107
1,101
Erie
73
100,460
126,456
10,820
5,019
Essex
62
1,674
18,504
255
171
Franklin
100
5,088
7,992
612
400
Fulton
100
3,988
12,786
779
324
Genesee
100
4,881
13,001
2,121
464
Greene
23
1,109
3,189
208
93
Hamilton
91
445
2,220
100
66
Herkimer
16
33
3,034
212
58
Jefferson
100
8,305
15,361
3,209
858
Lewis
100
1,513
6,106
546
182
Livingston
100
5,544
12,320
3,290
439
Madison
100
5,278
15,986
1,285
481
Monroe
99
87,280
107,525
50,207
4,494
Montgomery
88
4,517
10,436
739
287
Niagara
99
21,884
44,033
4,512
1,256
Oneida
100
22,330
55,878
4,666
2,032
Onondaga
99
52,497
101,490
9,192
3,012
Ontario
100
7,872
17,896
5,027
499
Orange
79
18,939
43,833
1,904
1,354
Orleans
100
2,714
8,709
1,568
188
Oswego
100
7,435
29,055
2,271
713
Otsego
100
5,159
13,800
1,019
268
Putnam
77
6,442
16,710
434
333
Rensselaer
100
19,913
31,834
2,869
1,123
Rockland
100
37,832
48,720
1,517
1,445
StLawrence
0
0
0
0
0
Saratoga
99
22,045
45,721
3,722
1,550
Schenectdy
53
13,516
19,007
1,908
647
Schoharie
100
2,819
7,787
518
162
Schuyler
100
1,424
4,489
404
128
Seneca
100
2,485
7,754
1,033
212
Steuben
80
4,636
19,947
1,594
500
Sullivan
100
6,299
14,943
550
370
Tioga
100
3,391
13,070
1,560
407
Tompkins
100
11,806
13,332
1,543
429
Ulster
99
19,093
40,407
1,988
1,122
Warren
5
250
988
55
39
Washington
100
4,216
13,612
945
628
Wayne
100
5,791
18,766
4,881
627
Wyoming
100
2,760
9,158
953
298
Yates
100
1,678
5,353
748
128
Totals
85
1,939,965
2,042,530
183,416
70,658


Voters Cry: Enough, Mr. Cuomo!
In the end, even his friends agreed, Mario Matthew Cuomo simply strutted and fretted too long on the great stage of his state, and yesterday, with the pungent irrevocability of the Latin he loves to quote, the voters finally ordered: "Exit."
Long before it became clear last spring that the Governor's presumed opponent would be an unknown State Senator, it was clear that his toughest opponent would be his well-known self -- his untaken Presidential campaign plane, his unachieved oratory and his unsparing presence astride an electorate weary of his renunciations.


Cuomo Loss Hands Mayor Unsure Future In Own Party
Having staked his political future on a gamble that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo would win a fourth term, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani suffered an enormous defeat last night as the Republican he had assailed as a captive of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and a menace to the downstate region was elected as New York's next governor.
While many of Mr.
Giuliani's former Republican supporters celebrated George E. Pataki's victory at the New York Hilton, Mr.
Giuliani remained closeted with his closest advisers blocks away in the Sheraton New York Hotel suite of the Liberal Party leader, Raymond B. Harding, whose party and ballot line he might now need more than ever.


Downtown Artist Goes Uptown, but Not Her Art
Kiki Smith sits cross-legged on the living room floor in her sunny Lower East Side apartment, calmly cutting doily shapes from yards of gossamer-thin paper and talking about life.
She ignores her cat, Ginzer, curled up on a corner of the paper she is cutting, snoring.
She is also oblivious to the churning of the fax machine, the constant ringing of the telephone and the loud cooing of the doves and finches that live in cages along one windowsill.
"I'm making as much stuff as I can," said the 40-year-old Ms.
Smith, her voice high-pitched and childlike.
"Then I'm going to put everything in garbage bags, take them on the subway and see how they look in the gallery. When you get things out of the house, they always look better."


Making Bread


New Sensations Cross Path of an Old One
Talk about a coincidence.
Just when it seemed women's tennis was about to doze off because of the thin mix of talent at the top, with every other final a rehash of the tired Steffi Graf-Arantxa Sanchez Vicario rivalry, the sport was revived by the October debut of a pair of 14-year-olds, Martina Hingis and Venus Williams.


California Pregnancy Study Finds Healthier Outcomes for Refugees
SUPERIOR educations and higher family incomes do not necessarily result in healthier pregnancies and healthier babies.
A new study in San Diego County has found that immigrants and refugees from Mexico and Southeast Asia have better pregnancy results than native-born American women, despite their often extreme poverty and difficulties adjusting to a foreign culture.
The researchers attributed their findings to characteristics of American life that include unhealthy eating habits, weak social support and excessive use of alcohol and drugs.
The findings were presented last week at the annual meeting of the American Public Health Association in Washington by Dr.
Ruben G. Rumbaut, a sociologist at Michigan State University in East Lansing.


U.N. Approves Tribunal on Rwandan Atrocities
The Security Council voted today to create an international tribunal to try people accused of atrocities in Rwanda even though the Rwandan delegate voted against the measure, complaining that it lacked a death penalty and only covered crimes committed in 1994.
The vote was 13 to 1 with China abstaining.
The resolution skirted the death penalty issue because over 70 countries prohibit capital punishment and any resolution that included it would have met opposition.


Songs From Vienna
The New York Festival of Song is to present a program called "Vienna: Turn of the Centuries," on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Cheryl Parrish (soprano), Susanne Mentzer (mezzo-soprano) and William Sharp (baritone), accompanied by Steven Blier and Michael Barrett, are to sing works from the years just before and after 1900, with a few samples of Haydn and Beethoven from the turn of the preceding century.
Works by Mahler, Richard Strauss, Schoenberg, Berg, Wolf, Pfitzner and Zemlinsky are on the program.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 916-1100.


Rogers Signs for 9 Years
CARLOS ROGERS, a 6-foot-11-inch forward-center, signed a nine-year contract with the Golden State Warriors yesterday, leaving only one first-round National Basketball Association draft pick unsigned.
Financial terms were not available, but the agreement provides Rogers with an option to become a restricted free agent after his third season.
The 23-year-old Rogers, from Tennessee State, practiced with the team yesterday and was expected to be in uniform when the Warriors played Miami in their home opener last night.
The Warriors acquired the rights to Rogers from Seattle along with RICKY PIERCE and two 1995 second-round draft picks.
The Warriors gave up SARUNAS MARCIULIONIS and BYRON HOUSTON.


Promise to Repeal Income Tax Helps Rowland and G.O.P. to Apparent Victory
John G. Rowland, a Republican who has vowed to repeal the state's three-year-old income tax, was elected governor of Connecticut yesterday with little more than a third of the vote, defeating William E. Curry Jr., a Democrat, and two other major candidates.
Mr.
Rowland's narrow victory puts a Republican in the state's top office for the first time in two decades.
And it means that an income tax introduced in 1991 -- the major legacy of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. -- may once again be the focus of debate in the State Legislature.


At Salomon, Trader Earns $30 Million
Even though Salomon Brothers is losing more money than any other large securities firm, one of its traders is perhaps the highest paid on Wall Street.
Robert M. Stavis, a vice president in the company's New York-based bond arbitrage group, will be paid $30 million this year, according to Investment Dealer's Digest, a securities industry trade publication.


Manager's Dream Is Lost In the Sun
Mike Easler came to Puerto Rico a couple of weeks ago to nurture his managerial aspirations in this island's winter leagues much the way he had nurtured his playing career during 10 winters of play here.
But what had once been so kind an experience for the effervescent Easler turned pitilessly cruel a day ago.
For Easler, having managed all of four games, was fired.
The Caguas Criollos sent the part-time Baptist minister and full-time hitting coach for the Boston Red Sox back to the States with his hopes and faith in the game in tatters.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Dual Focus In Concert of Remembrance  Cathedral of St. John the Divine
For the last five years, the Interfaith Committee of Remembrance has been recalling the Holocaust with concerts at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
This year the event focused more narrowly -- on the liquidation of the Lodz ghetto in Poland in 1944 -- but also more broadly, looking beyond the Holocaust to remember the murder of 1.5 million Armenians by the Ottoman Turks in 1915.


Real Estate; A new mall in downtown Indianapolis is a monument to public-private partnerships.
PASSERS-BY could easily miss the $325 million Circle Centre mall in downtown Indianapolis.
Halfway through construction, it looks more like a turn-of-the-century streetscape than the standard mall found in suburbia.
But more than an example of harmonious urban architecture, the center, which is scheduled to open next September, is a monument to public-private partnerships, which have had mixed results in this city.


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: MAN IN THE NEWS -- John Grosvenor Rowland; Behind the Issues, a Yearning for Lost Innocence
In his victory speech on primary night two months ago, John G. Rowland talked about the good old days in his hometown of Waterbury, a time not so long ago when children had the run of not just their neighborhoods, but the entire city.
In his neighborhood, he recalled, he and his friends hopped a fence so often to cut across one family's yard that the father finally did something about it: he put a gate in the fence.
"Now," Mr.
Rowland said, "they'd probably call the police."


A Golden Boy Bumps Into Reality
"When I was in high school. . . .," Ron Powlus began, and his mind was temporarily removed from the here and now of Notre Dame's unexpectedly painful football season.
In high school, he was the quarterback of the Berwick Bulldogs, free of significant injury, a record-setting leader of a team that never endured more than three defeats in a season and was considered a national champion in a perfect senior year.
Life then might seem simpler in hindsight, particularly when he recalls the days when Abby, his golden retriever, was just about the only one who did not care where he was going to college.
But Powlus had not yet been considered worthy of the Heisman Trophy, and he had not yet been asked about his departure from college to the National Football League, and his collarbone had not yet snapped -- twice -- and the nasty electronic mail had not yet started appearing, and problems could be solved more simply.


Barry Rebounds From Disgrace to Win Again in Washington
Former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. last night regained the office he had left in disgrace almost five years ago, but not without widespread defections of black voters to his Republican opponent, Carol Schwartz.
At 12:48 A.M., with 73 percent of the precincts reporting, the vote was:
Barry . . . 54%
Schwartz . . . 44%
The margin was enough to force Mrs.
Schwartz to concede shortly after 11 P.M. last night.


Sarajevo Is Hit by Artillery Fire in Worst Attack Since February
In the worst bombardment of the Bosnian capital since a NATO ultimatum in February, Sarajevo was hit by 10 to 15 artillery rounds late this afternoon, probably fired from Bosnian Serb positions, a United Nations spokesman said here tonight.
Four people, three of them children, were killed in the shelling and in sniper attacks, and six others were wounded.


Improving on Perfection
BROWN sugar and sweet potatoes are a natural combination in American cooking.
The idea of flavoring them with rosemary comes from Michel Richard, a chef who says that rosemary and sweet potatoes are as natural in France as brown sugar and sweet potatoes are here.
Sweet Potatoes With Brown Sugar and Rosemary
20 ounces sweet potatoes  1 teaspoon dried rosemary  1 1/2 tablespoons packed brown sugar  3 tablespoons light sour cream  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Peel potatoes, and cook in water to cover in covered pot until tender, 12 to 15 minutes.
2.
Drain potatoes, and place in food processor with crumbled rosemary, brown sugar, sour cream, salt and pepper; puree the mixture.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 295 calories, 2 grams fat, 7 milligrams cholesterol, 175 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 65 grams carbohydrate.
Grilled Lamb on Spinach
8 ounces boneless leg of lamb  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin  16 ounces fresh loose spinach or 10-ounce package fresh spinach  4 ounces fresh mushrooms  1 large clove garlic  1 teaspoon olive oil  2 tablespoons sherry vinegar  1 1/2 teaspoons Dijon mustard.
1.
Wash, dry and trim fat from lamb.
Cut into half-inch-wide strips.
Sprinkle with pepper and cumin on both sides.
2. Wash and trim stems from spinach; wash, trim and slice mushrooms; mince garlic.
3.
Prepare stove-top grill, and grill the lamb for just a few minutes on both sides, until meat is medium rare.
4.
Heat oil in nonstick pan until it is hot; reduce heat to medium high, and saute mushrooms and garlic for about 2 minutes.
5. In serving bowl mix vinegar and mustard.
6.
Add the spinach to the mushrooms, and cover; cook about 2 minutes, until spinach has wilted but is still green.
7. Drain spinach, stir into vinegar and mustard mixture and season with pepper.
8. Arrange spinach on dinner plates, and top with lamb.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 190 calories, 9 grams fat, 55 milligrams cholesterol, 310 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 4 grams carbohydrate.


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: NEW YORK GOVERNOR MAN IN THE NEWS: George Elmer Pataki; Soft but Forceful Steps Lead to Paradoxical Victory in the Governor's Race
State Senator George E. Pataki, who was elected New York's 55th Governor last night, is almost a millionaire, yet he comes off as homespun and unpretentious: He says "gosh" a lot and is so forgetful of his appearance that on a recent campaign trip he mismatched one suit's blue jacket with another's gray trousers, and then had to change pants in a hotel alcove.
He is a graduate of Yale College and Columbia Law School and can argue points like a Wall Street litigator, yet he cries at one of his favorite films, "Old Yeller," and carries a dollar signed for good luck by the late Lubavitcher Grand Rabbi, Menachem M. Schneerson.


Carrying Today's Ideas To 14th-Century World
Withdrawing from the medieval world to devote herself to the Virgin Mary, a young woman named Christine happily chooses to be forever walled into a tiny room adjoining the church.
As the last stone is put in place, "Anchoress" creates a chilling sense of entrapment while making the young woman's sense of relief and escape clear.
Now she won't have to marry the reeve, the belligerent overseer of the manor where Christine, her sister and their parents sleep in a single bed in their thatched cottage.
At times "Anchoress," an eccentric, beautifully photographed black-and-white film, offers an eerie immersion in a distant world.
In his first feature, the English director Chris Newby deftly carries our century's attitudes about spiritual freedom and feminism into an artfully constructed past in which such attitudes came from the Devil.
The story is based on scant historical references to the real Anchoress of Shere.
Two letters written on a church wall in the English countryside tell of Christine Carpenter, who escaped from the world only to long for it again.
The film's Christine (Natalie Morse) is like an emotional time traveler, a bridge between our attitudes and those of the 14th century.


McCall's Gets New Editor
Sally Koslow, editor of Mary Emmerling's Country, was named editor in chief of McCall's yesterday.
She replaces Kate White, who became editor in chief of Redbook last month.
Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, which acquired Mary Emmerling's Country and McCall's as part of a group purchase from The New York Times Company earlier this year, announced yesterday that it would close Mary Emmerling's Country after its December issue, saying the magazine had fallen short of sales goals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ISRAEL TO SPEED SELF-RULE TALKS  Moving to defend Yasir Arafat against challenges from his Islamic foes, Israel agreed to pick up the pace of its sluggish talks on expanding self-rule beyond the Gaza Strip and the Jericho enclave to include the entire West Bank.
A10  CIVILIANS KILLED IN SARAJEVO  Four civilians died and six were wounded in the heaviest artillery bombardment of the Bosnian capital since February.
United Nations commanders ruled out military retalation by NATO.
But they noted that tensions in Sarajevo seem once again dangerously high.
A8


G.O.P. Wins County Job
A Republican was elected Essex County Executive tonight after the Democrats were unable to recover from a divisive primary that left them with little time and money to battle for a powerful post that had traditionally been theirs.
The Republican, James Treffinger, the Mayor of Verona and the lone Republican on the County Board of Freeholders, rolled up a solid margin of victory -- in a historically Democratic county -- over Cardell Cooper, the Mayor of East Orange.


Architecture Historian Linked Us to Lost Era
To the Editor:
Re your obituary of Richard Krautheimer, the architectural historian (Nov. 3): He was a link to the now very remote world of Europe before World War I. The education of that time and place gave him a humanistic erudition almost unimaginable today.
For him, as for so many, the ferment of Weimar gave way to expulsion and the death of many family members in the Holocaust.


Saks Cleared Of Customers As Fire Erupts In Basement
A fire that firefighters described as suspicious broke out in the basement of Saks Fifth Avenue yesterday afternoon, filling the building with smoke and forcing the evacuation of the 70-year-old department store.
The fire apparently began in two large trash bins in the basement of the store, on Fifth Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets.
"Mostly it stayed in the Dumpsters, so what damage there is is smoke damage," said Firefighter Jack Thompson, a Fire Department spokesman.


Editors' Note
An article on Sept. 20 about new Federal requirements for drug and alcohol tests for transit workers included a statement, attributed to a New Jersey Transit official, suggesting that new alcohol tests will probably turn up a substantial number of people working under the influence, especially in rail operations.
In letters dated Sept. 20 and Oct. 18, officials of New Jersey Transit say that the remarks of Elizabeth Schneider, their director of medical services, were misinterpreted.
They say she was talking about potential problems in the rail industry in general, not about New Jersey Transit, and that she did not characterize the numbers as substantial in any case.


Nothing Devilish In Halloween Origins
To the Editor:
As a witch, a priestess and a practitioner of the ancient pre-Christian religion with which you take such liberties in "Consider the Pumpkin," your Oct. 31 Halloween editorial, I must protest not only your gross religious insensitivity but your scholarship as well.


In Mozambique and Other Lands, Children Fight the Wars
In the rebel camps where Alberto Matevui spent five years of his childhood, he says the commanders usually called upon the young boys to perform the executions.
The victim might be an uncooperative hostage, or an adult guerrilla who had disobeyed an order, or a child soldier who had tried to escape.


News Corp.(NWS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MFS Communications Co.(MFST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guatemala: Change the Message
For 40 years Guatemala has endured a civil war that, like many Central American conflicts, has been part cold-war proxy battle, part genuine social revolution, marked by disappearances, extrajudicial killings, torture, secret prisons and impunity for hideous human rights abuses.
As in other such conflicts, the United States' intelligence services have played a highly questionable role.
No one knows how many innocent Guatemalans have been killed in this bloody conflict.
But now U.S. attention is focused on one of its victims, a guerrilla who married an articulate American lawyer.
Jennifer Harbury is determined to force the Guatemalan military to produce her husband, dead or alive.


French Police Arrest 95 Suspected of Links to Algerian Militants
In the largest crackdown to date on Islamic militants active within France's Muslim population, the French police today arrested 95 people reportedly linked to Algeria's Armed Islamic Group in raids on homes and Muslim associations in and around Paris.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua said the police operation confirmed the "implantation" in France of a clandestine network of Muslim militants who were determined to carry out terrorist activities from Europe.


Defying Anti-Incumbent Mood, Moynihan Wins Easily
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a three-term incumbent who is among the most influential members of Congress, was re-elected by a wide margin yesterday over his Republican challenger, Bernadette Castro, according to unofficial returns early this morning.
Mr.
Moynihan, a Democrat, defeated Ms.
Castro, a longtime Republican fund-raiser who was running for public office for the first time, by a ratio of about 3 to 2.
Henry F. Hewes, the Right to Life candidate, was a distant third.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Fostering Intimacy In Folk and Art Songs  Kaye Playhouse
Perhaps the most appealing aspect of Jorma Hynninen's art song recital on Monday evening was a sense of intimacy that made his interpretations seem like confidences between friends.
Perhaps the Kaye Playhouse deserves some of the credit: its design puts listeners close enough to the stage to catch even the subtlest turns of phrase.
But of course, if the singer does not provide those subtleties, the hall is irrelevant.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sluggish Sampras Wins  Playing on antibiotics, Pete Sampras awoke from a slumber when pride was on the line and beat the local favorite, Johan Van Herck, to advance yesterday in the European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
The top-seeded Sampras allowed the 157th-ranked player to take him to a first-set tie breaker, but then Van Herck could not handle the pressure play of Sampras.
After winning the tie breaker, 7-2, the sluggish defending champion did just enough to take the second set at 6-4.
"I've had my better days," said Sampras, the world's top-ranked player, who is suffering from a throat infection.
"I feel depleted and I haven't eaten too much." Tomorrow, he will face Richey Reneberg, who defeated David Wheaton, 7-6 (7-1), 6-7 (7-9), 6-1.
Jaime Yzaga of Peru, seeded eighth, beat the German qualifier Arne Thoms, 6-2, 7-6 (7-1), ending a string of upsets that had sent two seeded players home on the first day.
The tournament lost two top 20 players Monday when Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, seeded fourth, and Jason Stoltenberg of Australia, No. 5, lost in straight sets. (AP)


Economic Data Help To Lift Bonds
A successful start to a quarterly refinancing and two weaker-than-expected economic reports helped to lift bond prices yesterday for the first time in seven sessions.
Even gold prices rebounding from a 12-week low and a weaker dollar could not dampen the rally.
Investors instead focused on the Treasury's $17 billion three-year note auction.


EMC Bets on a PC Storage System
When the EMC Corporation, a leading maker of computer data-storage equipment, recently expanded its manufacturing operation, employees at the new site in Milford, Mass., discovered signs on the walls still bearing the name of the building's former owner, Prime Computer, a once-hot computer maker that is no longer in business.
At the employees' suggestion, Michael Ruettgers, the company's president and chief executive, decided to leave the Prime signs in place -- "to remind us of what could happen," Mr.
Ruettgers recalled.


Hall of Fame Nominees
KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR, whose skyhooks and dunks helped him become the N.B.A.'s leading career scorer, was among nine men and two women nominated yesterday for the Basketball Hall of Fame.
As Lew Alcindor, Abdul-Jabbar led U.C.L.A. to three N.C.A.A. championships.
In the N.B.A., he led the Milwaukee Bucks to their only title and the Los Angeles Lakers to five.


Mets Promote Dave Howard
As part of a reorganization that represents a reduction in upper management, the Mets announced yesterday that they are promoting Dave Howard, the club's general counsel, to the position of vice president for business affairs.
In his new position, Howard will take over some of the duties formerly handled by both Jack Diller and Ed Lynch, both of whom have left the Mets for other positions.
Diller served as the head of the Mets' business operations until he left to assume the presidency of the San Antonio Spurs last summer.
Lynch, a former assistant to general manager Joe McIlvaine, was named the new general manager of the Chicago Cubs last month.


Arrest in Abduction Of Boy From His Bed
A construction worker has been charged in the kidnapping of a 6-year-old Fairfax County, Va., boy who was taken from his bedroom in the middle of the night last week, the police said.
The man, Edward Charles Wingo of Damascus, Md., was arrested by Montgomery County police after the boy was able to describe the car the kidnapper drove and the house to which he had been taken, said Officer Evelyn Cahalen of the Montgomery County police.
The child was found the next morning near a cemetery in Rockville, Md.


New Faces In the Senate
MISSOURI  John Ashcroft
Republican, 52.
A lawyer and gospel singer, Mr.
Ashcroft was elected governor in Missouri in 1984 after serving as State Attorney General, won re-election handily in 1988, but was barred from a third term by state law.
He lost his bid last year to become national Republican Party chairman.


A Frightening Portrait of a Threat to the Species
THE COMING PLAGUE  Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance
By Laurie Garrett
Illustrated. 750 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
"Everybody knows that pestilences have a way of recurring in the world," Albert Camus wrote in his 1948 novel "The Plague," "yet somehow we find it hard to believe in ones that crash down on our heads from a blue sky."


Yankees Get Patterson
Nine months after the Yankees acquired left-hander TERRY MULHOLLAND and a player to be named from the Philadelphia Phillies for BOBBY MUNOZ and two minor leaguers, they received right-handed reliever JEFF PATTERSON as the additional player yesterday.
Patterson, 26, who was placed on New York's 40-man roster, was 6-4 with a 4.60 earned run average and 5 saves for Class AAA Scranton-Wilkes Barre last year in 52 games.


All Dressed Up: Turkey and Stuffing Rolled Into Shape
NOVEMBER, the month of Thanksgiving, is truly "turkey month" for me.
This is when I can usually find terrific deals on fresh turkey in all forms, including whole turkey, breasts, legs and thighs, as well as turkey cutlets and ground turkey.
If there are special sales on fresh turkey in your area, buy it now, then double-wrap and freeze it for use over the next several months, when the price of turkey will double or triple at the market.
The piece de resistance on this menu is a turkey roulade, which is made of boned, stuffed and rolled turkey thighs.
This is such a substantial main course, especially when served as it is here with a hearty broccoli and rice etuvee (meaning braised), that only a simple green salad and a light fruit dessert need accompany it.


Gasoline Prices to Rise in Many Areas
New Federal clean-air rules will force drastic changes in the recipe used for gasoline in most urban areas in the next few weeks, and refiners and distributors are struggling to get supplies of the reformulated gasoline into place.
Some analysts are predicting spot shortages and sudden price surges.
"We're going to have the biggest change in gasoline chemistry ever, even bigger than what we saw when we went to unleaded gas in 1973 and 1974," said William Berman, chief environmental affairs lobbyist of the American Automobile Association.


Generation X Makes Its Mark
IN this season of heightened cynicism, how will today's young and relatively innocent first-time voters come to remember their political initiation?
How in years to come will they recall the time they cast their first ballot as grown men and women, as candidates who vied for their vote were mostly casting stones?


Vengeful Glee (and Sweetness) at Gingrich's Victory Party
At the Newt Gingrich victory party tonight at a mall outside Atlanta, the air was filled with vengeful glee.
The master of ceremonies, Sean Hannity, a conservative talk show host on local radio, made fun of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo losing his race in New York, sneeringly pronouncing his name "Coo-mo." Mr.
Hannity joked that a Federal Express package had arrived with some Tylenol for President Clinton, because he was about to "feel the pain."


Ailing Klaus Tennstedt Puts Down His Baton
The conductor Klaus Tennstedt has announced his retirement from the concert stage because of poor health.
Mr.
Tennstedt, 68, has fought throat cancer and has had two hip replacements in recent years.
He canceled performances frequently because of his health problems.
But his probing interpretations of the 19th-century repertory -- Mahler in particular -- made his increasingly rare appearances notable events.
Officially, Mr.
Tennstedt is retiring only from public performances, and at EMI Classics, the company for which he had been recording since 1977, there is tentative talk of his continuing to make records.
Peter Alward, the company's vice president for artists and repertory at EMI Classics, said he hoped that Mr.
Tennstedt's "undimmed musical appetite might tempt him into the less tiring atmosphere of the recording studio."


Publicity Firm Expands Base
Dan Klores Associates, a Manhattan-based public relations company, said yesterday that it was forming a new division, Dan Klores Entertainment, to expand the company's activities with entertainment industry clients.
The company's clients include Jay Leno, Garry Shandling, Lorne Michaels and Brillstein/Grey Entertainment.


New York Voters End a Democratic Era
George Elmer Pataki, a lanky lawyer-legislator from the Hudson Valley who has promised to slash income taxes and restore the death penalty, was elected the 53d Governor of New York yesterday, ending 20 years of Democratic rule in Albany and toppling Mario M. Cuomo, a legendary figure in state and national politics.
In other New York races, H. Carl McCall became the first black New Yorker to win statewide elected office, defeating Herbert London in the race for state comptroller.
Mr.
McCall, a former State Senator, investment banker and president of the New York City Board of Education, was appointed Comptroller by the Legislature last year to fill a vacancy left by the midterm retirement of Edward V. Regan.


Simpson Industries(SMPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $400 million of 8.625 percent debentures due in 2004.
Redeemable on or after Nov. 10, 1999, the issue is priced at 99.984375 to yield 8.627 percent.


Texas Elects George W. While Florida Rejects Jeb
George W. Bush, the eldest son of former President George Bush, ousted Gov.
Ann W. Richards on Tuesday, heralding historic Republican gains in the nation's second-largest state.
But his younger brother Jeb, hoping for a similar coup in Florida, was turned back by the Democratic incumbent, Lawton Chiles.
The Bush victory over the Democratic Governor here, coupled with a crushing triumph by an incumbent Republican Senator, Kay Bailey Hutchison, brings about the first time in Texas history that the party has held the Governor's office and both Senate seats.
Republicans also made major gains in Congressional races.


Gov. Wilson's Comeback Ends in Re-election Victory
Pete Wilson was elected to a second term as California's governor tonight by a commanding margin over his challenger, Kathleen Brown, the State Treasurer.
But it remained unclear whether the powerful tide of support for Mr.
Wilson ran deep enough to also spell victory for Proposition 187, the highly divisive voter initiative that would deny to undocumented immigrants most government services, including schooling and nonemergency health care.


Legent Corp.(LGNT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In America; The Soap Opera Machine
The national soap opera apparatus has shifted (temporarily) from the left coast to the right because the story of a woman who would drown her own babies is too colossally exciting to pass up, even in the era of O. J.
Nobody admits it's exciting, of course.
Nobody would dare say it was entertaining.
But when Phil Donahue and Oprah Winfrey decide to set up shop in Strom Thurmond country, you know there's something titillating going on.
Sex, lies and infanticide in Union, S.C.


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: Connecticut Congressional Races -- FIFTH DISTRICT; Franks Re-elected to Third Term After a Bitter Personal Campaign
Representative Gary A. Franks, a Republican from Waterbury who was seen as vulnerable in his bid for a third term, handily won re-election tonight after a lackluster campaign that focused on personal attacks and complaints even by the candidates that they weren't talking about the issues.
Mr.
Franks, 41, gained national attention in 1990 as the first black Republican elected to the House of Representatives in 60 years.
With 66 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Franks had 54 percent of the vote, to 31 percent for James H. Maloney, a Democrat and State Senator from Danbury.


Insanity Plea Expected in Boys' Drownings
With a handwritten confession tucked away in the evidence file and an angry, betrayed town clamoring for her execution, Susan Smith is expected to plead that she was insane when, as charged, she drowned her two sons in a lake and then told the people in her hometown of Union, S.C., that the boys had been abducted.
But while legal experts in South Carolina and around the nation say insanity might be Mrs.
Smith's only real defense in a state that allows the death penalty for killers of children under 11, it might be difficult to persuade a jury in her home county.
Investigators say that for nine days after a fictitious Oct. 25 abduction, she orchestrated an elaborate hoax, punctuating her lies with tears.


Pentagon Aide On Secret Visit To Tour China
The director of the Defense Intelligence Agency is in China, but United States officials will not say whom he is meeting or which defense sites he is visiting.
The visit by Lieut.
Gen.
James R. Clapper represents the highest level of known contact by a United States intelligence official and the Chinese military leadership since the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989.


Officials Fear Budget Cuts Will Slow Transit Repairs
Few New Yorkers doubt their transit system has gotten better since the early 1980's, when the fiscal crisis of the previous decade turned the city's bus and subway lines into a shambles and left riders plagued by derailments, track fires and breakdowns.
Now, after $12 billion has been spent on new buses, cars and tracks, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has once again cut back the city's commitment to mass transit to cope with a new fiscal crisis.


Sealright Co.(SRCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elenore Hangley, Ad Executive, 63
Elenore Hangley, a former executive vice president of the Advertising Council, died on Saturday at the Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, in Englewood, N.J.
She was 63 and lived in Cliffside, N.J.
The cause of death was cancer, said her husband, Charles.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section last Wednesday about low-price restaurants in the Los Angeles area referred incorrectly to the Bistro Garden in Beverly Hills.
It remains open.


Columbia Gas System Inc.(CG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Knicks Save Some Flash For a Title
NO shimmering laser show.
No hoisting of championship banners.
No fireworks.
This was the modest we-ain't-done-yet mood at Madison Square Garden last night when the Knicks opened their home season with a 117-113 victory over the Lakers.
"Time flies," Pat Riley said earlier in the day, before the Knicks played the first major league sports event on the New York subway line since the baseball players went on strike on Aug. 11 and the lords of hockey self-destructed in October.


No Headline
"The candidates are unworthy because they run simply by attacking each other instead of saying what they will do." BOB MAKEY, a Chicago real-estate developer.  [ B2:3. ]


'Bell Curve' Critics Say Early I.Q. Isn't Destiny
Are children who score poorly on standardized tests of ability fated to lives of poverty, crime and social squalor?
Charles Murray and Richard J. Herrnstein, authors of the controversial book, "The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life" (the Free Press), make no secret of their pessimism about the prospects for elevating the underclass.
"For the foreseeable future," they wrote, "the problems of low cognitive ability are not going to be solved by outside intervention."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 1 about the management divisions at the Warner Music Group included an erroneous sales figure supplied by Epitaph Records for "Smash," an album by the Offspring, a punk band.
The "Smash" album has sold 1.4 million copies through Oct. 30, according to Soundscan Inc., a company that tracks record sales; it has not sold 100 million copies.


Who Won Where - The Races for Governor
Results at 1:35 A.M.
ALABAMA Reporting: 91 %


Personal Health; The real problem with children's scalp ills.
WITH school in full swing, lice and ringworm have once again gone to the heads of the class.
But while the families of affected children are most distressed by what they regard as embarrassing if not repulsive infestations, dermatologists say the real problems lie in misdiagnosis and inappropriate and sometimes hazardous treatments.
Ringworm Re-Emerges
A half-century ago, ringworm, a fungal infection that most often attacks the scalp, was a common scourge among school-aged children.
And while it lapsed into relative obscurity for decades, ringworm is now back in a more insidious form that is harder to recognize and trickier to treat.


Dollar General Corp.(DOLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries(TEVIY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hal Ellson; Novelist, 84
Hal Ellson, a prolific writer of novels and short stories, died on Oct. 31 at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Campus Journal; Ex-Farrakhan Aide Speaks at N.Y.U.
BACK on the campus lecture circuit after recovering from a shooting last spring, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the former spokesman for the Nation of Islam, strode onto a New York University stage Monday night and warned whites in the audience that "it's going to be a rough ride, buddy."
Some giggled nervously.
A few squirmed uncomfortably in their chairs, in anticipation of the oratory to come from a man widely denounced as a hatemonger for his attacks against whites, Jews, homosexuals and the Pope, among others.


McCall Becomes First Black Elected to Statewide Office
H.
Carl McCall, who rose from a childhood on welfare to become a state legislator, ambassador and bank vice president, won the combative race for state comptroller early this morning, making history as he became the first black candidate elected to statewide office in New York.
Mr.
McCall, 58, was appointed to the job in May 1993 and this morning beat his Republican rival, Herbert London, a professor at New York University, who ran unsuccessfully this spring for his party's nomination for governor.


Raveling Ends Hospital Stay
His clothes were baggy, his voice was hollow and his gait was low-speed.
George Raveling, 44 days after a traffic accident, left a Los Angeles hospital yesterday thankful to be alive and not incapacitated.
"I am lucky to be alive," said the 57-year-old University of Southern California basketball coach.
On the morning of Sept. 25, he was about to meet a recruit for breakfast when he was injured in a two-car collision.
Doctors said his Jeep seatbelt initially saved his life, but, days after the crash, blood formed in Raveling's heart sac, forcing him into intensive care.


Vacco Comes From Behind To Win Against Burstein
Dennis C. Vacco narrowly beat out his Democratic opponent yesterday in the New York State attorney general's race after waging a law-and-order campaign in which he promised to lobby for the death penalty.
Mr.
Vacco, 42, a former United States Attorney in Buffalo who had never run for public office, came from behind to defeat Karen S. Burstein, a former judge in Brooklyn Family Court who had been leading in most polls during the campaign.


The Legendary Voices At Brooklyn Museum
An 11-part series of opera singers on film or video is to be presented by the Brooklyn Museum beginning at 7 P.M. tomorrow and continuing on Saturday and Sunday afternoons (except Thanksgiving weekend) through Dec. 18.
Among the clips to be shown are 40 minutes of a 1961 "Tosca" starring Renata Tebaldi, 20 minutes of Leontyne Price as the New Prioress in a 1957 "Dialogues of the Carmelites," early film of Enrico Caruso and Giovanni Martinelli, a "Boheme" duet by Miss Tebaldi and Jussi Bjorling, a half-hour recital by Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, an hourlong excerpt of "Norma" with Joan Sutherland, Acts III and IV of a 1965 "Carmen" with Grace Bumbry and Jon Vickers, and Pasolini's feature film "Medea," starring Maria Callas.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Boston Scientific will buy Scimed Life Systems in a stock swap valued at $870 million.
The combination of the two medical device companies would continue a trend toward one-stop shopping by hospitals and large managed health care buyers.  [ Page D1. ]
Union Pacific revised its bid for Santa Fe Pacific, proposing a two-step transaction in which shareholders stand to get less money, but more security from the Union Pacific deal.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
The Committee to Protect Journalists, an organization that promotes freedom of the press and monitors abuses against journalists, will present its Burton Benjamin Memorial Award tonight to GEORGE SOROS, the financier and philanthropist, at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Mr.
Benjamin, a former vice president and director of CBS News and a documentary producer, died of a brain tumor in 1988 at the age of 70.
Through his foundations, Mr.
Soros has worked to promote independence for newspapers and radio and television stations in countries accustomed to censorship.


Other Highlights
VIRGINIA In Brutal Battle, Robb Defeats North


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Comedy of Manners, Barely Aged After 3 Centuries  Theater 80
The wittiest, most provocative and most suggestive talk in town now is at Theater 80 on St.
Mark's Place in the East Village, in the Pearl Theater Company's elegant production of the "The Beaux' Stratagem" by George Farquhar.


MICROSOFT'S CO-FOUNDER INVESTS IN TRILOBYTE
Paul G. Allen, the co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation, is taking a minority investment in Trilobyte Inc., a software game company in Medford, Ore.
Mr.
Allen, who is on Microsoft's board, owns the Portland Trailblazers basketball team and has a controlling interest in Ticketmaster.
Trilobyte, which was established in 1991 as a spinoff of Virgin Software and has 35 employees, introduced its first game, "The 7th Guest," in April 1993.
It plans a sequel called "The 11th Hour," for introduction next year.


Bronx Officer And a Man Seeking Help Are Both Shot
An off-duty New York City police officer and a man who went to him for help, saying someone was trying to kill him, were wounded yesterday by a gunman in the South Bronx, the police said.
The officer, Avalo Amauri, 34 years old, who was shot once in the left knee, was carrying his off-duty 9-millimeter pistol.
"It happened so fast, he didn't have a chance to fire his weapon," said Lieut.
Raymond Ferrari, a police spokesman.


U.S. Agency Is Accused of Bias in Making South Africa Grants
Several current or former officials in the Agency for International Development are engaged in a dispute over whether the agency has improperly sought to exclude non-black groups both in the United States and in South Africa when it awards grants to aid that African nation.
Paul Neifert, an A.I.D. official who was transferred out of South Africa after criticizing agency policies there, complained that just when the new Government of President Nelson Mandela was seeking to build a country free of discrimination, A.I.D. was increasingly basing its grants on the color of recipients.


Who Won Where - New York's Congressional Races
Results at 1:45 A.M.


As Talks Near, an Ad Stirs Unrest
Just as baseball's negotiators were headed back to the table to talk peace, a new phase of the war broke out yesterday between the owners and the striking players.
Acting contrary to the low-key manner in which the mediator, Bill Usery Jr., has asked the two sides to conduct themselves, the owners went public in a two-step process.
They placed a full-page, four-color advertisement in today's edition of USA Today -- at a cost of approximately $70,000 -- and issued a news release quoting a "White Paper" in which Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, talks about "some fine tuning" baseball needs, presumably meaning a salary cap.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 4
Oct. 28
Nov. 5
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.3
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.4
Gasoline stocks
202.3
198.0
210.1
Distillate stocks
142.5
143.7
137.6
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.0
6.1
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.6
1.9
Crude stocks
337.7
338.5
329.5
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.1
87.3
91.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Nationalist, in U.S., Nice in U.S.
Buttoned grimly into a suit for his visit to America, the Russian nationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky insisted that all those nasty things people said about him just were not true.
He was not an anti-Semite, the head of the ultranationalist party that shocked American leaders by capturing the biggest share of parliamentary seats in elections last December told a somewhat incredulous audience of the World Affairs Council of Northern California Monday night.


Mandatory H.I.V. Testing of Babies Won't Work
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 3 news article on human immunodeficiency virus testing of pregnant women misstates what has been happening in New York.


Let's Not Rush Into World Trade Agreement
To the Editor:
In early December the House and Senate return to vote on implementing the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT, which was negotiated with more than 100 other countries over a period of several years.
Sadly, press coverage has been thin and not very substantial.


Chrysler Switch to New Mini-Vans
The Chrysler Corporation expects to lose about 60,000 sales of its highly profitable mini-vans in 1995 because it will temporarily shut two assembly plants to prepare for new models, company officials said today.
Auto industry analysts on Wall Street believe Chrysler makes $5,000 to $7,500 on every mini-van it sells.
Taking the lower figure, that means the No. 3 auto maker could lose at least $300 million because of the lost production and sales.


It's Not 125th Street: A Vendor Sweep in Brooklyn
Without fanfare or uproar, a police precinct in Brooklyn has moved hundreds of street vendors away from a bustling commercial strip over the last 10 months.
And, in the process, crime has decreased, store owners are pleased and some vendors are working with the police on a plan to set them up as legitimate merchants in city-owned space nearby.
It is hard to say precisely why Operation Peddler Push in the 84th Precinct has succeeded in clearing the Fulton Mall of most of the illegal vendors without the kind of tension that accompanied last month's similar campaign on 125th Street in Harlem.
One factor may be that 300 vendors used to cram the eight-block mall near Brooklyn Borough Hall, compared with 1,000 moved from the Harlem site.


Pulitzer Publishing (PTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kennedy Romps, Defying G.O.P. Surge


Limited Inc.(LTD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Public &amp; Private; Polls, Not Passion
A funny thing happened on the way to the midterm elections.
Abortion rights, the stepchild issue of campaigns past, became a stepping stone to elected office.
While once candidates wanted the whole subject to simply go away, in 1994 it was a linchpin of both gubernatorial and Congressional campaigns, for those who had previously soft-pedaled the incendiary issue -- and those who had once shown little or no support for legal abortion at all.
As recently as 10 years ago, recalls Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortion Rights Action League, candidates eschewed the league's endorsement or asked it to keep its support low-key.
"The change this year was very noticeable," she said.
"We had people upset that I couldn't come and campaign for them."


Voters Favor Plan to Create A Legislature
Nassau County voters tonight approved a plan to create a new Legislature to replace the county's 50-year-old Board of Supervisors, which a Federal judge found to be unconstitutional.
With 54 of 71 precincts reporting, the vote was 122,098 for a new county charter and 67,929 against.


Free Tuition for Public Service Law
To help increase the flagging number of lawyers in public service, the New York University School of Law said yesterday that it would give free tuition to students who agree to take low-paying legal jobs after graduation.
Students would have to serve in these jobs for 10 years, and the university will insure this by repaying all law school costs, as much as $40,000 a year at N.Y.U., for as long as the graduate remains in public service.
If, for example, a graduate spends six years working in a public defender's office, 60 percent of the debt would be paid by the university.


Passing From the Scene


Milton Taylor, 86, Co-Owner Of Caswell-Massey Pharmacies
Milton Taylor, who with his brother Ralph took over the venerable Caswell-Massey pharmacy on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan in 1936 and helped build it into an international purveyor of fashionable toiletries, died on Saturday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack, said Mr. Taylor's son Adam.


Rowland Wins Connecticut; Lautenberg Edges Haytaian
For the first time in a generation, Connecticut elected a Republican Governor yesterday, John G. Rowland.
His principal campaign promise was to repeal the 3-year-old state income tax, the legacy of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.


Simon Property Group Inc.(SPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge in the Simpson Case Eases Restrictions on Jurors
As lawyers began the task of selecting 15 alternates for the O. J. Simpson jury, Judge Lance A. Ito today told prospects -- as well as the 12 regular jurors, already chosen -- that they could now watch some television and, with caution, read newspapers.
But even under his eased regime, only viewers of old movies, home shopping programs and wildlife chronicles are unrestricted.
Any members of the jury pool venturing into other television fare must clutch their remote controls, fingers ever on "mute," to shield themselves from information about the case.


Elusive Price Cuts Intrigue Japan
In a country where shoppers are used to paying double and triple what an American might for everything from computers to cosmetics, the emergence of widespread discounting has hit Japan like a revolution.
The Japanese press has termed this happy trend "price destruction," declaring that it shows the economy is finally opening.
American trade negotiators have been struggling for years for such an opening, but there is ample room for doubt.
Experts who look beyond the headlines and follow Japan's fundamental industries like steel, cement and petrochemicals say that the old high prices and exclusionary practices persist.
Trade agreements, deregulation and the soaring value of the yen -- which makes imported goods cheaper -- have done little to open these critical markets to outsiders, whether Japanese or foreign.


Israeli Talks On Self-Rule Speeded Up
Moving to defend Yasir Arafat against a challenge from his Islamic foes, Israel agreed today to pick up the pace of its sluggish talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization on expanding self-rule beyond the Gaza Strip and the Jericho enclave to include the entire West Bank.
The two sides said that beginning in two weeks they would negotiate several major issues at the same time, principally territory-wide elections for a self-rule council and a withdrawal of Israeli forces from West Bank cities and towns.


Wine Talk
A YOUNG couple stop for a drink in a wine bar.
"I'll have a glass of chardonnay," the woman says.


Concession and Victory: Words of Pataki and Cuomo
Following are excerpts from the concession speech of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last night, as transcribed by The New York Times.
CUOMO Which brings me to my final thank-you, and that is to the people of the State of New York, this magnificent place.
Long ago, long before our first victory in 1982, this state had already given me and my family more opportunity and reward than we had any right to expect.
Then it added three terms as Governor of the greatest state in the nation.
I don't have the words to describe the deep sense of gratitude and depth that I feel for that immense opportunity.


Rich and Poor in Cuba as Castro's Sun Sets
Fidel Castro's condition must be verdaderamente desesperado if public television can't find a good word for him.
"Last Days of the Revolution" depicts a nation in despair.
The loss of Cuba's Soviet patrons, the continuance of the United States embargo and the bunglings of its Communist masters have sent the country's economy into free fall and thousands of its people on perilous voyages to Florida.
This tour by Jose de Cordoba of The Wall Street Journal was not arranged by any Cuba-United States friendship society.
It finds little light on the sunny island, where blackouts can last 16 hours.
Severe fuel and fertilizer shortages mean empty shelves in food stores.
Medicines, too, are in short supply.
The young have little hope of good jobs, and some former Fidelistas declare their loss of faith.


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: Connecticut Congressional Races-- SECOND DISTRICT; Gejdenson's Fate Is in Doubt
The fate of Representative Sam Gejdenson, a seven-term Democrat running in a rematch against a Republican who almost beat him in 1992, was uncertain early today.
Late results compiled by The Assoicated Press showed Edward W. Munster, a Republican and a former State Senator, with a 375-vote lead over Mr.
Gejdenson out of about 150,000 votes cast with 93 percent of the votes counted.


Foreman Eyes Megamillions
George Foreman is on his way to earning megamillions in endorsements if the early response to his reclaiming the heavyweight title is a leading indication.
"We had 100 telephone inquiries by the time I came in Monday morning and we've had a lot more since," Henry Holmes, Foreman's lawyer and business adviser, said yesterday.
"I got a call from a Japanese car company at 6 this morning."
Foreman will rest for a short while before deciding which companies to endorse.
"We're not going to waste any time," Holmes said.
One deal has already been made: an autobiography with Random House.
Products available to Foreman, who is viewed as cheerful, approachable and inspirational, are almost limitless.
His Doritos deal is over, and he now endorses Meineke Discount Muffler Shops and Thompson's Water Seal.


Aristide's Cabinet Is Sworn and Pledges to Get to Work
After nearly a month of highly publicized consultations with friends and foes and a bit of old-fashioned politicking behind closed doors, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide finally has a Prime Minister, a full Cabinet and a Parliament-approved plan of action.
At a ceremony at the National Palace this morning, before guests who included Haitian politicians, foreign diplomats and Maj.
Gen.
David Meade, commander of the American troops here, Prime Minister-designate Smarck Michel and his Cabinet took their oaths of office and pledged to begin work immediately on the daunting task of rebuilding a country devastated by military dictatorship, corruption and harsh economic sanctions.


Skating and Ratings
Figure skating, which dominates the television ratings at the Winter Olympics and never more so than at the '94 Games in Lillehammer, Norway, gets much of the drama from the individual rivalries that develop.
Team competitions are rare.
But tonight, a team of skaters from the United States takes on an international squad in an event known as the Ice Wars.


Harper And Knee Listed as Doubtful
The desperation pass that the Cowboys launched on the final play of the first half against the Giants on Monday night turned out to be riskier than expected.
As a result, the Cowboys could be without one of their best players when they travel to San Francisco to play the 49ers on Sunday in an eagerly awaited rematch of their National Football League championship games the last two seasons.


Erwin E. Kelm, Cargill Chief, Is Dead at 83
Erwin E. Kelm, who led Cargill Inc. through a period of rapid growth in the 1970's that helped propel the agribusiness giant to its position as the nation's largest family-owned company, died on Sunday at his home in Minneapolis, the company said yesterday.
He was 83.
Mr. Kelm died after a long struggle with heart disease, the company said.


World Bank Approves Loan to Help Russia Clean Up Pollution
The World Bank today approved its first loan to Russia aimed at cleaning up some of the country's contaminated rivers, polluted industrial sites and toxic waste dumps, and said it was the first step in a broad program to undo seven decades of environmental mismanagement.
By international standards the loan is small, about $110 million.
But bank officials, who have been heavily criticized for financing huge infrastructure projects in the developing world with little regard for their environmental effects, insisted today that the loan symbolized a change of direction that took place several years ago in the bank's lending, and is being speeded.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
New Sopranos Take Over Lead Roles in 'Arabella'  Metropolitan Opera
Two promising singers made their Met debuts in "Arabella" on Monday night: Julia Faulkner, in the title role, and Mary Mills, as Zdenka.
Ms.
Faulkner caused a stir when she won the Met's National Council Auditions in 1985, but she has since pursued her career largely in Europe, working in Vienna and Munich, Germany.


The Giants Stare Across Talent Gap
Dallas wide receiver Alvin Harper, who injured his knee against the Giants Monday night after a freakish end to the first half, had a warning for the Giants.
"He cheap-shotted me," Harper said of Giants cornerback Tito Wooten.
"All I've got to tell them is the last game of the year somebody is going to get hurt."
First, it doesn't seem that Wooten, a rookie, was intentionally trying to hurt Harper in the fight-filled finish at halftime of the 38-10 blowout.
Second, Harper's warning that the Cowboys would retaliate when the two teams meet again in the final regular-season game is like a giant threatening to smash a flea.


Dow Rises 21.87 as Voting And Bonds Provide a Lift
Stock traders, possibly looking forward to a Republican victory in midterm Congressional elections, bid up stock prices yesterday in brisk trading.
But a small rally in the bond market, the first gains in seven sessions, probably provided the biggest lift to stocks, analysts said.
And the stock market rally was limited.
Barely one stock rose in price for every one stock that fell on the New York Stock Exchange.
There were 1,118 advancers and 1,061 decliners.


Archie San Romani, A 1930's Miler, 82
Archie San Romani, a Kansas coal miner's son who overcame a severe childhood accident to become one of the world's leading milers in the 1930's, died Monday at a nursing home in Auberry, Calif.
He was 82 and a resident of Fresno, Calif.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Microsoft and Visa in Software Deal
Staking another claim in the emerging market for electronic commerce, the Microsoft Corporation said today that it had entered an agreement with Visa International to provide technology for secure electronic bank-card transactions across public and private computer networks.
The deal comes less than a month after Microsoft agreed to acquire Intuit Inc., the leading producer of personal finance software, in a stock swap valued at about $1.5 billion.


Tense Times for France-Africa Tie
Rather than a fond summing-up of nearly half a century of deep involvement in African affairs, the 18th so-called Franco-African summit meeting was marked by unusual soul-searching on the part of French commentators and African officials.
Heard amid, and often over, the traditional French statements of solidarity with Africa has been an uncomfortable debate over France's role in the Rwandan crisis and questions about its continuing close ties to leaders who, despite elections and reforms, have continued to rule as dictators.


For Squatters, Options Are Few in a Costly City
To the Editor:
As a longtime resident of Manhattan's East Village, I cannot accept Kate Walter's arguments in "Plight of Squatters Merits No Sympathy" (letter, Nov. 2).
She calls the 13th Street squatters childish, unwilling to make adult sacrifices.
What is moving into a gutted building on a drug-infested block and renovating it at your own cost?
What alternative is there in a city where tiny studios rent for $700 and two-bedroom apartments under $900 are rarities?


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONAGRA INC., Omaha, said its Beatrice Cheese Inc. subsidiary had bought most of the assets of Dorman-Roth Foods Inc., Hasbrouck Heights, N.J., a maker of processed cheese products, for undisclosed terms.
LABARGE INC., St.
Louis, which makes electronic systems and devices and complex interconnect assemblies, said it would sell its operations in Flippin, Ark., to Avnet Inc., Great Neck, L.I., for an undisclosed amount.


Who Won Where - New Jersey Congressional Races
Results at 1:00 A.M.


U.N. Debates an End to Bosnia Arms Embargo
The Security Council began a debate tonight on a resolution calling for an end to the arms embargo against the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the center of the discussion is a General Assembly resolution passed Thursday that asks the Security Council to consider exempting the Muslim-led Bosnian Government from a general embargo imposed on the former Yugoslavia in 1991.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock trading on Monday referred incorrectly to comments by an analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
The analyst, Barbara Osborn, did not express pessimism about the quarterly earnings of Cisco Systems Inc.; she said the company would meet but not exceed Wall Street forecasts.
She also said Cisco would increase its inventory, if possible; she did not say the company's order backlog was lower than expected.


Dillard Department Stores Inc.(DDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


TV News Magazines Falter
In the latest sign that television news magazines have lost favor as prime-time programming, both ABC and Fox are backing away from commitments to such programs.
ABC News announced yesterday that it would scale back the news magazine "Turning Point" from a weekly series to specials, beginning in January.
Fox announced on Monday that it was putting its news magazine, "Full Disclosure," on hold before it even got on the air.


Ralph W. G. Wyckoff, 97, Dies; Led Research on Crystallography
Ralph W. G. Wyckoff, a research scientist who achieved renown in electron microscopy and crystallography, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Tucson, Ariz., where he lived.
He was 97.
The cause was bone cancer, said his wife, Laura.


CHRONICLE
Senator BEN NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL, Democrat of Colorado, who is known for riding his Harley past the august buildings of Washington, says the image of motorcyclists as menacing toughs is an unfair, out-of-date stereotype.
The Senator showed up at a party Sunday in Livermore, Calif., celebrating the end of parole for a founder of the Hell's Angels, RALPH H. (SONNY) BARGER, The Associated Press reported.
"These clubs are much different now," the Senator said.
"They're very respectable."


Knicks Sign Starks, and the Lakers Pay the Price
The Knicks got more than they bargained for in their home opener last night, but they got a victory -- if just barely.
Using a 43-point third quarter to overcome a 20-point first half deficit, the Knicks (2-0) outlasted the Los Angeles Lakers, 117-113, to kick off the home season before a capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden.
It was the largest deficit from which the Knicks had rallied to win since April 1991, when they also overcame a 20-point deficit at home to defeat the Indiana Pacers.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Marv Foley manager of Rochester of the International League and Denny Walling roving minor-league hitting instructor.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Juan Bell, infielder, to a minor-league contract.
Announced that Mike Easler, hitting coach, and Frank White, first base coach, have been retained for the 1995 season.
Named Tim Johnson, Herm Starrette and Dave Oliver coaches.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Released Larry Casian, pitcher.
Named Jeff Datz manager of Columbus of the South Atlantic League.


William J. Sanders, Educator, 87, Dies
Dr.
William J. Sanders, a retired educator and the former Commissioner of Education in Connecticut for 17 years, died on Sunday at the Fowler Nursing Home in Guilford, Conn.
A resident of West Hartford, he was 87.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


A Vote Against Clinton
It was an immoderate campaign, coarse in its tone and unedifying in its substance, and the nation's politics are likely to stay that way for the next two years and beyond.
Dissatisfaction with President Clinton, with liberalism, with the Democratic Party and with Washington in general combined to create a surge by Republicans, especially conservative Republicans.
If not quite a tidal wave, yesterday's results swept dozens of incumbents from office and set up two years of intense political confrontation between the White House and Congress.


F.A.A. Considering Limit On Plane in Indiana Crash
The Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday that it would consider a recommendation that the make of commuter aircraft that crashed last week in Indiana be prohibited from flying in icy conditions.
The plane that crashed in a soybean field, killing 68 people, was a Avions de Transport Regional ATR-72.
The recommendation also includes the company's ATR-42.


Union Pacific's Santa Fe Offer Uses a Trust
The Union Pacific Corporation stepped up its battle for the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation last night, proposing a two-step transaction in which shareholders stand to get less money, but more security, from the Union Pacific deal.
Under terms of its tender offer, Union Pacific would buy 57 percent of Santa Fe's shares for $17.50 apiece -- about $10 a share in cash and $7.50 a share in Union Pacific stock.
It would also offer shareholders a way to circumvent the uncertainty of waiting for regulatory approvals that could scuttle the deal.


Minorities and Women Win Airwave Licenses
In a further sign that the nation's airwaves are worth plenty on the open market, the Federal Government received bids today totaling nearly $400 million in its third set of auctions of wireless-radio licenses.
At stake were 30 regional licenses for two-way paging services, with each license covering about one-fifth of the country.
Today's results, when added to those of the auction in July for 10 nationwide paging licenses, bring the total to be received so far from selling the airwaves to more than $1.1 billion.


Rostenkowski, The Old Lion, Is Defeated By a Cub
The old lion of Chicago politics, Dan Rostenkowski, will roar no more.
In a major upset tonight, Mr.
Rostenkowski, the 18-term Democratic Congressmen whose chairmanship of the House Ways and Means Committee had once made him one of the most powerful men in Washington, was defeated by a little-known Republican -- and by the weight of a 17-count Federal indictment charging Mr.
Rostenkowski with corruption in his dealings with the House post office.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions on Sunday about religious leaders' turn to environmentalism misidentified the clergyman shown blessing an elephant during the feast of St.
Francis at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York City.
He was Bishop Craig Anderson, the Dean of the General Theological Seminary in New York.
The caption also referred incorrectly to the Dean of the cathedral, whose name erroneously appeared.
He is the Very Rev.
James Parks Morton.


IN PERFORMANCE: CIRCUS
Grandma and the Mimes Open the Big Apple Season  Damrosch Park
In a marriage made in big-top heaven, Grandma and Mummen schanz are making mischief at Lincoln Center, where the Big Apple Circus has pitched its tent for 115 performances, through Jan. 8.


Fila Holding SpA (FLH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Off the Menu
Movable Feasts
Daniel Boulud, the chef and co-owner of Restaurant Daniel at 20 East 76th Street, has joined with Jean-Christophe Le Picart to form a catering company called Feast and Fetes.
Mr.
Le Picart had been a partner in a catering company in New York called Tentation, which is no longer in business.
The new company, which will cater small dinner parties and larger events, is now based in the Hotel Surry, where Restaurant Daniel is situated, but is looking for larger quarters.
Information: (212) 737-2224.
Downtown Dining
When the Vista Hotel reopened last week, nearly two years after it was severely damaged in the bombing of the World Trade Center, two of its restaurants also reopened.
The Greenhouse Cafe is serving breakfast, lunch and dinner, and the Tall Ships Bar and Grill serves lunch and dinner from a hearty American menu.
The hotel is replacing its American Harvest restaurant with three private dining rooms called the Harvest Rooms.
The rooms are to open in January with the 16,000 or so bottles of wine from Windows on the World, which used to be run by Hilton International, the owner of the Vista.
When Windows reopens, it will be run by the Joseph Baum &amp; Michael Whiteman Company.
The Stanhope Reopens
This is preview week at the Restaurant in the Stanhope Hotel, East 81st Street and Fifth Avenue.
Scott Cohen, the new executive chef, is putting the finishing touches on his American menu prior to the restaurant's official reopening on Saturday evening.
The dining room, now on two levels, with a view of Fifth Avenue, has a less formal look and serves lunch and dinner, with dinner entrees from $17.50 to $25.
That's Italian!
This evening, Tony May's Hostaria and Gastronomia will open in Port Chester, N.Y., at 25 South Regent Street.
Mr.
May, who owns San Domenico in Manhattan, has every Italian dining trend covered in his new restaurant and catering shop, including a vast antipasto display, designer pizzas, family-style platters and old-fashioned comfort food like spaghetti and meatballs.
There is even a bank of television sets tuned to news and sports over the bar.
For those whose idea of a spectator sport is watching chefs flinging pizza dough in the air, video cameras will also bring that activity to the screen.
A Tavern or Two or Three
Tavern (of one sort or another) is definitely the hot restaurant name.
Mrs.
Park's Tavern, a lower-priced spinoff of New York's Park Avenue Cafe, has just opened in the Doubletree Guest Quarters, in Chicago just off Michigan Avenue.
In January, a Chicago clone of Park Avenue Cafe is also to open in the adjacent space.
Alan Stillman, the president of the New York Restaurant Group, which owns the restaurants, said that there were plans to open Park Avenue Cafes in Philadelphia and Boston.
White Truffles for Dinner
On Nov. 29 at 7 P.M., Ristorante Barolo, 398 West Broadway (near Prince Street), is holding a five-course white truffle dinner paired with wines from the Piedmont region of Italy.
The cost of the dinner is $100 a person.
Reservations: (212) 226-2055.
Sweet Truffles for Dessert
Speaking of truffles, the chocolate variety is much in evidence this fall.
A menu of chocolate desserts and drinks, including truffles to nibble, is served on Friday and Saturday evenings from 6 to midnight in the Lobby Lounge at the Four Seasons Hotel, 57 East 57th Street.
At Mark's Restaurant in the Mark Hotel, East 77th Street and Madison Avenue, a teatime all-you-can-eat chocolate menu is served every afternoon from 3 to 5:30.
And Tavern on the Green, at West 67th Street and Central Park West, now serves desserts that have been featured in Chocolatier magazine.


Telxon Corp.(TLXN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G.O.P. WINS CONTROL OF SENATE AND MAKES BIG GAINS IN HOUSE; PATAKI DENIES CUOMO 4TH TERM
The Republican Party seized control of the Senate and moved within a few seats of capturing the House yesterday, winning eight Democratic seats in the Senate and at least 38 in the House.
The gains were the Republicans' strongest in decades and put them in position to thwart President Clinton and his legislative proposals for the next two years.
The Republican tide also extended to the races for governor in several important states that will be critical to Mr.
Clinton's hopes for re-election in 1996, including New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and California.


Market Place; Profits from higher-rate loans to low-income home buyers.
FOR a profitable mortgage-lending business, consumers with low incomes and checkered credit records marred by delinquent payments are not the usual prospects.
But they are the bread and butter for the United Companies Financial Corporation of Baton Rouge, La., and some other finance companies, which have found that low-income homeowners will mortgage their houses at relatively high interest rates to obtain loans unavailable from other sources.
While the traditional mortgage-lending business is slumping as interest rates rise and middle-class homeowners have stopped refinancing, some lenders in low-income areas are expanding rapidly.
With the help of Wall Street and bond insurance companies, these "B" and "C" loans issued to borrowers with credit blemishes are now routinely packaged into securities that can be sold readily in the financial markets.


U.S. Blamed for Soul's Wait in Limbo
In August, when Yang Yimei finally paid off his $30,000 debt to the smugglers who got him here from China, life was full of possibilities.
He would work hard and buy a restaurant and bring his wife and 7-year-old daughter from Fujian Province to join him.
But a month later, a bullet ended that dream.
While working in a Chinese take-out restaurant in the Bronx, Mr.
Yang, 33, was shot to death during a robbery.
Now friends and family members say his soul toils in limbo, between this world and the next.


Who Won Where - The Races For The U.S. Senate
Results at 1:55 A.M.
Thomas Andrews, D 136,439 - 37 %  #-Olympia Snowe, R 218,222 - 59 % MARYLAND 100 %  x-Paul Sarbanes, D * 788,032 - 59 %  William Brock, R 538,351 - 41 % MASSACHUSETTS 84 %  x-Edward Kennedy, D * 1,039,647 - 58 %  W. Mitt Romney, R 719,357 - 40 % MICHIGAN 68 %
Bob Carr, D 866,630 - 43 %  #-Spencer Abraham, R 1,035,515 - 51 %  Jon Coon, Other, 85,565 - 4 % MINNESOTA 78 %
Ann Wynia, D 622,303 - 45 %  x-Rod Grams, R 677,011 - 49 % MISSISSIPPI 91 %  Ken Harper, D 173,471 - 31 %  x-Trent Lott, R * 392,333 - 69 % MISSOURI 87 %
Joel Hyatt, D 1,333,364 - 39 %  #-Mike DeWine, R 1,814,107 - 53 % OKLAHOMA 100 %
Dave McCurdy, D 392,488 - 40 %  #-James Inhofe, R 542,387 - 55 % PENNSYLVANIA 99 %
Harris Wofford, D * 1,617,178 - 47 %  #-Rick Santorum, R 1,694,009 - 49 % RHODE ISLAND 99 %  Linda Kushner, D 118,411 - 36 %  x-John Chafee, R * 213,896 - 64 % TENNESSEE 100 %
Incumbent


The Pop Life
Strange Clubfellows
John Paul Jones, the former Led Zeppelin bassist and keyboardist, is scheduled to begin his first American tour since the band broke up 14 years ago.
But he won't be performing with his former bandmates Robert Plant and Jimmy Page, who will be reinterpreting old Zeppelin songs on their own tour next year sans Mr.
Jones.
And he won't be playing stadiums either.
Instead, he will be at the downtown club Irving Plaza performing avant-garde songs with the local singer and performance artist Diamanda Galas.
"I may miss the private plane," Mr.
Jones said, speaking by telephone from Berlin, "but on the other hand, I'm much more interested in new, alternative music now."
Since Led Zeppelin's demise, Mr.
Jones has received countless offers to work with what he described as "tedious formula rock bands." Though he recently produced a live acoustic comeback album for the 1970's Zeppelin-influenced pop group Heart, he has spurned most of those requests, preferring to collaborate with more cutting-edge bands and artists like the Butthole Surfers, R.E.M., Brian Eno and Ms.
Galas.


Paper Accuses Goalie of Fix
Bruce Grobbelaar, one of the most flamboyant goalies in British soccer, was accused today by the mass circulation tabloid The Sun of accepting bribes to throw matches.
The allegation, which Grobbelaar denied, threw Premier League British soccer into an uproar.
The sport has been slowly clawing its way to respectability here after all the problems of crowd violence in the 1970's and 1980's.
The Sun charged that Grobbelaar, a 37-year-old Zimbabwean, had accepted a bribe of $:40,000, or about $64,000, from a gambling syndicate in the Far East for agreeing to throw a league match last season against Newcastle, which won that game by 3-0.
The goalie was playing at the time for Liverpool.
He now plays for Southampton.


Capitalizing On Tainted Machine
In Essex County, where the Democratic Party has often seemed as immutable a fixture as the heavens or the earth, the Republicans are not supposed to rule.
But James W. Treffinger was able to capitalize on the problems of a Democratic machine that was tainted by corruption and rancorous infighting to capture the Essex County Executive's race on Tuesday.
Mr.
Treffinger, 44, the Mayor of Verona, N.J., and the only Republican on the County Board of Freeholders, presented himself as a reformer who would take a machete to the county tax rate and wipe out decades of Democratic patronage in county agencies.
He edged out his Democratic rival, Cardell Cooper, the Mayor of East Orange, N.J., by winning 51 percent of the vote.


Pataki Says No. 2 Will Have Real Role
The Governor-elect, George E. Pataki, said yesterday that his second-in-command, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, would not get lost in his shadow like some lieutenant governors and would have "very real and significant responsibilities."
He did not spell out those responsibilities but Ms.
McCaughey, a constitutional scholar and public policy expert, has written extensively on health care and has said that might be one area of interest.


Turning Back the Clock in Slovakia
Although he outpolled his rivals in Slovakia's elections last month, Vladimir Meciar remains unable to stitch together a government and get himself formally named prime minister.
But last week the Moscow-trained, rabble-rousing Mr.
Meciar proved once again that while he cannot rule, he can still wreck.
Just moments after the previous government resigned, he joined with parties from the far right and far left to railroad 13 measures through an all-night session of Parliament that sent Slovakia reeling back to the bad old days.
Mr.
Meciar was never able to command more than 83 votes in the 150-member Parliament during the session.
But with the opposition caught off guard and with only a simple majority required for legislation, he was able to do enormous damage to Slovakia's painful efforts to move toward a private economy and enlarge individual freedoms.
In effect, he turned back the clock.


Pataki Says No. 2 Will Have Real Role
The Governor-elect, George E. Pataki, said yesterday that his second-in-command, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, would not get lost in his shadow like some lieutenant governors and would have "very real and significant responsibilities."
He did not spell out those responsibilities but Ms.
McCaughey, a constitutional scholar and public policy expert, has written extensively on health care and has said that might be one area of interest.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INLAND INDUSTRIES, Chicago, said its Inland International Inc. unit had signed a preliminary agreement with two Chinese iron and steel companies to explore a joint venture in China.
Terms were not disclosed.


Leadership in Albany: A Changing Cast
GOVERNOR  George E. Pataki
Mr.
Pataki, who will be New York's 53d governor, is the first Republican to be elected Governor since 1970 and the first without New York City roots since Nathan Miller of Syracuse 50 years before that.
Like Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Pataki, a 49-year-old State Senator who was an Assemblyman and a Mayor of Peekskill, inherits a politically divided Legislature that could be a check on his agenda.
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR  Elizabeth McCaughey
If Mr.
Pataki was the seasoned pol, Ms.
McCaughey, who is 46 and lives in Manhattan, was the ticket's policy wonk.
She was recruited from the confines of the Manhattan Institute.
The Pataki campaign was short on substance, but state government revels in details.
Will Ms.
McCaughey be the brains behind the Pataki administration, or be left behind altogether when the guys get down to business?
COMPTROLLER  H. Carl McCall
Elected by the Legislature last year to fill Edward V. Regan's unexpired term, the 58-year-old Mr.
McCall survived the Republican sweep as the lone Democrat -- and the first black -- elected to statewide office in Albany.
Typically, the comptroller is a naysayer, warning the Governor and Legislature not to spend what they don't have and berating them for past inefficiencies.
New accounting constraints and his political independence may amplify his voice.
ATTORNEY GENERAL  Dennis C. Vacco
As a former Federal prosecutor from Buffalo, he has promised to transform the office of Attorney General into a platform for changing the criminal justice system, and restoration of the death penalty has dominated his platform.
But the job is considerably broader than that, and Mr.
Vacco, who is 42, is largely untested as a consumer advocate and an architect of legislation within an attorney general's domain.
ASSEMBLY SPEAKER  Sheldon Silver
As the Assembly Speaker, this 18-year veteran of the Legislature becomes perhaps the most powerful Democrat in the state.
He is unabashedly liberal, resisting even some of Mr.
Cuomo's more moderate initiatives.
Moreover, as a New York City resident, representing the Lower East Side, he is likely to emerge as the city's chief defender in a state government that, presumably, will be less receptive to City Hall's legislative agenda.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER  Ralph J. Marino
The Senate majority leader, who was the chief Republican check and balance on the Cuomo administration, retains his seat, representing part of Nassau and Suffolk, and the Republicans kept their majority.
But he may lose his leadership.
Mr.
Marino and his fellow Republican, Mr.
D'Amato, are political rivals and he only grudgingly endorsed Mr.
Pataki.
Ambiguously, Mr.
Pataki said only that he would not interfere when the Senate picks its leaders.
SAM ROBERTS
--------------------
Some Who Are Close to Governor-Elect
A representative, but incomplete, guide to those who have the ear of Gov.-elect George E. Pataki.
MICHAEL FINNEGAN Former law partner, State Senate aide, campaign counsel, and old political friend.
Is to Mr.
Pataki what Peter J. Powers is to Rudolph W. Giuliani.
UNITED STATES SENATOR ALFONSE M. D'AMATO Helped anoint Mr.
Pataki with the party hierarchy, raised money and devised strategy for the campaign.
In exchange, Mr.
Pataki announced yesterday: "You can call me, Al." CLARENCE D. RAPPLEYEA JR.
Known as "Rapp," he was Mr.
Pataki's mentor in the Assembly, where he is minority leader.
A resident of the Southern Tier town of Norwich, the former stock car driver served as a campaign co-chairman and ambassador to upstate.
JOE HOLLAND Harlem lawyer and entrepreneur who owns an ice cream parlor and founded a homeless shelter.
Wanted to run for Attorney General but lost at the state Republican convention to Dennis C. Vacco, then played the good soldier by becoming co-chairman of the Pataki campaign.
CHARLES GARGANO D'Amato fund raiser who helped Mr.
Pataki raise $13 million, enough to outspend an incumbent Governor.
LIBBY PATAKI The only Pataki adviser who the Governor-elect met while body surfing in a hurricane off Long Island.
Wife and best friend since 1973.
Mother of four little Patakis.
Her first advice: take a vacation.
He listened.


MORE ON THE VOTE
Voters Assign Blame
While Republicans touted their victory as a repudiation of the President, voters blamed sundry factors for the nation's problems.
Page B1.
The New York Strategy
A key factor in his victory was Governor-elect Pataki's response to the Giuliani defection.
Page B14.
A 'Contract With America'
Most Republicans are pledging tax cuts, a stronger military, a balanced budget and welfare cuts.
Page B2.
Election Fallout on Economy
The world trade pact will be the first test of the new alignment in Washington.
On Wall Street, euphoria over the Republican sweep faded, with stocks posting a small gain.
Page D1.
Wisdom and Hindsight
An assortment of scholars, writers and political veterans offered a wide range of observations on the results of Tuesday's elections.
Pages B4-5.
Big Job in Connecticut
Governor-elect Rowland began trying to broaden support for his plan to eliminate the income tax.
Page B1.


Sterling Electronics Corp.(SEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Knicks to Magic: Prove Playoff Quality
Any Knicks-Orlando Magic game, no matter how early in the season, carries special meaning for both teams.
They have become intense rivals, and many people have picked the Magic to dethrone New York as Eastern Conference champion.
But the Knicks believe they are still the better team.
And the center matchup between Patrick Ewing and Shaquille O'Neal offers a clash of premier players with different games and different personalities.


Not Just in Kansas Anymore; A Crop Artist Debuts on Manhattan's Unlikely Terrain
In Kansas, where Stan Herd is known for making art by planting arrangements of crops and flowers, pretty much all he needs is a tractor.
Trying to replicate the process in Manhattan, he found he needed Donald Trump and two homeless people as well as the tractor.
"I have to say I was overwhelmed by the whole task," Mr.
Herd said yesterday, patrolling the landscape image of trees and clouds that he fashioned with vegetables, other plants and gravel on a one-acre plot along the Hudson River between 68th and 70th Streets.
"I put more hours into this than any of the others I did. I like it, but some of the plants didn't grow as well as I would have preferred."


Just No Ball Playing In the House, Please
Politics and football forged a strong alliance on Election Day, with two former stars riding the Republican surge to seats in Congress from Oklahoma.
STEVE LARGENT, the star receiver for the Seattle Seahawks who retired in 1989, and J. C. WATTS, the quarterback who led Oklahoma to two straight Orange Bowl victories in the 1970's, were among the winners Tuesday on a day in which about a dozen sports figures ran for office.


Atmos Energy Corp.(ATO,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


G.O.P.'s Rising Star Pledges To Right Wrongs of the Left
The former history teacher said it felt weird to be making history.
But Newt Gingrich adapted quickly.
The Georgia Congressman, who is likely to ascend to the influential role of Speaker of the House in Washington's new Republican universe, says he wants nothing less than to change the very character of the country.


Stokely USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bernstein Songs Survive in 1953 Musical
The truth about the New York City Opera's new production of Leonard Bernstein's "Wonderful Town" on Tuesday night lay somewhere between the opinions of those who left during intermission muttering about how awful it was and those who stood and cheered the celebrated lyricists, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, during the curtain calls.
Bernstein's songs from this 1953 musical are as spirited as they ever were; the question is whether the show was always as campy and cliched as it was on Tuesday.
It's likely that even when it first opened to enthusiastic reviews, the show had a hint of camp, a hip humor based on a sense of superiority to the story's stock figurines.
Bernstein and the lyricists had stepped in at the last minute to rescue a failing enterprise, and in cobbling this show together in four weeks they relied on character types for effect, leaning a bit on their earlier collaborative success, "On the Town."


NBB Bancorp Inc.(NBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vastar Resources Inc.(VRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Capitol Hill, a World Is Turned Upside Down
The Capitol was an eerie place today, quiet and void of its usual bustle and the famous faces who orchestrate it.
They are home either nursing wounds or nurturing new-found importance.
Left behind were their staffs -- Capitol Hill's permanent denizens, who discovered today that some were more permanent than others, their fates largely contingent on the electoral fortunes of their patrons.


Homebase Chain Picks Suissa Miller
Homebase, a home improvement chain in Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Suissa Miller Advertising of Santa Monica, Calif., to handle the broadcast advertising portion of its account, which had been at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles for the last year.
Billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million.


One Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Muscovites Fume Over New Import: Gas Lines
Motorists, gas station attendants and Government officials all agreed.
The 10-day gasoline shortage that created mile-long lines, drove up black-market prices tenfold, and left cars stranded all over Moscow was no accident.
It was like a commodities version of the game of Clue: everyone was a suspect.


Who Won Where - The Races For Governor
ALABAMA 99 % Jim Folsom, D * 590,091 - 50 % #-Fob James Jr., R 601,822 - 50 %


Elinor Poindexter, An Art Dealer, 88
Elinor F. Poindexter, a Manhattan dealer in contemporary art, died on Sunday at her home in Easton, Conn.
She was 88.
The cause was pneumonia, said her son, Joseph.


As Washington's Old Order Gives Way, No Clear Signs From the New
For American business, the immediate post-election impact from the Republican Party victories is the new faces coming to the fore in Washington as committee chairmanships change hands.
Even so, the shift in control may not result in radical departures from current Congressional policies.
Here is a look at several leading industries most likely to be at the top of the agenda next year:


Panamerican Beverages Inc.(PB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  SHATTERED RWANDAN LIVES  Though they long for their families and friends, fear of the unknown still prevents countless Rwandan refugees from returning home.
Some worry about retaliation by ethnic Tutsi -- especially those who took over their houses when they fled months ago.
A3


Magna Group (MAGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Necessities Spur 3 to Invent
SPURRED by necessity, three designers are marketing sports products they created to fill their own needs.
Chris Smith, 39, an in-line skater from Little Silver, N.J., grew tired of jamming both skates into one hand-carried satchel.
His answer was to invent the Blade Bag, a heavy-gauge nylon saddle bag that is slung over one shoulder.


F.A.A. Restricts Some Icy-Weather Flying
The Federal Aviation Administration today barred airlines that fly planes like the one that crashed last week in Indiana from using automatic flight controls, or autopilot, during icy conditions.
Federal safety officials say if the plane that crashed had been under manual control, instead of autopilot, the pilot might have noticed if the plane had encountered an icing problem.
There have been suggestions that icing was a cause of the crash of the plane, an ATR-72.
All 68 people aboard were killed.


How to Save a Wright
To The Home Section:
The University of Texas and the city of Austin can save the Charles Moore house  [ "Moore's House Divided," Oct. 20, 1994 ]  by taking a page out of the experience of the Currier Gallery of Art in Manchester, N.H. -- the only museum in the country to own a Frank Lloyd Wright house.
The house was completed in 1952 for Isadore J. and Lucille Zimmerman.
The museum acquired ownership in 1988, and in 1990 began offering public tours of the house four days a week  [ by reservation only ] .


Madge N.V. (MADGF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As Washington's Old Order Gives Way, No Clear Signs From the New
For American business, the immediate post-election impact from the Republican Party victories is the new faces coming to the fore in Washington as committee chairmanships change hands.
Even so, the shift in control may not result in radical departures from current Congressional policies.
Here is a look at several leading industries most likely to be at the top of the agenda next year:


The Israeli Soldiers Who Must Not Fight
To the Editor:
The predicament of Alice Miller, the woman who is challenging Israel's ban on women in combat (news article, Nov. 3), recalls the women who fought for biblical Israel.


The Election's Fallout for the Economy; Trade Vote Is First Test For Victors
Newly victorious Republicans and a humbled Clinton Administration face their first big test even before the new Congress takes over in January, in a scheduled vote after Thanksgiving on whether to approve a long-delayed world trade pact.
Both parties say they support the 123-nation agreement hammered out under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which is known as GATT and is considered to be one of the most important economic initiatives of the last decade.
But the two sides still find themselves at odds as soon as they start discussing its details.


Women in Canada Upset by Court Rulings on Drunkenness
Women's advocacy groups are expressing outrage at recent criminal cases in Canada in which drunkenness has been successfully used as a defense in assaults against women.
The fury erupted in September when the Supreme Court overturned the conviction of a Montreal man who, after consuming seven or eight beers and 35 ounces of brandy, according to testimony, pulled a 65-year-old woman out of a wheelchair and sexually assaulted her.


Elbit Ltd. (ELBTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Choosing between a 5-3 fit and a 4-4 fit can be a difficult problem at the slam level.
Study the North-South cards on the diagramed deal, with the East-West cards covered, and decide what contract you would wish to play.
Six diamonds is slightly better than six hearts, which will fail if the hearts do not break evenly and the diamonds are misguessed.
Seven diamonds will usually make if the declarer can guess the location of the diamond queen, and seven hearts is again somewhat worse.


The Election's Fallout for the Economy; Stocks Rise, But Euphoria Doesn't Last
Traders stormed into the stock market like a herd of elephants yesterday morning, pushing prices sharply higher in the wake of the Republican sweep of the House, the Senate and the governors' mansions.
But few investors followed them, and by the end of the day the herd had turned into bears as Wall Street debated the effect of the Republican victory; after falling at midday, blue-chip stocks recovered to eke out a tiny gain.


Houston Effler Changes Its Name
Houston Effler &amp; Partners in Boston said yesterday that it had changed its name to Houston Effler Herstek &amp; Favat, to reflect the contributions of Rich Herstek and Pete Favat, the agency's executive vice presidents and co-creative directors.
Mr.
Herstek, 40, a copywriter, and Mr.
Faval, 32, an art director, joined the agency in August 1992 from Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston.


U.S. Xpress Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Jude Medical Inc.(STJM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pope's Book Success
To the Editor:
Re "A Papal Best Seller" (Op-Ed, Nov. 4): Paul Elie finds it perplexing that a Pope whose rank and file disagrees with him on so much has a best-selling book.
Perhaps this is because the level of dissent Mr.
Elie believes exists is pure hype.


Zap! Zap! The Allies Update War Games
Six years ago, the Army had to fly in 17,500 soldiers from the United States and deploy 7,000 armored vehicles and nearly 1,100 tanks to practice the kind of epic battles the NATO alliance would have to fight if World War III broke out.
Just the damage NATO forces caused tearing around the German countryside cost $23.4 million then, and since unification in 1990 Germany has severely restricted ground and air maneuvers.


John Hadley, 64, Philanthropist And Investor
John Wood Blodgett Hadley, an investor and philanthropist, died on Monday at Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 64 and lived in Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The cause was heart failure resulting from lung cancer, according to the Heckscher Museum in Huntington, of which Mr.
Hadley was chairman for the last nine years.


Fidelity National Financial (FNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UMB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Californians Pass Measure On Aliens; Courts Bar It
Californians overwhelmingly approved a new law cutting off most government services to illegal aliens on Tuesday, but Gov.
Pete Wilson's orders to begin enforcing some of its provisions today were immediately blocked by Federal and state judges.
Senator Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat who opposed the popular initiative as too restrictive, claimed victory in a closely fought race against Representative Michael Huffington, a Republican who supported the measure.
Mr.
Huffington has not conceded pending a count of the absentee ballots.


Rival Co.(RIVL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Line to lead: Senior Republican Senators
Senators likely to lead Senate committees, based on their seniority.
Usually, seniority is the deciding factor in determining committee chairmanships.


A Family Recipe For Making China
WHEN Laure Japy, a French artist, couldn't find dishes she liked, she asked her Mexican grandmother for china-making lessons.
Nine years later, Granny's helpful hints have grown into Laure Japy Diffusion, an award-winning tabletop firm.
The company's latest introduction is Jamaique, right, a Limoges porcelain lavished in brilliant red, blue and yellow diamonds and bands inspired by Mrs.
Japy's New World heritage.


Fragrant You, Fragrant Car, Etc.
UNISEX colognes may be the rage, but what about fine scents that are multipurpose?


Asked to Place Blame, Americans in Surveys Chose: All of the Above
While Republicans touted their electoral surge on Tuesday as a repudiation of President Clinton and an endorsement of conservative Republican policies, there was little evidence that these motivations moved most voters.
Instead, voters who were surveyed as they were leaving their polling places blamed a host of factors for the nation's failures in solving problems.
Indeed, a majority said that special interest groups and members of Congress from both parties were more at fault than the Clinton Administration.


Thomas Industries(TII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perini Corp.(PCR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Vermont Public Service Corp.(CV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A brief front-page report in some editions yesterday about the Tennessee senatorial elections, headed "A Senate Sweep for the G.O.P.," reversed the identities of two photographs.
William Frist, the Republican who defeated Jim Sasser, was at the left; Fred Dalton Thompson, who defeated Representative Jim Cooper, was at the right.


Sithe Energies Inc.(SYT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Teen-Agers Try to Flee Detention Center
Little more than a week after five youths escaped from custody on the way to a Bronx detention center, three teen-agers at the center -- including one who took part in the earlier incident -- attacked a guard yesterday in another escape attempt.
One of the teen-agers succeeded in getting away from the Spofford Juvenile Center, in the Hunts Point section, but was caught a few blocks away after half an hour, said Detective Mary Ann Mullins, a police spokeswoman.
The other two were found a short time later, hiding inside the center.


Semi-Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: PARTIES - THE OUTLOOK: As One Party Prepares to Run the Capitol, the Other Hunts for Leaders; On the Morning After, the Democrats Try to Come to Grips With Disorder
The state of Congress's Democratic minority in the aftermath of Tuesday's elections is simple enough that it can be summed up in three words: utter, complete disarray.
The party's top legislative leaders have either retired or been defeated, and their troops have seen the party's stewardship of Congress brutally rejected at the polls.
Who will replace the leaders is unknown.
And the new Republican majority is intent on slashing Congressional staff positions across the board, a move that will even further reduce the Democratic presence on Capitol Hill.


As State Split, High Turnout Upstate Elected Pataki and Reflected Change
George E. Pataki won the governorship on the strength of sweepingly high voter turnout in the upstate areas that make up his base, where nearly 70 percent of registered voters went to the polls on Tuesday, compared to just under half in New York City and just over half in the suburban counties around it.
Those differences demonstrated the profound lack of enthusiasm for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the downstate areas where he needed extraordinary voter turnout to win, and reflected a sweeping change in urban voter participation since Mr.
Cuomo's first election in 1982, when turnout was just over 70 percent statewide and 66 percent in the city.


Two Sides May Talk, But Will They Move?
When baseball's labor negotiators last held a bargaining session, the players were in the 29th day of their strike.
Today, on Day 91, the negotiators will resume talks, but no more optimism exists now than two months ago.
"I have no reason to believe things will be different this time," Donald Fehr, the union leader, said yesterday.
"I hope I'll be pleasantly surprised, but I don't see that happening. The club position seems as fixed as it was on June 14. We'll see if it's anything different."


New York Results - The Race for Attorney General
RPTNG.
Burstein
Vacco
Albany
100.0
64,642
51,771
Allegany
100.0
3,552
9,127
Bronx
100.0
119,578
39,119
Brooklyn
99.9
225,229
101,323
Broome
99.5
22,838
40,752
Catargus
100.0
7,687
15,822
Cayuga
100.0
7,363
14,483
Chataqua
100.0
15,511
25,011
Chemung
100.0
8,197
16,535
Chenang
100.0
3,990
10,161
Clinton
100.0
9,267
10,666
Columbia
100.0
8,806
13,104
Cortland
100.0
4,944
7,816
Delaware
98.4
4,420
9,443
Dutchess
97.9
28,767
46,079
Erie
98.2
104,099
197,228
Essex
100.0
4,141
7,862
Franklin
100.0
5,356
5,907
Fulton
100.0
5,237
10,030
Genesee
100.0
5,122
12,229
Greene
100.0
5,156
10,857
Hamilton
100.0
767
2,011
Herkimer
100.0
6,321
12,215
Jefferson
100.0
8,127
14,849
Lewis
100.0
2,080
4,826
Livingston
100.0
6,620
11,573
Madison
100.0
7,566
12,185
Manhattan
100.0
253,789
59,744
Monroe
99.1
97,731
114,447
Montgomery
100.0
5,884
9,362
Nassau
99.1
181,968
224,025
Niagara
100.0
22,064
43,352
Oneida
100.0
26,982
45,449
Onondaga
99.0
67,441
78,592
Ontario
100.0
14,341
16,159
Orange
100.0
28,209
46,079
Orleans
100.0
3,342
7,835
Oswego
100.0
11,951
20,345
Otsego
100.0
6,403
10,944
Putnam
100.0
9,610
17,866
Queens
99.9
198,565
121,418
Rensselaer
100.0
24,307
50,315
Rockland
100.0
35,434
42,863
StLawrence
100.0
11,104
15,456
Saratoga
99.4
24,408
40,185
Schenectdy
100.0
23,917
29,050
Schoharie
100.0
3,566
6,671
Schuyler
100.0
1,812
3,571
Seneca
100.0
3,691
5,900
StatenIsl
100.0
33,858
54,925
Steuben
98.8
7,651
18,737
Suffolk
100.0
139,399
212,146
Sullivan
92.1
7,680
9,738
Tioga
100.0
4,355
11,301
Tompkins
100.0
12,828
11,065
Ulster
100.0
23,958
32,120
Warren
100.0
6,069
11,957
Washington
100.0
5,580
11,088
Wayne
100.0
8,251
17,370
Wstchester
92.8
119,110
120,896
Wyoming
100.039
3,024
8,200
Yates
100.0
2,334
4,448
Totals
99.2
2,123,757
2,247,409


Brascan Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Now Comes the Hardest Part: Repealing That Hateful Tax
On the morning after the Republican John G. Rowland was elected governor with 36 percent of the vote, he began the difficult job of broadening support for his plan to eliminate the income tax, reaching out to Democrats and independents and describing his victory as a message about the public's feelings concerning government.
"It's a mood," he said.
"I think people of this country, let alone this state, want someone who will reverse the trends of the Great Society that has been around for the last 30 years."


Cedar Fair L.P. (FUN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Oct 2


The Endgame: For Pataki, Fighting Giuliani Became the Way to Fight Cuomo
In the moments after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for re-election, strategists for State Senator George E. Pataki held their collective breaths.
Should they ignore it?
Should they denounce Mr.
Giuliani as a turncoat?
In 48 hours they had their answer.
Mr.
Pataki was dropping precipitously in their internal polls.
Within four days, what had been a 7- to 8-point Pataki lead had become a 13-point deficit.
Among some Pataki advisers, panic set in.


Who Won Where - The Races For the U.S. Senate


Northeast
CONNECTICUT
If there is a survival model for shaken Democrats, it would seem to be Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who in one term has soared to seeming invincibility with his moderate views and superior connections that include many prosperous supporters in New York and Hollywood.
Despite being a friend of President Clinton, he defeated Gerald Labriola, a retired pediatrician and former State Senator whose campaign never took shape, by more than 2 to 1 and consolidated his hold on one of his party's most secure Senate seats.
But the crowded governor's race, dominated by debate over taxes, seemed to offer few lessons.
John G. Rowland, a Republican and former Representative, outlasted three opponents, the closest being William E. Curry Jr., the Democratic state controller, after a disclosure late in the campaign that Mr.
Rowland had tried to suppress a police report about a quarrel with his former wife.


MK Rail Corp.(MKRL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dealers Buying Again At Impressionist Sales
There's been a sea change in the market for Impressionist and modern art.
At this week's auctions, which ended last night at Christie's, buyers tended to be either serious connoisseurs or dealers.
Gone are the days of impulse buying.
Gone, too, is a market so inflated that dealers and old-time collectors were priced out.
Almost half the works sold last night were bought by dealers.
At Sotheby's on Tuesday night, dealers snapped up 25 percent of the sale.


America Online Buys 2 Internet Companies
America Online Inc., facing a challenge from the Microsoft Corporation in the market for on-line computer services, said yesterday that it had acquired two small Internet service companies for a total of more than $34 million in stock.
The companies acquired by America Online, Navisoft Inc. and Booklink Technologies Inc., would become the core of America Online's recently formed Internet Services Company.
The companies, which are start-ups that have generated no revenue to date, make software that allow businesses and consumers to more easily use the Internet, especially the rapidly growing area known as the World Wide Web.


What Drives Women to Starvation Diets
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 7 television review of "A Burning Passion: The Margaret Mitchell Story": I feel that your use of the word "pudgy" to describe the actress Shannen Doherty is not only unnecessary but also irresponsible.


PAGE BY PAGE
CONGRESS  Republicans declared a political revolution and promised to balance the Federal budget.
A1  News analysis: Everything is changed by the G.O.P. sweep.
The question is for how long.
A1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
4.51
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.21
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.63
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
7.98
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.11
8.12
6.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.94
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.21
7.26
5.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Performance Food Group (PFGC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Who Won Where - The Races For Governor
ALABAMA 99 % Jim Folsom, D * 590,091 - 50 % #-Fob James Jr., R 601,822 - 50 %


Recycled Products: The 'Ugly' Factor
IT'S been a long time since "Don't, don't, don't be a litterbug," a jingle associated with the Keep America Beautiful movement of the 1960's, wormed its way into our collective consciousness.
Recycling today is a lot more complicated and has gone far beyond merely tossing trash into the nearest garbage can.
Now, it's de rigueur to sort, tie and leave it neatly stacked at the curb.
The next step is to actually buy products made of trash, bringing our refuse back indoors.
That's the message broadcast by "Hello Again! Recycling for the Real World," an upbeat exhibition at the Fashion Institute of Technology, showcasing more than 250 recycled products, from plastic milk bottles reincarnated as a kayak to a couture gown with beer-can spangles.


Mercury General Corp.(MRCY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Law on Death Penalty Is Likely by Next Fall
After 18 annual legislative launchings followed by 18 annual crash landings due to gubernatorial vetoes, the death penalty now seems likely to become a sentencing option faced by New York murderers by next November.
At a news conference yesterday, Governor-elect George E. Pataki wasted no time reiterating his campaign promise to sign a bill to restore the death penalty, which would make New York the 38th state in the nation with such a law.


Charity Campaign By Absolut
Absolut vodka and its agency, TBWA Advertising in New York, say they hope their eighth annual fanciful holiday advertisement will encourage charity to go hand in glove with gift-giving.
The 1994 print ad, called "Absolut warmth," will appear in all 450,000 copies of the Dec. 5 issue of New York magazine.
Inside, readers will find a pair of knit gloves bearing the logos of Absolut and the designer Donna Karan's DKNY line.
The Seagram Company, which imports Absolut, will donate $10,000 and 5,000 pairs of gloves to the Henry Street Settlement in Manhattan.


O'Sullivan Industries Holdings Inc.(OSU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WLR Foods Inc.(WLRF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


No Break in San Francisco Newspaper Strike


Nets' First Victory Features Benjamin In a Starring Role
Maybe it was the criticism directed at him by Coach Butch Beard.
Maybe it was Beard's insistence that he join the team huddle with 2 minutes 16 seconds left; something about "sitting down and shutting up." Maybe it was the idea of not starting, a real possibility if he continued to produce at a pace consistent with the hatching of larvae.
At any rate, Benoit Benjamin, Everybody's Favorite Net to Pick On, turned in one of his rare inspiring performances tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Benjamin, maligned for his 5 points-per-game average and questionable effort after three games, erupted for 22 points and 13 rebounds as the Nets defeated the Chicago Bulls, 110-109.


Sports of The Times; She's Back, But Still on The Baseline
JENNIFER CAPRIATI was back on the baseline last night, rooted to where much of her well-chronicled trouble began.
After 15 months away from what is loosely known as a women's tennis tour, Capriati was back trying to outslug an opponent with powerful ground strokes, but with unremarkable speed and no great serve.
Beyond conditioning, she needed another weapon against 19-year-old Anke Huber, a German who was supposed to be the second coming of Steffi Graf.


National Sea reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
ALEXANDER REINSURANCE INTER MEDIARIES INC., Stamford, Conn., a unit of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., named William R. Coleman, its president, to the additional position of chief executive, and Robert T. Mobyed, its executive vice president, to chief operating officer.
ITT HARTFORD INSURANCE GROUP, Hartford, a subsidiary of ITT Corp., appointed James J. Westervelt senior vice president and group controller.


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L. Players Talk Contingencies
Already damaged and increasingly fragmented by a six-week labor lockout, the major league hockey business resumes on two modest fronts today while more radical plans loom on the horizon, at various stages of planning.
Meeting in Buffalo, the National Hockey League and the N.H.L.
Players Association will resume negotiations regarding a collective bargaining agreement.


Banco Frances del Rio de La Plata S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nynex Faces Yet Another Competitor
Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday that it would upgrade its cable television networks in Manhattan to offer high-speed telephone services for business customers by next summer, giving the Nynex Corporation yet another rival to worry about.
The move further solidifies Time Warner's effort to compete against telephone companies around the country, and it dovetails with plans by other cable television operators.


Suncor Inc.(SU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about French-African relations misstated the duration of France's involvement in African affairs.
French colonial rule in Africa dates from the 19th century, not from the 1940's.


State Auto Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Rescue Boat Arrives  Newcastle Australia, the 60-foot yacht that rescued the shipwrecked BOC round-the-world racer, Josh Hall, arrived in Cape Town on Tuesday afternoon.
On board were Hall and Newcastle's skipper, Alan Nebauer.
The sailor from Australia picked up Hall in the South Atlantic Ocean on Oct. 18, eight hours after Hall's 60-footer hit a submerged object.
Nebauer -- a day after leaving Charleston, S.C., at the start of the race -- hit an abandoned Cuban refugee raft, which damaged Newcastle's keel.
Arnet Taylor Jr., a BOC racer from Portsmouth, N.H., arrived in Cape Town earlier Tuesday.


Both Candidates Claim Victory
Representative Sam Gejdenson, a seven-term Democrat from eastern Connecticut, claimed victory by a few hundred votes today in one of the closest Congressional elections in the nation.
His Republican opponent, Edward W. Munster, also claimed victory by about the same margin.
The race is heading for a recount, required by state law when the margin is within one half of 1 percent of the total vote.
Mr.
Gejdenson's campaign said that out of slightly more than 185,000 votes, he got 470 votes more than Mr.
Munster.
The Associated Press also gave Mr.
Gejdenson the victory, by 5 votes, 79,172 to 79,167.
Mr.
Munster claimed victory by 362 votes, with 42.6 percent of the vote to 42.4 percent for Mr.
Gejdenson.


New York City Marathon Casualty Got Medical Help Too Late
To the Editor:
Sunday, along with hundreds of thousands of other people, a friend and I ventured out to Central Park to cheer on the participants in the New York City Marathon.
At about the 3:40 mark we saw a tall man come around the slight bend just before the finish line.
As soon as we saw him, we could see he was in trouble.


Jordan, Marketing Tool
American Association teams are wasting little time in taking advantage of the MICHAEL JORDAN baseball show.
The Louisville Redbirds and the Buffalo Bisons are already offering special ticket packages featuring 1995 games against the Nashville Sounds, whose roster will probably include the former National Basketball Association star.


Alice Miller, 46, Headed Center For Women at Brooklyn College
Alice Miller, the director of the Brooklyn College Women's Center since 1985, died on Monday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
She was 46 and lived in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn.
The cause was cancer, said Richard Coniglione, a spokesman for Brooklyn College.


It's Secondary Concerns Primarily for the Jets
It was never meant to be easy, this business of being a Jets football player or a Jets fan.
They have won three of their last four games.
They have swept the Bills for the first time in eight years.
They have found a friendly home crowd at Giants Stadium, where they are 4-1 this season.
Yet they are a battered squad as they prepare for the Green Bay Packers, their mirror image.
Both teams are 5-4.


Summer of Ringing Doorbells Sends a New Face to Congress
Only one challenger prevailed in New Jersey's Congressional races on Tuesday, so the victory was all the sweeter for William Martini, the Republican Passaic County Freeholder who defeated Herbert Klein, the one-term Democrat, by about 2,000 votes.
It was a high-spending race that drew support from the national Republican Party, which made Mr.
Klein's seat a target for a takeover.


ACE Ltd. (ACL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rwandan Refugees in Zaire Still Fear to Return
The simple Rwandan peasant woman, a widow unable to read or write, uncertain of her age, wonders if she will ever see her three sons again.
The eldest of Margarita Icymanizanye's three sons, in turn, wonders if he will ever see his mother.
He fled Rwanda during the spring and summer's deadly civil war, and now yearns to return home to be near her.
His hope is to take his wife and their five children back to their house in Kigali.


Mr. Pataki and the Albany Gang
Like the rest of the nation, New Yorkers voted for change on Tuesday.
They stand to get lots of it at the top of state government, but if they are lucky and insistent the ascension of George Pataki could represent something more important.
Mr.
Pataki, a little-known State Senator, has an opportunity to reshape the cloistered political culture of Albany.
Mario Cuomo waged a strong re-election campaign -- gamely bucking the national Republican trend to defend his 12-year record and his out-of-fashion but laudable commitment to the less fortunate.
Even the endorsement by New York City's Republican Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, though, could not overcome voters' hunger for change.


Cascades reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


His Head Held High, Very High, Cuomo Is Done In His Way
Searching through the millions of glistening words that constituted Mario M. Cuomo's final campaign for governor, it is difficult to find more than a handful in which he explained how his fourth term would have been different from the previous three.
It did not matter that the popular demand for change became so incessant that he could not have mistaken its threatening implications for his career.
He declined, for reasons of principle, pride and a trademarked stiffness of neck, to pay tribute to that national mood, instead attacking it in speech after speech as a Republican construct.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a Federal decision to end some clinical trials for AIDS patients in New York City misstated the name of an organization that runs one program.
It is the Clinical Directors Network, not the Community Directors Network.


West
ALASKA
A Democratic incumbent is leading, but the party may have to wait until next week before it celebrates.
That is, if it gets to celebrate at all.
With 100 percent of the precincts reporting, Gov.
Tony Knowles has a lead of 339 votes over James Campbell.
But 7,500 absentee ballots remain to be counted and a winner will not be declared until Monday.
Lieut.
Gov.
Jack Coghill, running as the Alaska Party Choice, held 13 percent of the vote.


Midwest
ILLINOIS
Once one of the most powerful lawmakers in Congress, Representative Dan Rostenkowski was soundly defeated by a relative unknown, Michael P. Flanagan.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, an 18-term Chicago Democrat, was forced to relinquish the chairmanship of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee earlier this year after his indictment on corruption charges.
Nonetheless, his defeat on Tuesday was considered a huge upset in the ward politics of Chicago, which in earlier times did not find indictments particularly troublesome.
As expected, Gov.
Jim Edgar won a second term, trouncing his Democratic challenger, Dawn Clark Netsch.
In other Congressional races, one other Republican managed to win a seat that had been in Democratic hands.
The district in Joliet that has been held by Representative George E. Sangmeister, a Democrat who is retiring, was won by State Representative Gerald C. Weller, a Republican.


Burlington Industries Inc.(BUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Lautenberg, on the Brink, Beats Back a G.O.P. Tide
In a state where the Democratic Party has repeatedly faltered in recent years, and after a night in which that trend was accelerated locally and nationally, United States Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the two-term Democrat who has begun each of his political campaigns as the presumed loser, stood again in the winner's circle today.
"We saw a tidal wave sweep across this country with the majority changing hands in both houses of the Congress in proportions that were never dreamed of," Mr.
Lautenberg said today at his first news conference since his victory Tuesday night over Chuck Haytaian, a Republican and Speaker of the State Assembly.
"But we think that there is a message that one can stand as an individual, proud of one's party and buck the tide."


Silcorp Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Russian Nationalist Tells U.N. It Shouldn't Meddle in World
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian nationalist politician touring the United States, stopped by here today and immediately chastised the United Nations for interfering in international affairs.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky said the imposition by the United Nations of embargoes on countries like Iraq and the combatants in the Balkans had yielded "no positive results." The leaders whom the actions were intended to curb, he said, "are people still in power" while "women and children suffer."


Regulators Get Leeway In Bank Takeover Rule
Worried that a new accounting rule might make crises in the financial market worse, Federal bank regulators announced a narrow exception yesterday aimed at preventing unintended Federal takeovers of commercial banks.
The new rule, Financial Accounting Standard 115, will soon force banks to show the current market value of securities on their books, rather than the price at which they acquired the securities.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is part of the Treasury Department, announced yesterday that banks would be required to follow the rule except in determining whether they retained enough capital to cover possible losses on loans and other investments.


INSIDE
Dread Strands Rwandans
In a quandary that pains families and hampers Rwanda's recovery, more than a million refugees remain outside the country.
Page A3.
New Autopilot Restrictions
The F.A.A. barred pilots of planes like the one that crashed last week in Indiana from using automatic flight controls in icy conditions.
Page A24.


Central Garden &amp; Pet Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Corrections
The Kitchen Bookshelf column in The Living Section on Nov. 2 about this fall's new cookbooks reversed the authors' identities for "The Four Seasons -- A History of America's Premier Restaurant" (Crown, 1994).
It is by John Mariani with Alex von Bidder.


Siliconix Inc.(SILI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: PARTIES - THE OUTLOOK: As One Party Prepares to Run the Capitol, the Other Hunts for Leaders; Republicans Get Chance on Taxes, Crime and Welfare
The Republicans have left no doubt where they stand.
Most of those who were elected to Congress on Tuesday had signed what they called a "Contract With America" -- sweeping promises of tax cuts, a stronger military, a balanced budget, less generous welfare programs and term limits.


Deep in SoHo, Mermaids and Crabs
THE classic Manhattan lobby, all glitter and swank, won't do in SoHo.
Especially at Red Square, an esthetically anarchic apartment building, at 250 East Houston Street, which sports a rooftop assemblage of globes and street signs.


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.(THI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


THE NEW FACES IN THE SENATE
ARIZONA  Jon Kyl, 52, Republican
The son of a Congressman, a lawyer and four-term House member, Mr.
Kyl has been a strong critic of cuts in the Pentagon budget and played an important role in preserving spending for the Stars Wars program.
In the race to succeed Senator Dennis DeConcini, the retiring Democrat, he campaigned against Representative Sam Coppersmith by emphasizing his opposition to abortion rights and President Clinton's health plan.
MAINE  Olympia J. Snowe, 47, Republican
A member of the House since 1978, Ms.
Snowe defeated Representative Thomas H. Andrews to take over the seat now held by Senator George J. Mitchell, the Democratic leader, who is retiring.
She entered politics in 1973 by running for the state House seat left vacant by the death of her first husband, Peter Snowe.
A widely known and popular figure around the state, Ms.
Snowe was one of a group of Republican women who called on President George Bush to modify his opposition to abortion rights.
She supports a balanced budget amendment and in 1987 led the drive to have the new American Embassy in Moscow demolished after listening devices were discovered in it.
Ms.
Snowe is married to the state's governor, John McKernan.


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc.(PIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Special Prosecutor on Suffolk Car Leasing to Withdraw
The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon, said today that he would withdraw from an investigation of a car-leasing deal in neighboring Suffolk County amid allegations that Mr.
Dillon's name was invoked by the Suffolk County District Attorney to threaten a Suffolk County legislator.
Mr.
Dillon's request came as the Suffolk County Legislature prepared to meet on Thursday to ask Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to initiate proceedings to remove the Suffolk District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr.


UNR Industries Inc.(UNRI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Regal-Beloit Corp.(RBC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York City Marathon Casualty Got Medical Help Too Late; Running and Anorexia
To the Editor:
A Nov. 6 news article about the New York City Marathon attributes to me the statement that "anorexic women tend to be runners." This is a misunderstanding.
That anorexic women tend to be perfectionistic and often engage in fitness activities, including running, is well known, but very different from the statement attributed to me.
WILLIAM FRIED  New York, Nov. 7, 1994 The writer is associate director, psychiatry residency training program, Maimonides Medical Center.


Houston Wins Potboiler With Trashy Plot
Rockets 109, Pacers 104
Hakeem Olajuwon's 43 points and 16 rebounds carried the Houston Rockets past the host Indiana Pacers by 109-104 last night in a game in which the crowd pelted the floor with trash to protest an official's foul call.


Valero Energy Corp.(VLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Roberds Inc.(RBDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Israeli Soldiers Who Must Not Fight
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 3 news article recalls an incident from the late 1970's.


Editor Change At Details
Joe Dolce, features editor at Vogue, has been named editor in chief of Details, replacing John Leland, whose resignation was also announced on Tuesday.
The announcement was made by James Truman, Conde Nast's editorial director, who worked with Mr.
Dolce for three years at Details when Mr.
Truman was editor in chief and Mr.
Dolce was senior editor.
Together they remade the magazine in 1990 into a fashion and life-style magazine for men.
Before 1990 Details covered night life in downtown Manhattan.


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


George Moskowitz; Arbitrator, 87
George Moskowitz, a labor lawyer and arbitrator who served on a number of statewide panels in New York, died Nov. 2 in Beth Israel Hospital North in Manhattan.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Victoria Moskowitz of Brookline, Mass.


PATAKI BEGINNING BID TO TRANSFORM STATE GOVERNMENT
After a late night of celebration, Governor-elect George E. Pataki set about transforming his campaign into a government yesterday, pledging to move quickly to enact the death penalty and a deep tax cut.
The extent of the challenge quickly became evident when Cuomo administration officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that the state could face a budget shortfall next year of $4 billion or more.
A gap of that size -- the state's general fund budget is $34 billion this year -- could make it exceedingly difficult for Mr.
Pataki to deliver the first stage of his promise to cut income tax rates by 25 percent over four years.


Edwin B. Dexter, 88, Ex-Coffee Executive
Rear Adm.
Edwin Boardman Dexter, a retired executive director of the Pan American Coffee Bureau and the New York Coffee and Sugar Exchange, died on Oct. 19 at his retirement home in Seminole, Fla.
A former resident of Manhattan, he was 88.
He joined the bureau in 1953 and became executive director, representing the interests of 15 coffee-growing countries.
From 1965 until his retirement in 1972, he was the executive director of the Coffee and Sugar Exchange.


Eott Energy Partners L.P.  (EOT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Republican Leaders: Setting Congressional Agenda With 'Contract' in Mind
NEWT GINGRICH
Following are excerpts from an interview with Representative Newt Gingrich on the CNN program "Morning News":
I think we have the potential to do some very good work.
I think that the American people want very bold, dramatic change.
And I think, when you have changes in governors and in state legislatures and in the Senate and in the House, all simultaneously, there's a pretty big underlying message.
So, I hope that the President and the Democrats in the Congress will take seriously the American people's choices, and give us a chance to work with them to try to do some good things for the country. . . .


Ketchum Protests Political Ads
Ketchum Communications has declared war on negative political advertising.
In print advertisements that ran yesterday in The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, Ketchum characterized negative ads as "political filth that is not advertising and shouldn't be dignified by being called advertising."


Jet Attacks Bosnian Town; 10 Deaths Reported
A warplane flown either by Bosnian Serbs or by Croatian Serbs fired a rocket into the northwestern Bosnian town of Bihac at noon today, United Nations officials said.
"This is a serious incident," said Maj.
Koos Sol, a United Nations military spokesman, who said military observers witnessed the fighter-jet fire a single rocket into Bihac after a heavy shelling attack.
Bihac is in one of the regions designated by the United Nations as a "safe area."


Results - New York: The Race for Governor
% RPTG.
Cuomo
Pataki
Golisano
Other
'94 N.Y.C.
100
1,023,493
421,545
16,432
15,941
Bronx
100
155,350
46,650
2,092
2,956
Brooklyn
100
286,564
116,824
3,942
3,791
Manhattan
100
287,443
64,806
3,636
3,103
Queens
100
243,806
139,349
5,142
4,597
Staten Island
100
50,330
53,916
1,620
1,494
'94 Suburbs
98
514,406
645,989
23,640
25,865
Nassau
100
202,559
231,580
7,887
9,767
Rockland
100
37,832
48,720
1,517
1,445
Suffolk
100
147,399
230,531
10,131
10,406
Westchester
93
126,616
135,158
4,105
4,247
'94 Upstate
100
792,305
1,469,817
171,598
48,056
Albany
100
61,204
52,466
5,066
1,947
Allegany
100
2,606
10,581
1,000
349
Broome
100
20,973
45,178
6,685
1,086
Cattaraugus
100
5,851
18,768
1,463
802
Cayuga
100
5,795
18,560
1,689
722
Chataqua
100
12,505
30,845
1,692
800
Chemung
100
7,771
19,833
2,050
686
Chenango
100
3,071
12,090
971
277
Clinton
100
8,728
13,886
1,328
560
Columbia
100
7,331
16,408
978
373
Cortland
100
3,496
12,546
826
422
Delaware
100
3,227
12,546
636
212
Dutchess
99
24,642
58,221
2,885
1,640
Erie
99
138,215
174,329
14,908
6,849
Essex
100
3,807
10,712
514
349
Franklin
100
5,088
7,992
612
400
Fulton
100
3,988
12,786
779
324
Genesee
100
4,881
13,001
2,121
464
Greene
100
4,386
12,776
779
324
Hamilton
100
560
2,577
129
78
Herkimer
100
5,579
16,489
1,107
362
Jefferson
100
8,305
15,361
3,209
858
Lewis
100
1,513
6,106
546
182
Livingston
100
5,644
12,216
3,294
421
Madison
100
5,278
15,986
1,285
481
Monroe
100
89,474
110,390
50,207
4,572
Montgomery
100
5,412
12,420
887
346
Niagara
100
22,187
44,792
4,587
1,266
Oneida
100
22,330
55,878
4,666
2,032
Onondaga
99
52,497
101,490
9,192
3,012
Ontario
100
8,673
19,758
5,846
538
Orange
100
24,516
58,932
2,633
1,810
Orleans
100
2,714
8,709
1,568
188
Oswego
100
7,435
29,055
2,271
713
Otsego
100
5,159
13,200
1,019
268
Putnam
100
8,404
22,684
576
463
Rensselaer
100
21,717
35,130
3,211
1,285
Rockland
100
37,832
48,720
1,517
1,445
StLawrence
100
10,739
19,157
1,755
594
Saratoga
100
22,245
45,939
3,722
1,557
Schenectdy
100
23,702
31,523
3,248
1,078
Schoharie
100
2,819
7,787
518
162
Schuyler
100
1,424
4,489
404
128
Seneca
100
2,485
11,754
1,033
212
Steuben
100
5,848
23,870
2,151
616
Sullivan
100
6,299
14,903
493
366
Tioga
100
3,391
13,070
1,560
407
Tompkins
100
11,806
13,332
1,543
429
Ulster
100
19,255
40,892
2,008
1,136
Warren
100
5,088
14,587
974
698
Washington
100
4,210
13,612
945
628
Wayne
100
5,791
18,766
4,881
627
Wyoming
100
2,760
9,158
953
298
Yates
100
1,649
5,374
779
134
Totals
99
2,292,372
2,488,631
210,153
88,417


Caldor Inc.(CLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Vacco Savors Victory as a Mandate for the Death Penalty
In his first campaign for elective office, Dennis C. Vacco had a simple message: Let's get tough on crime, and as attorney general I'll help you get a death penalty in New York.
It was apparently a message that many voters wanted to hear.
Mr.
Vacco, the Republican candidate, squeezed by his Democratic opponent, Karen S. Burstein, 50 percent to 47 percent, according to the latest results, with most of those supporting him saying in exit polls that they favored the death penalty.
The margin of victory was almost the same as in the gubernatorial race, in which George E. Pataki, also a proponent of the death penalty, defeated Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who opposes it.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Boston Journal; Suspicion Is Legacy Of Odd Life
When Mary Guzelian was killed by a taxi nine years ago at the age of 68, few people would have guessed what was inside the shopping bags she toted around as she panhandled in the elegant Back Bay neighborhood here, wearing two heavy coats at a time even on hot summer days.
The bags were filled with money, thousands of dollars.
And there was even more money squirreled away in Ms.
Guzelian's home, mixed in among the trash, rotting food and human waste that fouled the subsidized apartment where she lived even though she owned two large houses.


Spacelabs Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


THEATER
An Irish Vaudeville, Literary and Otherwise  Theater Four
"Alive, Alive Oh!" is a sort of vaudeville of Irish music and literature, a collection of skits and songs one might expect to find on talent night at the local parish church.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a Critic's Notebook article last Thursday about sexual permissiveness on television misidentified the host of the HBO program "Hardcore TV." He is Dave Konig; Dave Kolin, shown in the related photograph, is a performer on the program.


Southern Electronics Corp.(SECX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Election's Fallout  The long-delayed world trade agreement will be the first test of the new alignment in Washington.
Although both parties say they support the pact, known as GATT, they still find themselves at odds as soon as they start discussing its details.  [ Page D1. ] Euphoria over the Republican sweep quickly faded on Wall Street, with the Dow industrials eking out a tiny gain of 1.01 point.  [ D1. ]


THEATER
Finding a 'Gift Horse,' With Talmudic Roots  Theater 91
Michael Hardstark loves snappy lines, and he writes good ones; but his passion runs away with him in "The Gift Horse," being produced by the Jewish Repertory Theater.
The plot itself is simply one running transparent joke, and in a performance of more than two hours all the wisecracks put into the mouths of seven of the nine characters add up to too much of a good thing.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Student Is Shot at a High School in New Haven
A sophomore at Wilbur Cross High School was shot outside the school cafeteria this morning in the aftermath of an argument that began the night before, school officials said.
It was the first time a student had been shot by another student in the New Haven school system, authorities said.
Last December, a 15-year-old boy shot himself in the foot in a public school here.


Who Won Where: The Race for Connecticut Governor
Groark
Rowland
Curry
Scott
Town
ACP
GOP
DEM
IND
Andover
281
294
376
283
Ansonia
695
3,025
2,028
505
Ashford
303
365
693
262
Avon
2,306
2,187
1,569
786
Brkhmstd
386
412
355
286
BeaconFals
186
1,046
474
194
Berlin
1,569
2,045
2,604
1,928
Bethany
331
1,075
672
174
Bethel
671
3,683
1,942
322
Bethlehem
203
781
384
205
Bloomfield
2,444
1,181
3,769
648
Bolton
563
587
622
424
Bozrah
265
307
348
202
Branford
2,282
4,238
3,769
762
Bridgeport
1,837
10,748
12,390
788
Bridgewatr
111
409
240
44
Bristol
4,119
4,725
7,376
4,055
Brookfield
471
3,134
1,409
213
Brooklyn
543
621
672
243
Burlington
747
890
836
668
Canaan
120
162
130
47
Canterbury
440
596
448
253
Canton
1,388
986
929
599
Chaplin
172
205
285
122
Cheshire
2,137
4,884
2,947
1,266
Chester
545
396
492
183
Clinton
1,150
1,810
1,268
478
Colchester
1,144
1,288
1,419
935
Colebrook
120
189
204
138
Columbia
591
547
787
323
Cornwall
205
209
233
71
Coventry
941
958
1,544
807
Cromwell
1,291
1,285
1,745
1,077
Danbury
1,802
8,214
6,107
775
Darien
1,263
4,608
1,168
123
DeepRiver
533
588
643
208
Derby
436
1,904
1,295
291
Durham
658
826
740
455
Eastford
149
239
205
80
EastGranby
573
592
499
293
EastHaddam
770
832
841
619
EastHmptn
1,033
1,079
1,299
1,047
EastHrtfrd
3,086
3,305
6,141
3,664
EastHaven
1,085
3,773
3,607
792
EastLyme
2,470
1,840
1,415
439
Easton
290
1,913
725
107
EastWndsr
631
851
1,151
792
Ellington
844
1,289
1,338
1,055
Enfield
2,581
3,758
4,942
3,620
Essex
1,013
925
673
232
Fairfield
2,565
9,496
6,347
792
Farmington
2,494
2,552
2,802
1,351
Franklin
262
233
280
102
Glastnbry
4,495
4,473
3,808
1,843
Goshen
222
495
272
188
Granby
1,245
1,292
933
653
Greenwich
5,059
9,918
4,449
445
Griswold
651
822
1,115
459
Groton
3,500
3,042
2,479
828
Guilford
1,918
3,320
2,643
568
Haddam
852
949
1,052
634
Hamden
3,783
6,953
7,842
1,467
Hampton
180
169
259
84
Hartford
4,113
2,351
12,135
1,576
Hartland
158
311
152
188
Harwinton
479
786
584
502
Hebron
825
853
936
548
Kent
175
569
394
60
Killingly
903
1,468
1,385
519
Killngwrth
644
796
643
316
Lebanon
595
790
828
493
Ledyard
1,687
1,898
1,046
432
Lisbon
341
404
478
197
Litchfield
717
1,409
962
481
Lyme
434
349
215
103
Madison
1,832
2,918
1,620
466
Manchester
4,897
4,678
6,811
4,013
Mansfield
1,288
901
2,638
396
Marlboro
609
666
738
510
Meriden
3,397
5,234
6,141
3,051
Middlebury
261
1,943
658
258
Middlefld
439
516
664
357
Middletown
3,241
2,894
5,857
2,451
Milford
2,178
8,306
5,366
2,695
Monroe
566
4,048
1,569
368
Montville
1,548
1,674
1,702
686
Morris
161
421
268
133
Naugatuck
858
5,305
2,529
1,186
NewBritain
2,901
3,651
8,105
3,812
NewCanaan
1,562
4,071
1,169
162
NewFairfld
485
2,640
1,195
253
NewHartfrd
691
779
705
504
NewHaven
3,523
5,129
15,934
1,016
Newington
2,778
2,789
4,709
2,892
NewLondon
2,040
1,400
2,152
329
NewMilford
1,060
3,980
2,099
484
Newtown
1,119
4,302
2,124
418
Norfolk
232
210
248
80
NorthBrnfd
808
2,171
1,405
487
NorthCanan
206
493
278
102
NorthHaven
1,612
4,542
3,118
853
NorthStntn
579
722
450
173
Norwalk
2,531
10,733
8,504
672
Norwich
3,440
2,774
4,260
1,460
OldLyme
1,362
1,066
753
261
OldSaybrk
1,392
1,570
1,141
450
Orange
897
3,286
1,782
390
Oxford
312
2,042
800
323
Plainfield
926
1,175
1,399
573
Plainville
1,217
1,429
2,280
1,768
Plymouth
673
1,159
1,213
871
Pomfret
335
563
395
162
Portland
929
895
1,303
792
Preston
531
599
495
230
Prospect
291
2,174
781
530
Putnam
683
888
1,078
302
Redding
419
1,817
1,000
103
Ridgefield
1,284
4,882
2,491
321
RockyHill
1,492
1,808
2,493
1,314
Roxbury
118
459
249
56
Salem
459
461
404
206
Salisbury
652
566
512
79
Scotland
137
143
192
118
Seymour
566
3,239
1,413
454
Sharon
272
503
326
55
Shelton
1,268
8,521
3,129
1,109
Sherman
209
656
333
49
Simsbury
3,808
3,517
2,236
1,176
Somers
623
1,149
946
709
Southbury
953
4,123
2,072
473
Southngtn
2,910
4,317
4,610
3,310
SouthWndsr
2,187
2,936
3,148
1,974
Sprague
265
292
394
218
Stafford
756
1,129
1,563
712
Stamford
4,617
12,182
10,315
758
Sterling
147
280
192
126
Stonington
2,465
2,079
1,808
416
Stratford
1,612
9,127
5,621
1,365
Suffield
1,102
1,501
1,244
862
Thomaston
319
1,354
753
428
Thompson
493
1,135
1,123
269
Tolland
1,030
1,404
1,452
1,011
Torrington
2,096
3,832
4,152
2,656
Trumbull
1,209
8,731
3,673
663
Union
60
89
100
58
Vernon
2,225
2,640
3,431
2,248
Voluntown
167
264
237
91
Wallingfrd
3,000
5,565
5,045
2,230
Warren
99
252
139
34
Washington
322
716
447
120
Waterbury
2,190
16,864
9,820
3,082
Waterford
2,677
2,413
2,085
517
Watertown
845
4,658
2,034
1,020
Westbrook
645
891
645
217
WestHrtfrd
9,122
5,993
9,256
2,590
WestHaven
2,137
6,388
7,182
1,669
Weston
444
1,952
1,120
72
Westport
1,483
4,955
3,728
186
Wethersfld
3,137
3,577
4,272
2,211
Willington
459
532
766
423
Wilton
897
3,748
1,679
136
Winchester
779
1,113
1,209
908
Windham
1,482
1,311
3,300
656
Windsor
2,587
2,506
4,138
1,908
WindsorLks
866
1,201
1,614
1,124
Wolcott
506
3,448
1,396
1,009
Woodbridge
782
1,748
1,299
156
Woodbury
497
2,034
982
213
Woodstock
615
1,016
758
268
Totals
215,952
412,255
372,749
129,920


U.S. Promises To Maintain Foreign Policy
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came to Seoul to tell the South Koreans that Washington was committed to their security.
But today he found himself reassuring them that Republican victories in Congress would not change the course of American foreign policy.
Mr.
Christopher's words were also intended as a message to the rest of the world -- most immediately to the foreign leaders that he and President Clinton will meet in Asia in the coming days -- that they should not overreact to the extraordinary shift of power in Washington.


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reader's Digest Assn.  Inc.(RDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Aluminum Corp.(IAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After a Strong Start, Capriati Loses Steam
Resurfacing from a 14-month sabbatical from professional tennis that turned out to be more debilitating than exhilarating, Jennifer Capriati made a spirited return tonight to the sport she abandoned in despair after it broke her spirit last year.
The comeback did not, by conventional standards, end happily.
The unranked 18-year-old, appearing in her first tournament since the first-round 1993 United States Open loss that provoked her exit, was defeated, 6-4, 3-6, 6-1, by 13th-ranked Anke Huber of Germany.


How Democrat McCall Navigated a G.O.P. Flood
H.
Carl McCall stood before supporters yesterday and tried to explain why he, the candidate who looked most vulnerable a week ago, was the only Democrat left standing after a Republican sweep of the four statewide governmental offices.
"Obviously, the people of New York State want somebody to watch all the other fellows," he said, half-joking, not long after Republicans won the offices of governor, lieutenant governor and attorney general but not comptroller, which he claimed for himself.


ON THE ROAD WITH: Brooke Shields; Coping, From Toe to Head to Heart
THE morning after her opening night here in the road show of "Grease!" finds Brooke Shields padding around her hotel suite in bare feet, which, thanks to bunion surgery, are now as lovely as the rest of her.
"I had to have both feet broken," she says, wincing, "but now I can wear high heels without three Tylenols."
Along with her born-again feet, the 29-year-old actress has a born-again Christian boyfriend, the world class tennis player Andre Agassi, 24.
He was a perfect brick during her long convalescence last winter, it seems, even though he himself was recovering from wrist surgery.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Pots and Cold
Q.
How can I keep my large terra-cotta pots from cracking over the winter? -- Elizabeth Haines, New York


Toronto Sun reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Researchers Ask Whether Prenatal Care Truly Saves Money
Prenatal care is often described as preventive medicine that pays for itself by averting future costs, but a new analysis says the savings have not been substantiated.
The investigators hasten to add that prenatal care is medically important and that all pregnant women should receive it.
But they say the argument that for every dollar spent far more will be saved is a myth.


Premdor Inc.(PI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


His Man Unhorsed, Giuliani Confronts His Political Plight
Having gambled and lost in his dramatic endorsement of Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has now been left needing millions of dollars of assistance from the state but facing a Republican governor who owes him nothing and drew little of his support from New York City.
In a sign of his political plight, the Mayor admitted yesterday that he had twice called Governor-elect George E. Pataki since his victory, but had not heard back.


Hewlett-Packard to Sell Notebooks
The Hewlett-Packard Company, aiming to complete its personal computer line, said today that it would introduce two new color notebook computers on Thursday, marking its entry in this fast-growing segment of the market.
Hewlett-Packard has been the most successful maker of so-called personal digital assistants, or P.D.A.'s.
The company's Omnibook 300, a black-and-white subnotebook, has also been popular, and the maker's line of desktop PC's has taken off recently, after years of slow sales.
But to become a full-range player, analysts have said, the company needed a line of notebook machines.


Coventry Corp.(CVTY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rockport Picks Leo Burnett
The Rockport Company has ended a brief review on the creative portion of its worldwide footwear account by awarding the assignment to the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, which handles many large accounts for Rockport's parent, Reebok International.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Drugs May Slow Alzheimer's Disease
To the Editor:
Former President Ronald Reagan's disclosure that he has Alzheimer's disease is saddening (front page, Nov. 6).


Assembly Can Brake G.O.P.
H.
Carl McCall, the State Comptroller, will be the only Democratic official to hold statewide office come January.
But the most powerful Democrat in Albany, when the post-Mario M. Cuomo era begins in two months, is more likely to be Sheldon Silver, the Speaker of the Assembly.
Mr.
Silver, the quiet veteran state legislator from Manhattan's Lower East Side, will be in a position to shape and perhaps even block much of Governor-elect George E. Pataki's agenda.
Mr.
Pataki's core campaign pledge, a 25 percent reduction in the state's personal income tax rate, must go for approval to the Democratic-controlled Assembly, which Mr.
Silver leads, and to the Republican-dominated Senate.
The coming battles over whether to approve the tax cuts, when to impose them, how to trim state spending and how to protect local communities from a loss of vital state aid, will all inevitably find themselves right on Mr.
Silver's desk.


Haggar Corp.(HGGR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Penney Chief To Quit Post By Year-End
The J. C. Penney Company said yesterday that its chairman, William R. Howell, would step down as chief executive on Jan. 1, putting in place a succession plan before his anticipated retirement in a few years.
As part of the plan, the retailer named James E. Oesterreicher, 53, vice chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Oesterreicher, who began his Penney's career in 1954 as a management trainee in Lansing, Mich., is currently president of Penney stores and catalogue, a post he has held since 1992.


Minimalism, Out; Romanticism, In
Two of the best dance works you will see this season are "A Brahms Symphony" and "Fandango." It is no accident that Lar Lubovitch is their choreographer.
In recent years, Mr.
Lubovitch's versatility has obscured his true calling, which is putting movement together with the mastery of someone who recognizes the passion of pure dancing.
"A Brahms Symphony," created in 1985, is a virtual surge of sweeping movement, while "Fandango" (1990) is the opposite, an erotic duet whose shapes are intricately pieced together, jigsaw-style.


As Washington's Old Order Gives Way, No Clear Signs From the New
For American business, the immediate post-election impact from the Republican Party victories is the new faces coming to the fore in Washington as committee chairmanships change hands.
Even so, the shift in control may not result in radical departures from current Congressional policies.
Here is a look at several leading industries most likely to be at the top of the agenda next year:


The Right Way to Listen to Ragas: Carefully
"Follow the song," said Manilal Nag in the Tishman Auditorium of the New School on Friday night, explaining how his style of Indian music must be heard.
"First you must listen to the voice."
And then Mr.
Nag demonstrated, his voice barely audible, sliding down to a note, gliding past it, bending slightly above it, wavering back and forth before sounding its center and sliding to the next pitch.
He then imitated precisely the same vocal gesture on the sitar, the instrument's frets becoming irrelevant as the strings were bent and pressed into microtonal expression.


Enduring a Disease That Steals the Soul
I DID not laugh at the Ronald Reagan witticisms when they erupted this week, as they had to.
I suppose I can understand the impulse; how else but with mordant humor to cope with the terror of an unpredictable and fatal illness that corrupts the memory and steals the soul?
But Alzheimer's disease ceased to be funny to me in 1984, when my father was first diagnosed with the ailment that scoured his memory and assaulted his brain so viciously, and helped to kill him seven years later.


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When the People Spoke, Federal Term Limits Gained
The people of seven states voted on Tuesday in favor of term limits for members of Congress, and Republican leaders predicted yesterday that Congress would soon propose a constitutional amendment to achieve that goal.
With the new balloting, 22 states have now voted to impose term limits on Federal lawmakers, despite many questions about the legality of such restrictions when imposed by state law or a state constitution.
On the other hand, there is no doubt that a properly drafted amendment to the Federal Constitution could limit the tenure of members of Congress, just as the 22d Amendment, ratified in 1951, set a two-term limit for Presidents.


Life Re Corp.(LRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ye Historic Drag Strip
DESIGNATED historic places aren't just turreted mansions and spired churches.
Drag strips have historic significance, too.
In August, the National Hot Rod Association Drag Strip at Great Bend, Kan., was listed on the Register of Historic Kansas Places not because it is a glorious piece of architecture -- it is a concrete runway 150 feet wide by 7,999 feet long -- but because it was the site of the first national drag race championship sanctioned by the group, which was held Sept. 29 through Oct. 2, 1955.


Fewest U.S. Farms Since 1850: 1.9 Million
Continuing a trend that began six decades ago, the number of American farms has dipped below two million for the first time since before the Civil War, the Census Bureau said today.
The bureau, which produces a farm census every five years, counted 1,925,300 farms in the United States in 1992, the lowest number since 1850.
The decline has been steady since 1935, when the total number of farms peaked at 6.8 million as the Depression began the migration off the land and into the cities.


Can Treatment Ever Cure Sex Offenders?
To the Editor:
"Remembering Megan" (editorial, Nov. 5) questions the focus in New Jersey's new legislation on informing communities about convicted sex offenders released in their midst, as opposed to a focus on treatment programs in New Jersey's prisons and juvenile facilities.


Was Hemingway Gay? There's More to His Story
HEMINGWAY'S GENDERS Rereading the Hemingway Text  By Nancy R. Comley and Robert Scholes  Illustrated. 154 pages.
Yale University Press. $23.
For some years now and in several recent biographies, evidence has been gathering that Ernest Hemingway was not, after all, the avatar of monolithic masculinity that he was once so universally assumed to be.


Michael O'Donoghue, 54, Dies; Writer for 'Saturday Night Live'
Michael O'Donoghue, a comedy writer who helped create two of his generation's best-known institutions of humor, National Lampoon magazine and the NBC television show "Saturday Night Live," died yesterday in Manhattan.
He was 54 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said his wife, Cheryl Hardwick.


A Daughter's Death, a Father's Guilt
Out by the noisy sawmill, the trailer parks, the taxidermist and the scrubby bait shops where Bobby Crabtree lives, there is very little mystery why he shot the daughter he doted on early Sunday morning.
And the idea of blaming Mr.
Crabtree for what happened when his high-spirited 14-year-old, Matilda Kaye, decided to play a practical joke on him, is far removed from the minds of most.
He might have acted a little hastily, some say tentatively.
But there are more people who not only sympathize with the 53-year-old ice-company driver but see themselves doing the same thing.


Nordstrom Inc.(NOBE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Salomon Says It May Take Charge Against Its Earnings
Salomon Inc. announced yesterday that it may be forced to take an unspecified charge against earnings in the fourth quarter because of "certain unreconciled balances" on its books.
But the charge, if taken, will not have any appreciable affect on its overall financial position, the company said.
The potential reserve, which was first disclosed in the company's latest quarterly filing to the Securities and Exchange Commission, came to light as a result of Salomon's transition in the last several years from a centralized computer system to one relying on networks of smaller machines.
While reviewing data bases containing the company's accounts, the "unreconciled balances" were discovered, the filing said.


Washington Real Estate Investment Trust (WRE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Novellus SystemInc.(NVLS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rwandan Refugees in Zaire Still Fear to Return
The simple Rwandan peasant woman, a widow unable to read or write, uncertain of her age, wonders if she will ever see her three sons again.
The eldest of Margarita Icymanizanye's three sons, in turn, wonders if he will ever see his mother.
He fled Rwanda during the spring and summer's deadly civil war, and now yearns to return home to be near her.
His hope is to take his wife and their five children back to their house in Kigali.


'Homicide' Survives, But in What Condition?
There's more than one way to snuff the life out of a television series.
For a while, it looked as if "Homicide: Life on the Street" would simply be murdered by NBC as the rule-breaking and stubbornly downbeat police show was shunted from one day and time period to another, leaving even its fans confused.
But now "Homicide" is ensconced in a Fridays-at-10 P.M. slot, not the best spot on the weekly schedule, but at least a steady gig.
Furthermore, the network has just announced, even as ratings remain soft, an order for seven more episodes that will take the series well into 1995.
Sometimes, it seems, the system works.


National Health Laboratories Holdings Inc.(NH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foley, Defending Congress to the Last, Concedes Election Defeat by Newcomer
The House Speaker, Representative Thomas S. Foley, a 30-year incumbent, has always said that the best way to insure term limits was at the ballot box.
On Tuesday, voters in eastern Washington followed his advice.
Mr.
Foley conceded today at midday, even though he trailed the Republican challenger, George Nethercutt, by only 2,200 votes with 14,000 absentee ballots still to be counted.
The odds appeared too long to make up, Mr.
Foley said.


Starbucks (SBUX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Reeves Pulls the Switch and Goes With Graham
Quarterback Kent Graham was lifting weights this morning when Giants Coach Dan Reeves said he had to speak with him.
Graham knew that Reeves probably wasn't pulling him aside to invite him home for dinner with the family.
Reeves told Graham he was going to make a change at quarterback.
Looking for anything to jump-start the team -- anything -- Reeves said today that he was going to bench Dave Brown, the man anointed as the team's quarterback of the future, in favor of Graham.
The Giants have lost six straight games and they will do anything to end their misery.


TJ Int'l.(TJCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Primadonna Resorts Inc.(PRMA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Letting True Nature Be the Artist
BOTANICAL prints of flora captured in all its dewy, idealized glory leave David Winter cold.
"The real thing is more poetic than an artist's rendering," said Mr.
Winter, co-owner of Winter Works on Paper, a Manhattan gallery of prints, gravures and framable oddment.


Who Won Where: Results In the 435 Races for the House
ALABAMA District 1 -- 100% Don Womack, D 49,671 - 33% x-H.L.
Callahan, R* 101,956 - 67% District 2 -- 100% Brian Dowling, D 44,694 - 26% x-Terry Everett, R * 124,525 - 74% District 3 -- 100% xGlen Browder, D * 93,795 - 64% Ben Hand, R 53,706 - 36% District 4 x-Tom Bevill, D *
Uncontested  District 5 -- 100 %  x-Karen Thurman, D * 125,780 - 57 %  Big Daddy Don Garlits, R 94,093 - 43 %  District 6  x-Clifford Stearns, R *
Uncontested  District 7 -- 100 %  Edward Goddard, D 47,742 - 27 %  x-John Mica, R * 131,705 - 73 %  District 8  x-Bill McCollum, R *
Uncontested  District 9  x-Michael Bilirakis, R *
Uncontested  District 10  x-C.W.
Bill Young, R *
Uncontested  District 11 -- 100 %  x-Sam Gibbons, D * 76,774 - 52 %  Mark Sharpe, R 72,062 - 48 %  District 12 -- 100 %  Robert Connors, D 57,018 - 35 %  x-Charles Canady, R * 105,737 - 65 %  District 13  x-Dan Miller, R *
Uncontested  District 14  x-Porter Goss, R *
Uncontested  District 15 -- 100 %  Sue Munsey, D 100,512 - 46 %  x-Dave Weldon, R 117,026 - 54 %  District 16 -- 100 %  John Comerford, D 88,646 - 42 %  x-Mark Foley, R 122,734 - 58 %  District 17  x-Carrie Meek, D *
Uncontested  District 18  x-Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R *
Uncontested  District 19 -- 100 %  x-Harry Johnston, D * 147,591 - 66 %  Peter Tsakanikas, R 75,779 - 34 %  District 20 -- 100 %  x-Peter Deutsch, D * 114,615 - 61 %  Beverly Kennedy, R 72,516 - 39 %  District 21  x-Lincoln Diaz-Balart, R *
Uncontested  District 22 -- 100 %  Hermine Wiener, D 69,215 - 37 %  x-Clay Shaw, R * 119,690 - 63 %  District 23  x-Alcee Hastings, D *
T.
Mink, D * 124,431 - 70% Robert Garner, R 42,891 - 24% Larry Bartley, O 10,074 - 6% IDAHO District 1 -- 99% Larry LaRocco, D * 88,708 - 44% x-Helen Chenoweth, R 110,842 - 56% District 2 -- 99% Penny Fletcher, D 48,412 - 25% x-Mike Crapo, R * 143,099 - 75% ILLINOIS District 1 -- 100% x-Bobby Rush, D * 107,000 - 75% William Kelly, R 34,807 - 25% District 2 x-Mel Reynolds, D *
D.
Jacobs Jr., D * 55,491 - 53% Marvin Bailey Scott, R 48,363 - 47% IOWA District 1 -- 100% Glen Winekauf, D 69,240 - 38% x-Jim Leach, R * 109,975 - 60% Michael Cuddehe, O 1,169 - 1% Jan Zonneveld, O 2,322 - 1% District 2 -- 100% Dave Nagle, D 86,035 - 44% x-Jim Nussle, R * 110,639 - 56% Albert Schoeman, O 1,038 - 1% District 3 -- 99% Elaine Baxter, D 78,231 - 41% x-J.
Uncontested District 2 x-William Jefferson, D *
Uncontested District 3 x-W.
J.
Billy Tauzin, D *
Uncontested District 4 x-Cleo Fields, D *
Uncontested District 5 x-Jim McCrery, R *
Uncontested District 6 x-Richard Baker, R *
Uncontested District 7 x-James Hayes, D *
Morella, R * 138,010 - 70% MASSACHUSETTS District 1 x-John Olver, D *
Uncontested District 2 -- 99% x-Richard Neal, D * 114,826 - 59% John Briare, R 71,018 - 36% Kate Ross, O 9,901 - 5% District 3 -- 100% Kevin O'Sullivan, D 93,704 - 44% x-Peter Blute, R * 116,286 - 55% Dale Friedgen, O 2,382 - 1% District 4 -- 100% x-Barney Frank, D *
Uncontested District 5 -- 100% x-Martin Meehan, D * 141,144 - 70% David Coleman, R 60,628 - 30% District 6 -- 100% John Tierney, D 113,289 - 47% x-Peter Torkildsen, R * 120,743 - 51% Benjamin Gatchell, O 4,939 - 2% District 7 -- 100% x-Edward Markey, D * 145,966 - 64% Brad Bailey, R 80,629 - 36% District 8 x-Joseph Kennedy II, D *
Knollenberg, R * 155,158 - 68% John Hocking, O 2,940 - 1% District 12 -- 100% x-Sander Levin, D * 103,420 - 52% John Pappageorge, R 92,625 - 47% Eric Anderson, O 1,476 - 1% Jerome White, O 1,384 - 1% District 13 -- 100% x-Lynn Rivers, D 87,445 - 52% John Schall, R 75,889 - 45% Helen Halyard, O 1,329 - 1% Gail Petrosoff, O 591 - 0% Craig Seymour, O 3,137 - 2% District 14 -- 100% x-John Conyers Jr., D * 129,850 - 82% Richard Fournier, R 26,417 - 17% Richard Miller, O 2,967 - 2% District 15 -- 100% x-B.
Heineman, R 77,770 - 50% District 5 -- 100% Sandy Sands III, D 63,105 - 43% x-Richard Burr, R 84,580 - 57% District 6 x-Howard Doble, R *
Uncontested District 5 -- 100% Jarrod Tudor, D 48,914 - 27% x-Paul Gillmor, R * 134,581 - 73% District 6 -- 100% Ted Strickland, D * 86,892 - 49% x-Frank Cremeans, R 90,401 - 51% District 7 x-Dave Hobson, R *
Uncontested District 8 x-John Boehner, R *
C.
Uncontested District 6 -- 100% x-Tim Holden, D * 89,184 - 57% Frederick Levering, R 67,388 - 43% District 7 -- 100% Sara Nichols, D 59,777 - 30% x-Curt Weldon, R * 137,177 - 70% District 8 -- 100% John Murray, D 45,057 - 27% x-Jim Greenwood, R * 110,239 - 66% Robert Cash, O 4,362 - 3% Jay Russell, O 7,910 - 5% District 9 x-Bud Shuster, R *
Uncontested District 18 -- 100% x-Michael Doyle, D 101,396 - 55% John McCarty, R 83,714 - 45% District 19 x-William Goodling, R *
K. de la Garza, D * 61,889 - 59% Tom Haughey, R 40,755 - 39% John Hamilton, O 1,806 - 2% District 16 -- 100% x-Ronald Coleman, D * 49,815 - 57% Bobby Ortiz, R 37,409 - 43% District 17 -- 100% x-Charles Stenholm, D * 83,486 - 54% Phil Boone, R 72,000 - 46% District 18 -- 100% x-Sheila Lee, D 84,802 - 72% Jerry Burley, R 28,156 - 24% George Hollenbeck, O 1,169 - 1% J. Larry Snellings, O 4,278 - 4% District 19 x-Larry Combest, R *
B.
Bateman, R * 142,927 - 74% Matt Voorhees, O 4,365 - 2% District 2 -- 100% x-Owen Pickett, D * 78,524 - 59% Jim Chapman, R 54,623 - 41% District 3 -- 100% x-Robert Scott, D * 108,080 - 79% Thomas Ward, R 28,029 - 21% District 4 -- 100% x-Norman Sisisky, D * 115,236 - 62% A. George Sweet III, R 71,176 - 38% District 5 -- 99% x-L.
F.
Payne, D * 94,955 - 53% George Landrith III, R 83,135 - 47% District 6 x-Robert Goodlatte, R *
Uncontested District 7 -- 100% x-Thomas Bliley Jr., R * 176,640 - 84% Gerald Berg, O 33,123 - 16% District 8 -- 100% x-James Moran Jr., D * 116,602 - 59% Kyle McSlarrow, R 777,088 - 39% R. Ward Edmonds, O 1,808 - 1% William Jones, O 830 - 0% District 9 -- 100% x-F.
Uncontested District 7 -- 100% x-David Obey, D * 97,184 - 54% Scott West, R 81,697 - 46% District 8 -- 100% Stan Gruszynski, D 65, 218 - 36% x-Toby Roth, R * 114,021 - 64% District 9 x-J.
Sensenbrenner Jr., R *
Uncontested WYOMING At-Large -- 99% Bob Schuster, D 80,628 - 41% x-Barbara Cubin, R 103,952 - 53% Dave Dawson, O 11,792 - 6%


AT&amp;T Gets Mexico Partner For Long-Distance Service
Making its bid for one of the biggest prizes in the Mexican economy, the AT&amp;T Corporation announced a $1 billion alliance today with a Mexican partner, Grupo Industrial Alfa S.A., that would provide long-distance telephone service when the present Government-approved monopoly ends in 1997.
Analysts had expected AT&amp;T to decide to enter the expanding Mexican market, but were surprised by its selection of Alfa, an industrial group that manufactures diverse products ranging from cold-cut meats to flat steel, but has no telephone experience.


The New Era of Instability
Since 1968, there has been much talk of a "Republican realignment." Quieted by Bill Clinton's victory in 1992, it resounds again after Tuesday's Republican victories.
This election may in fact hail the emergence of a 20-year Republican lock not only on the Presidency but also on Congress and the statehouses.
But it is more likely to usher in an era of greater political turbulence characterized by empty sloganeering, mean-spirited campaigning and the growth of local and national third parties -- an era in which neither Democrats nor Republicans can count on stable majorities.


Tennant Co.(TANT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Commercial (STW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Gas Resources Inc.(WGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anxieties About a Mother Harming Her Children
THE confessed killing of two little boys by their mother in Union, S.C., horrified the nation last week.
The incident may also have terrified youngsters across the country.


In Stock: Design du Jour; Peeling Paint and More Trends at 3 Stores
LEAVES scattered to the wind, overturned baskets, weather-beaten signs, prairie kitchen tables with layers of peeling paint, banged-up watering cans, trailing ivy and rusted urns.
These are a few of the favorite things in the city's most stylish stores.
At a time when trying to define new directions in home design has become a freewheeling parlor game, three shops -- one with a decidedly French accent, another that offers a romantic take on the "wrong side of the tracks" and a third that seems like nothing so much as a secret garden -- offer some signposts.


One Hand Tied, Clinton Offers the Other
Even as President Clinton reached out to victorious Republicans, the White House was casting about today for ways to govern that would not require Congressional cooperation.
Looking somewhat chastened and sounding very conciliatory at a White House news conference, President Clinton accepted his share of responsibility for the devastating defeats suffered by Democrats in Congress, and he said that he would try to seek common ground with Republicans on issues like welfare reform.


Dr. Fell's Election
Tuesday's vote produced a political upheaval of historic proportions.
It decimated the top ranks of the Democratic Congressional leadership, awarded the Republicans control of both houses of Congress and most of the big-state governorships, and confronted President Clinton, who was elected as a minority President, with a stark problem of political survival.
Whether he can get any legislation passed and whether he is re-electable now depend largely on the strategic calculations of the likely Republican leaders, Representative Newt Gingrich and Senator Bob Dole, and such obstreperous ideologues as Senator Phil Gramm.
In the aftermath of a calamity that even the Cassandras among them had not predicted, disconsolate Democrats began to ask whether their party was flying apart like a disintegrating galaxy and losing any identity with which American voters could connect.
Republicans, in the aftermath of a triumph that fulfilled their rosiest fantasies, are left to wonder whether they can -- or want to -- shift from opposition to governance.


Derlan Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
LIV ULLMANN, the luminescent Norwegian actress turned director and screenwriter, has returned to her homeland to receive one of its highest honors.
She is to be formally named a Commander of Olav by King Harald of Norway in a ceremony tomorrow in Oslo.
"I love my country, and it is very good to get such beautiful recognition from your country and your king," she said yesterday.
The honor, comparable to a British knighthood, is not the only good news to come Ms.
Ullmann's way recently.
More came from INGMAR BERGMAN, with whom she lived for many years.


Instrument Systems (ISY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Losers in Congress Can't Pack Up Just Yet
The House and Senate Democratic incumbents who lost on Tuesday or who have already announced their intention to leave Congress cannot go into retirement quite yet.
They have been asked by the White House to return to Washington in less than a month to consider one final measure, the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs.
It will be the first lame-duck session in 12 years, called by President Clinton to finish the last piece of his 1993-94 legislative agenda.


Edward Schwartzman; Political Campaign Expert, 66
Edward Schwartzman, a political campaign specialist whose clients included former Mayor Abraham D. Beame of New York City and a New York gubernatorial candidate, Assemblyman Perry B. Duryea, died on Saturday in Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 66 and had lived in Manhattan until 1983, when he moved to Bethesda.
He died of complications from a heart attack, said his former wife, Robin Berman Schwartzman of Chevy Chase, Md.


Numac Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brazil Ponders a Once-Unspeakable Subject: Taxing the Rich
With their Paris townhouses, lavish weddings and squads of servants, Brazil's super rich customarily find their photos in the society pages.
This week, a dozen multimillionaires opened Veja magazine to find their portraits illustrating an article on income tax evasion.
Studying files leaked by the tax authorities, the newsweekly calculated that Brazil's 460 wealthiest millionaires paid $32.5 million in income tax in 1992 -- barely one percent of their $26.7 billion in assets.
Totaled, their assets were equal to the combined gross national products of two of Brazil's largest neighbors, Peru and Bolivia.


Dr. James Watts, U.S. Pioneer In Use of Lobotomy, Dies at 90
Dr.
James W. Watts, a neurosurgeon who performed the first frontal lobotomy in the United States, died on Monday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 90 and lived in Washington.
The cause of his death was cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Moe Drabowsky minor league pitching instructor.


Thermadyne Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
California Petroleum Transport Corp. filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell about $286.4 million of mortgage notes.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp. will be the lead underwriter.
*
Harrah's Jazz Co., New Orleans, is selling $435 million of first mortgage notes due in 2001 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities.
The notes are priced at par to yield 14.25 percent.
Callable in five years, the issue is rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Just Don't Call Me King, D'Amato Says of Pataki Victory
Even Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's daughter, Lisa Murphy, one of the state's many jubilant Republican Party committee workers, was calling him "the king" yesterday instead of Daddy.
She hailed him as the king of the party, of the state, and of at least two powerful new Senate fiefdoms when she sent him a balloon bouquet to celebrate his impressive single-day payoff of compounded political clout.


Insurers See Benefits From Election Victories
Where it counted, the insurance industry won on Tuesday.
In California and Georgia, the candidates for insurance commissioner perceived as friendly to the industry narrowly defeated rivals aligned with consumer interests.


Quno Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Snyder Oil Corp.(SNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THEATER
A Surreal Dissection Of the Lesbian Brain  Judith Anderson Theater
"The lesbian brain is divided into three sections, as opposed to the sub-division into two sections of the normal brain," declares Eleanor, a self-described "feminist, archeologist, historian and bilingual student of the female brain," in Claire Chafee's comedy, "Why We Have a Body." Those three sections are "memory, lust and hammering doubt."


THE 1994 ELECTIONS: CONGRESS -- NEWS ANALYSIS How Lasting a Majority?; Despite Sweeping Gains for Republicans, History Suggests the Power Is Temporary
Everything in Washington is changed by Tuesday's Republican sweep.
The question is for how long.
With the Republicans in control of the Senate and the House of Representatives for the first time since 1954, when the Dodgers were still in Brooklyn and a postage stamp cost three cents, and with the Republicans in control of the statehouses in seven of the eight largest states, it is evident that a power shift of major proportions has taken place.
But is the transformation permanent?


New York Results - The Race for Comptroller
RPTNG.
Burstein
Vacco
Albany
45.6
35,077
17,764
Allegany
100.0
3,401
9,231
Bronx
100.0
138,762
34,723
Brooklyn
99.0
261,908
87,118
Broome
99.5
27,373
34,517
Catargus
100.0
7,627
15,690
Cayuga
100.0
8,691
15,106
Chataqua
100.0
16,852
24,186
Chemung
100.0
10,325
14,894
Chenang
100.0
4,440
9,830
Clinton
100.0
9,214
11,538
Columbia
100.0
9,175
12,685
Cortland
100.0
4,763
8,333
Delaware
98.4
4,477
9,882
Dutchess
97.9
30,115
46,592
Erie
98.2
143,013
147,270
Essex
100.0
3,613
7,738
Franklin
100.0
5,178
6,559
Fulton
100.0
5,004
9,898
Genesee
100.0
5,695
11,670
Greene
100.0
5,566
10,619
Hamilton
100.0
775
1,815
Herkimer
100.0
6,320
11,988
Jefferson
100.0
8,053
15,077
Lewis
100.0
2,032
5,001
Livingston
100.0
6,289
11,969
Madison
100.0
6,872
12,977
Manhattan
100.0
265,628
57,423
Monroe
99.1
97,737
117,416
Montgomery
100.0
6,149
9,051
Nassau
99.1
192,516
216,465
Niagara
100.0
26,687
37,107
Oneida
100.0
29,197
44,504
Onondaga
99.0
63,430
83,877
Ontario
100.0
10,316
18,290
Orange
100.0
31,980
45,194
Orleans
100.0
3,352
7,617
Oswego
100.0
9,950
22,387
Otsego
100.0
6,583
10,934
Putnam
100.0
9,956
18,100
Queens
99.9
221,307
110,463
Rensselaer
100.0
26,463
28,062
Rockland
100.0
38,839
41,518
StLawrence
100.0
10,767
16,224
Saratoga
99.4
25,311
38,524
Schenectdy
100.0
25,885
26,184
Schoharie
100.0
4,482
6,280
Schuyler
100.0
1,946
3,697
Seneca
100.0
3,198
6,405
StatenIsl
100.0
41,159
46,619
Steuben
100.0
8,192
18,642
Suffolk
100.0
151,024
206,955
Sullivan
92.1
7,645
10,081
Tioga
100.0
5,239
10,701
Tompkins
100.0
12,719
11,307
Ulster
100.0
23,748
32,782
Warren
100.0
6,487
11,625
Washington
100.0
5,715
10,845
Wayne
100.0
7,274
18,468
Wstchester
92.8
130,335
113,976
Wyoming
100.039
3,488
7,945
Yates
100.0
2,065
4,845
Totals
99.2
2,227,859
1,981,307


Canadian Natural reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonds Gain Despite Rate Threat
Prices of Treasury securities were higher yesterday for the second consecutive session on a stronger dollar and optimism that Republican gains would help the fixed-income market.
Prices of United States securities started rising overnight as European investors interpreted the election results to mean that Republicans would provide a more favorable environment for the financial markets.


Market Place; Union Pacific Shuffles Deck, Playing New Santa Fe Card
When the election campaign is going badly, change the rules.
That option, unavailable to the Democrats, was seized on election night by the Union Pacific Corporation, which appeared to be all but certain to lose the pending election for control of the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation.
Union Pacific's latest bid in the contest with Burlington Northern Inc. for railroad supremacy in the West offered to assume all risk that Federal regulators would turn the merger down.
It is willing, it said on Tuesday night, to pay for Santa Fe shares now and, if forced to do so, dispose of them later.
Santa Fe shareholders would face no risk.
But -- and this is where this election battle gets complex -- Union Pacific is also willing to pay a higher price if it doesn't have to bear that risk.
And while it initiated its tender offer last night, it imposed conditions that mean it could withdraw the offer.
It is at least possible that Santa Fe shareholders who will vote next week on the Burlington Northern offer could turn it down and then not be able to get anything from Union Pacific for years, if at all.
That risk obviously was not on the minds of traders yesterday who bid up Santa Fe shares, which rose $1.25, to $16, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Union Pacific fell $2 a share, to $47.50, while Burlington Northern, after rising early, ended unchanged at $49.375.
The market clearly thinks that Union Pacific will likely prevail with its new offer.
And it suspects it is overpaying.
Burlington Northern denounced the new Union Pacific offer, but said nothing to rule in or out the possibility of improving its own bid.
"In an effort to avoid an effective competitor, U.P. has now put its shareholders in a risky and vulnerable position," Gerald Grinstein, Burlington's chairman and chief executive, said.
The unusually complex takeover fight for Santa Fe reflects the fact that approval by the Interstate Commerce Commission is needed before the railroads can merge.
But there is nothing to stop one company from buying the other before the commission acts.
The mechanism for doing that is the voting trust, in which the railroads are kept separate even while under common ownership.
That is what Union Pacific proposed on Tuesday.
If the merger eventually is viewed as anticompetitive, Union Pacific would then have to dispose of Santa Fe, perhaps taking a sizable loss.
Santa Fe shareholders will vote Nov. 18 on the Burlington Northern offer of Burlington stock now valued at $16.79 a share.
That offer cannot be completed without the commission's approval, but Santa Fe officials believe that approval would be forthcoming.
They say a Union Pacific takeover would present a much more difficult hurdle because of the higher number of parallel routes that would be combined.
Prior to Tuesday night, Union Pacific had offered $20 a share in Union Pacific stock, contingent on shareholders rejecting the Burlington deal.
Union Pacific had rejected a voting trust proposal, instead citing its own experts who argued that the commission would approve a deal.
Effectively, Santa Fe's institutional holders said they did not want to take the chance, and suggested that Union Pacific put its money where its mouth was.
At first glance, that appears to be exactly what Union Pacific has done.
It is now offering $17.50 in cash and stock for each Santa Fe share, but with a voting trust that will enable it to act without commission approval.
It is taking that plan to Santa Fe shareholders through a tender offer.
But Union Pacific has left itself some escape clauses.
Though the tender offer goes directly to the shareholders, it is contingent on approval of the Santa Fe board, as well as on shareholder rejection of the Burlington Northern offer.
Why make a hostile offer contingent on board approval?
"We need their cooperation with the I.C.C.," said Gary Schuster, a spokesman for Union Pacific.
"We can waive that if we want to, but we probably won't."
Moreover, even in saying it would go to the shareholders, Union Pacific said it remained ready to make a deal on its previous terms, which offer more money but shift the risk of the commission's disapproval to Santa Fe shareholders, who would have to wait, perhaps for years, to see any cash.
The move by Union Pacific clearly shows it is determined to break up the marriage of two rivals.
But it has left itself enough wiggle room that shareholders who vote against the Burlington deal cannot be sure that a better deal will be quickly available.


Nellcor (NELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


LDDS Communications (LDDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As Washington's Old Order Gives Way, No Clear Signs From the New
For American business, the immediate post-election impact from the Republican Party victories is the new faces coming to the fore in Washington as committee chairmanships change hands.
Even so, the shift in control may not result in radical departures from current Congressional policies.
Here is a look at several leading industries most likely to be at the top of the agenda next year:


Spielberg Recording Holocaust Testimony
Steven Spielberg stepped into a modest trailer not far from his offices at Universal Studios and was welcomed by a chorus of ringing telephones.
Milie Stern, one of a half-dozen volunteers, cupped a phone to her ear.
"You go to N.Y.U.?" she asked the caller.
"You're calling about your grandfather. What was the name of the concentration camp?"


Millipore Corp.(MIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Breathes there a college or graduate-school applicant, past or present, who does not know the name of STANLEY KAPLAN?
As the founder of the Kaplan Education Centers, he is the man who started tutoring programs for students preparing for the Scholastic Aptitude Test (now called the Scholastic Assessment Test) and 30 other entrance exams.
Mr.
Kaplan, who sold the business to the Washington Post Company in 1984, is now stepping down as chairman after 56 years in business.


Many Blacks See Betrayal In This Year's Campaign
The defeat of the Democrats was a bittersweet loss for many blacks, long considered the most loyal of Democratic voters.
It came after a campaign that left many saying they felt they were the underlying issue, where talk of welfare overhaul and the death penalty seemed aimed at them and where both parties seemed to compete to be the toughest on those topics.
"Race was at the heart of this election," said Roger Wilkins, a professor of history at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.
"There is a fierce anti-black and anti-immigrant undertone to this switch to the Republican Party. The message was, 'Let us take this country back and make it a white country -- a white male country -- again.' "


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about the Ice Wars figure skating competition between a team representing the United States and an international squad misstated the nationality of the skaters Viktor Petrenko and Oksana Baiul.
They are Ukrainian, not Russian.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
New Singers Step Into Roles In the Met's 'Rigoletto'  Metropolitan Opera
Verdi was well-served by the new principals who joined the Metropolitan Opera cast on Tuesday evening for the company's 500th performance of "Rigoletto." Alfredo Kraus was an uncommonly suave Duke, who moved among his cavorting courtiers in the opening scene with a relaxed, proprietary air.
At 67, Mr.
Kraus remains in superb vocal shape.
Resisting the temptation to turn "Questa o quella" and "La donna e mobile" into mere crowd-pleasers, he showed how elegance can be as virtuosic as bravura singing and often more communicative.


Lowe Group Buys 50% of Alice
The Lowe Group has acquired 50 percent of Alice, a leading French creative agency, and will combine its Lowe &amp; Associes agency in Paris with Alice.
The terms were not disclosed.


New York City Marathon Casualty Got Medical Help Too Late
To the Editor:
Sunday, along with hundreds of thousands of other people, a friend and I ventured out to Central Park to cheer on the participants in the New York City Marathon.
At about the 3:40 mark we saw a tall man come around the slight bend just before the finish line.
As soon as we saw him, we could see he was in trouble.


Journal; On the Bright Side
"This is not the end of the world -- it's the end of a campaign," said a wise woman, Ann Richards, in conceding defeat Tuesday night.
Others on the losing side in this election should follow her example and take a reality check.
The world didn't end, the news isn't all bad, and, in any case, yesterday was the first day of the rest of the next campaign.
Herewith a determined look at the election's bright side by one voter who woke up the morning after feeling more intrigued than despondent about the G.O.P.'s Brave New World.


G.O.P. CELEBRATES ITS SWEEP TO POWER; CLINTON VOWS TO FIND COMMON GROUND
Republicans today declared a political revolution, promised to balance the Federal budget and generally reveled in winning control of both the House and the Senate for the first time in 40 years.
The depth of their victory was sounded by the fact that no sitting Republican governor, senator or representative was defeated.


Eritrea Didn't Expel Ethiopian Civilians
To the Editor:
Reporting on former Ethiopian Army soldiers, you say "more than 200,000" Ethiopians were expelled by Eritrean nationalist rebels after the army's defeat in Eritrea in 1991 (Kormeada Journal, Nov. 3).


City Hospitals Avoid Layoffs And Make Severance Offers
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that the agency that operates New York City's municipal hospitals would offer voluntary severance packages to cut more than 2,500 workers from its payroll, rather than resorting to layoffs, as first proposed.
Less than two months ago, the president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, said that the agency would lay off 3,000 workers and eliminate hundreds of beds in the city's 11 hospitals as part of a plan to close a $356 million gap in the agency's $3.6 billion budget.


Gymboree Corp.(GYMB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CBS Hopes to Cash In On a Sport for the Elite
There was a memorable photograph of a figure skating judge during the 1984 Sarajevo Olympics.
He was not hypnotized by the dazzling athleticism and artistry of Katarina Witt and Scott Hamilton, the gold medalists.
He was judging the dreary compulsory figures, endless repetitions of the figure 8.
He was sound asleep.
Now, compulsory events are skated by beginners only.
The elite skaters still dazzle, and, as one of them, Paul Wylie, said, "Figure skating has become a mainstream sport overnight." And there seems no end to its growth as more and more skating engulfs more and more television hours and arena dates.


Roving the Boroughs With Rover
"IT'S possible to own a dog in New York and still have a life," said Martha Kaplan, a writer for The New Yorker and mother to Clara, an animal-shelter mutt "who looks like a basenji on growth hormones."
Ms.
Kaplan's guide to enjoying the boroughs with Fido in tow, "The New York Dog Owner's Guide" (City &amp; Company, $9.95), offers the sort of information that can take months to learn by word of mouth: where to find dog runs, adoption agencies, ordinances, cemeteries and veterinarians, as well as stores that welcome shoppers with canine companions (among them, B. Dalton and Bloomingdale's).


Orthodox Rabbi Found Guilty Of Kidnapping a Jewish Youth
Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans, the leader of a small Hasidic sect in Brooklyn, was convicted yesterday of kidnapping a Jewish teenager who disappeared from his family for two years and became the center of an emotionally charged battle between the worlds of secular and ultra-Orthodox Jewry.
The rabbi's wife, who collapsed sobbing in the courtroom after her husband was taken away to jail, was acquitted of the kidnapping charge but convicted of criminal conspiracy in the case.


A Loner Is in Federated's Hot Seat
With the merger of Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company roughly one month away, the task of melding two fiercely independent armies of merchants who have spent the last 65 years as bitter rivals has fallen to a little-known department store executive.
He is Terry J. Lundgren, Federated's 42-year-old chief merchant, and the changes he has made at Federated since he arrived in April comprise the blueprint for how he intends to meet his challenge.


At French-African Conference, Dictators Got the Attention
This country has always had a special flair for the diplomatic flourish, and few stops were spared for President Francois Mitterrand's last French-African summit meeting, which ended today.
For two days, Biarritz was filled with tasseled honor guards in plumed silver helmets and spurred boots hoisting and lowering their sabers to salute the presidential delegations whose motorcades whizzed them from one red carpet to another.


Canstar Sports (HKYIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thermo Electron Corp.(TMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


New and Softer View of a Late Hit
Giants wide receiver Thomas Lewis shed some new light today on the controversy involving the hit on Dallas wide receiver Alvin Harper, a controversy that will linger all this week as the league ponders fining players on both teams.
Lewis sprained his left knee and ankle during the Dallas game and was taken to the training room.
There, Lewis said, he sat next to Harper, who sprained his knee after colliding with Giants cornerback Tito Wooten at the end of the first half.
The play resulted in a fight in which safety James Washington picked up a cameraman's monopod.


Calendar: Exhibitions And a French Chateau
Design Talks and Shows  Cooper Union Great Hall, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 353-4195.
The artist Milton Glaser, who created the logos for "I Love N.Y." and "Angels in America," will present an illustrated lecture on art and design on Tuesday at 7 P.M., prior to a reception to benefit the Great Hall.
Fee, lecture only, $25; reception and lecture, $225.


'It's Like a Call to Arms, Which the Democrats Will Ignore at Their Peril'
Howard Baker  Former Republican senator from Tennessee, who is now a lawyer in private practice.
This is unprecedented in my memory.
It is important to point out that it was not just anti-incumbency, since not a single incumbent Republican in the House or Senate has been defeated.


Lilco Shares Fall After Cuomo Loses
Shares of the Long Island Lighting Company fell 8.4 percent today on fears that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's election defeat would mean an end to his proposal for a $2 billion state takeover of the utility.
Lilco shares closed at 16 1/2, down 1 1/4, as more than one million shares changed hands.
Prices for Lilco's bonds also fell.


Essay; No Nyah-Nyah
The first right-winger to gloat should get booted right out of the tent.
This is a moment for quiet reverence by pols and pundits at the wisdom of the people.
Tsunami is the Japanese word for "great wave caused by underwater seismic shock." What was the shock that caused the conservative wave of 1994?


Tejas Gas Corp.(TEJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weicker Reflects on His Independent Party's Brief Heyday and Rapid Fall
By late Tuesday night, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. could read the portents: His independent third party, founded four years ago with the fanfare of a new political dynasty, had been consigned to the minor-party fringe.
His biggest achievement in office, the overhaul of the fiscal system in 1991 and the adoption of an income tax, would now be under siege by Governor-elect John G. Rowland, a man whom Mr.
Weicker has long reviled and who campaigned on a promise to undo Mr.
Weicker's fiscal accomplishments.


Rwandan Refugees in Zaire Still Fear to Return
The simple Rwandan peasant woman, a widow unable to read or write, uncertain of her age, wonders if she will ever see her three sons again.
The eldest of Margarita Icymanizanye's three sons, in turn, wonders if he will ever see his mother.
He fled Rwanda during the spring and summer's deadly civil war, and now yearns to return home to be near her.
His hope is to take his wife and their five children back to their house in Kigali.


In Line to Lead: Senior Republican Congressmen
Congressmen likely to lead House committees, based on their seniority.
Usually, seniority is the deciding factor in determining committee chairmanships.


Tyson Halts Appeal
MIKE TYSON has quietly withdrawn his request for an appeal hearing on his 1992 rape conviction.
The decision means the former heavyweight boxing champion will serve the remaining months of his six-year term.
He is eligible for release next May.
Indianapolis Superior Court Judge PATRICIA GIFFORD, who presided over the trial, had scheduled a September hearing on a second round of appeals.
That hearing was delayed at Tyson's request until Nov. 14.
But in a motion granted last month, Tyson asked that the hearing be canceled, court officials said.


Seeking to sparkle in consumers' eyes, Kmart is putting its national image account in review.
ATTENTION, Madison Avenue.
There's a blue light special on a big advertising account of a big, though troubled, retailer.
The Kmart Corporation, which has been struggling to reverse serious slumps in sales and profitability at its Kmart discount stores chain, said unexpectedly yesterday that it would begin a review on what is known as its national image advertising account.


Who Won Where: Results In the 435 Races for the House
ALABAMA District 1 -- 100% Don Womack, D 49,671 - 33% x-H.L.
Callahan, R* 101,956 - 67% District 2 -- 100% Brian Dowling, D 44,694 - 26% x-Terry Everett, R * 124,525 - 74% District 3 -- 100% xGlen Browder, D * 93,795 - 64% Ben Hand, R 53,706 - 36% District 4 x-Tom Bevill, D *
Uncontested  District 5 -- 100 %  x-Karen Thurman, D * 125,780 - 57 %  Big Daddy Don Garlits, R 94,093 - 43 %  District 6  x-Clifford Stearns, R *
Uncontested  District 7 -- 100 %  Edward Goddard, D 47,742 - 27 %  x-John Mica, R * 131,705 - 73 %  District 8  x-Bill McCollum, R *
Uncontested  District 9  x-Michael Bilirakis, R *
Uncontested  District 10  x-C.W.
Bill Young, R *
Uncontested  District 11 -- 100 %  x-Sam Gibbons, D * 76,774 - 52 %  Mark Sharpe, R 72,062 - 48 %  District 12 -- 100 %  Robert Connors, D 57,018 - 35 %  x-Charles Canady, R * 105,737 - 65 %  District 13  x-Dan Miller, R *
Uncontested  District 14  x-Porter Goss, R *
Uncontested  District 15 -- 100 %  Sue Munsey, D 100,512 - 46 %  x-Dave Weldon, R 117,026 - 54 %  District 16 -- 100 %  John Comerford, D 88,646 - 42 %  x-Mark Foley, R 122,734 - 58 %  District 17  x-Carrie Meek, D *
Uncontested  District 18  x-Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R *
Uncontested  District 19 -- 100 %  x-Harry Johnston, D * 147,591 - 66 %  Peter Tsakanikas, R 75,779 - 34 %  District 20 -- 100 %  x-Peter Deutsch, D * 114,615 - 61 %  Beverly Kennedy, R 72,516 - 39 %  District 21  x-Lincoln Diaz-Balart, R *
Uncontested  District 22 -- 100 %  Hermine Wiener, D 69,215 - 37 %  x-Clay Shaw, R * 119,690 - 63 %  District 23  x-Alcee Hastings, D *
T.
Mink, D * 124,431 - 70% Robert Garner, R 42,891 - 24% Larry Bartley, O 10,074 - 6% IDAHO District 1 -- 99% Larry LaRocco, D * 88,708 - 44% x-Helen Chenoweth, R 110,842 - 56% District 2 -- 99% Penny Fletcher, D 48,412 - 25% x-Mike Crapo, R * 143,099 - 75% ILLINOIS District 1 -- 100% x-Bobby Rush, D * 107,000 - 75% William Kelly, R 34,807 - 25% District 2 x-Mel Reynolds, D *
D.
Jacobs Jr., D * 55,491 - 53% Marvin Bailey Scott, R 48,363 - 47% IOWA District 1 -- 100% Glen Winekauf, D 69,240 - 38% x-Jim Leach, R * 109,975 - 60% Michael Cuddehe, O 1,169 - 1% Jan Zonneveld, O 2,322 - 1% District 2 -- 100% Dave Nagle, D 86,035 - 44% x-Jim Nussle, R * 110,639 - 56% Albert Schoeman, O 1,038 - 1% District 3 -- 99% Elaine Baxter, D 78,231 - 41% x-J.
Uncontested District 2 x-William Jefferson, D *
Uncontested District 3 x-W.
J.
Billy Tauzin, D *
Uncontested District 4 x-Cleo Fields, D *
Uncontested District 5 x-Jim McCrery, R *
Uncontested District 6 x-Richard Baker, R *
Uncontested District 7 x-James Hayes, D *
Morella, R * 138,010 - 70% MASSACHUSETTS District 1 x-John Olver, D *
Uncontested District 2 -- 99% x-Richard Neal, D * 114,826 - 59% John Briare, R 71,018 - 36% Kate Ross, O 9,901 - 5% District 3 -- 100% Kevin O'Sullivan, D 93,704 - 44% x-Peter Blute, R * 116,286 - 55% Dale Friedgen, O 2,382 - 1% District 4 -- 100% x-Barney Frank, D *
Uncontested District 5 -- 100% x-Martin Meehan, D * 141,144 - 70% David Coleman, R 60,628 - 30% District 6 -- 100% John Tierney, D 113,289 - 47% x-Peter Torkildsen, R * 120,743 - 51% Benjamin Gatchell, O 4,939 - 2% District 7 -- 100% x-Edward Markey, D * 145,966 - 64% Brad Bailey, R 80,629 - 36% District 8 x-Joseph Kennedy II, D *
Knollenberg, R * 155,158 - 68% John Hocking, O 2,940 - 1% District 12 -- 100% x-Sander Levin, D * 103,420 - 52% John Pappageorge, R 92,625 - 47% Eric Anderson, O 1,476 - 1% Jerome White, O 1,384 - 1% District 13 -- 100% x-Lynn Rivers, D 87,445 - 52% John Schall, R 75,889 - 45% Helen Halyard, O 1,329 - 1% Gail Petrosoff, O 591 - 0% Craig Seymour, O 3,137 - 2% District 14 -- 100% x-John Conyers Jr., D * 129,850 - 82% Richard Fournier, R 26,417 - 17% Richard Miller, O 2,967 - 2% District 15 -- 100% x-B.
Heineman, R 77,770 - 50% District 5 -- 100% Sandy Sands III, D 63,105 - 43% x-Richard Burr, R 84,580 - 57% District 6 x-Howard Doble, R *
Uncontested District 5 -- 100% Jarrod Tudor, D 48,914 - 27% x-Paul Gillmor, R * 134,581 - 73% District 6 -- 100% Ted Strickland, D * 86,892 - 49% x-Frank Cremeans, R 90,401 - 51% District 7 x-Dave Hobson, R *
Uncontested District 8 x-John Boehner, R *
C.
Uncontested District 6 -- 100% x-Tim Holden, D * 89,184 - 57% Frederick Levering, R 67,388 - 43% District 7 -- 100% Sara Nichols, D 59,777 - 30% x-Curt Weldon, R * 137,177 - 70% District 8 -- 100% John Murray, D 45,057 - 27% x-Jim Greenwood, R * 110,239 - 66% Robert Cash, O 4,362 - 3% Jay Russell, O 7,910 - 5% District 9 x-Bud Shuster, R *
Uncontested District 18 -- 100% x-Michael Doyle, D 101,396 - 55% John McCarty, R 83,714 - 45% District 19 x-William Goodling, R *
K. de la Garza, D * 61,889 - 59% Tom Haughey, R 40,755 - 39% John Hamilton, O 1,806 - 2% District 16 -- 100% x-Ronald Coleman, D * 49,815 - 57% Bobby Ortiz, R 37,409 - 43% District 17 -- 100% x-Charles Stenholm, D * 83,486 - 54% Phil Boone, R 72,000 - 46% District 18 -- 100% x-Sheila Lee, D 84,802 - 72% Jerry Burley, R 28,156 - 24% George Hollenbeck, O 1,169 - 1% J. Larry Snellings, O 4,278 - 4% District 19 x-Larry Combest, R *
B.
Bateman, R * 142,927 - 74% Matt Voorhees, O 4,365 - 2% District 2 -- 100% x-Owen Pickett, D * 78,524 - 59% Jim Chapman, R 54,623 - 41% District 3 -- 100% x-Robert Scott, D * 108,080 - 79% Thomas Ward, R 28,029 - 21% District 4 -- 100% x-Norman Sisisky, D * 115,236 - 62% A. George Sweet III, R 71,176 - 38% District 5 -- 99% x-L.
F.
Payne, D * 94,955 - 53% George Landrith III, R 83,135 - 47% District 6 x-Robert Goodlatte, R *
Uncontested District 7 -- 100% x-Thomas Bliley Jr., R * 176,640 - 84% Gerald Berg, O 33,123 - 16% District 8 -- 100% x-James Moran Jr., D * 116,602 - 59% Kyle McSlarrow, R 777,088 - 39% R. Ward Edmonds, O 1,808 - 1% William Jones, O 830 - 0% District 9 -- 100% x-F.
Uncontested District 7 -- 100% x-David Obey, D * 97,184 - 54% Scott West, R 81,697 - 46% District 8 -- 100% Stan Gruszynski, D 65, 218 - 36% x-Toby Roth, R * 114,021 - 64% District 9 x-J.
Sensenbrenner Jr., R *
Uncontested WYOMING At-Large -- 99% Bob Schuster, D 80,628 - 41% x-Barbara Cubin, R 103,952 - 53% Dave Dawson, O 11,792 - 6%


South
ALABAMA
The last time Fob James Jr. was Governor of Alabama, from 1979 to 1983, he was a Democrat.
But Mr.
James, 60, switched party affiliations for this year's race and rode the Republican tidal wave to an upset victory over Gov.
James E. Folsom Jr.
Mr.
Folsom, 45, a former Lieutenant Governor, became Governor last year after Gov.
Guy Hunt, a Republican, was convicted of ethics violations.
Democrats were counting on Mr.
Folsom to act as a bulwark against the strong anti-incumbent sentiment in the Deep South, and he held a steady lead over Mr.
James in the polls as recently as last week.


Saving the Story for the Game
My guess is that Allen Iverson's first contribution to Georgetown basketball will be to end late arrivals by Hoya fans.
Call it "The Joe Louis Effect."


Another Epic, With 4 Plays in 6 Hours
"Angels in America" and, long before it, "Nicholas Nickleby" did a lot to popularize the theatrical epic, those gargantuan plays that require two nights (or a full day) to see in their entirety.
But after "Floating Islands," Eduardo Machado's bid to join the big leagues, you can only wonder why anyone would ever consent to spending that much time in a theater.
A chronicle of two 20th-century Cuban families that eventually find their way to the United States, it spans some 50 years, involves more than two dozen characters and takes six hours to unfold.
Mounted here by the Mark Taper Forum, which also served as a crucible for "Angels," the two-part production (each part consists of two plays) has been widely anticipated as one of the more ambitious offerings this season in the nation's nonprofit theaters.


Blake Has the Cincinnati Fans Up and Roaring
Jeff Blake has been taking his newly found success in stride, but it has been awfully hard.
He went from a Jets castoff to the Bengals' No. 3 quarterback in the off season.
And in three weeks, he has gone from the No. 3 quarterback to Cincinnati's savior.
After guiding the Bengals to their first victory of the season last Sunday -- a 20-17 overtime victory against the Seattle Seahawks -- Blake has become a cause celebre.
His telephone hasn't stopped ringing and he has been deluged by the national news media for interviews.


Western Co. of North America (WSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delta's Terminals at Kennedy to Be Fixed
Kennedy International Airport, always crowded but rarely popular, will get an infusion of $150 million to fix up the Delta Air Lines terminals, the Port Authority announced yesterday.
The money is part of a projected $5 billion in improvements planned for the next few years to deal with the obvious decay in terminal buildings as well as less visible problems, like deteriorating sewers and roofs.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey signed a 25-year lease with Delta yesterday on the Delta Flight Center and Terminal 1A, both of which Delta took over when it acquired Pan Am's North Atlantic routes in 1991.
Of the $150 million in work that the Port Authority will finance, Delta has already spent $45 million, officials said.
Gerald P. FitzGerald, the agency's deputy director of aviation, said it would collect the money back through rent.


E.P.A. Rules On Emission Are Delayed
A convoluted air pollution issue that will affect tens of millions of automobile buyers in the next few years, today appears certain to become even more complicated when the Environmental Protection Agency misses a deadline for deciding whether to impose California's strict rules on automobile emissions on 12 Eastern states and the District of Columbia.
The states, from Virginia to Maine, voted as a group in February to ask the environmental agency to impose the California rules on them as a group.
But the agency appears to be weeks away from a decision, because it wants to strike a compromise based on an idea offered by the three largest automobile manufacturers in the country.


Economic Scene; Putting a price tag on life, and regulation that protects it.
HOW much is a life worth? Merely posing the question offends most people.
But answer it they must and answer it they do, says Kip Viscusi, an economist at Duke University.
Every time the Government decrees a cleanup strategy for a toxic-waste dump or spends Medicaid dollars on kidney dialysis it is making implicit decisions about the dollars-and-cents value of life.
The hard part, Mr.
Viscusi suggests, is facing up to it.


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Security-Connecticut Corp.(SRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sovereign BancorpInc.(SVRN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"I want to let you know right up front that we want to work together where we can." -- BOB DOLE, on the phone to President Clinton.  [ B6:1. ]
I will do everything in my power to reach out to the leaders and the members of this new Congress. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ B8:1. ]


National Re (NRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An All-Too-Believable Dad Steps In for Saint Nick
It may be early for Christmas, but it's not too early for a clever, entertaining children's film with a realistic edge and a minimum of seasonal mush.
"The Santa Clause" easily transports Tim Allen from success on television (he is the star of "Home Improvement") to bright prospects on the big screen.
Behind Mr.
Allen's rubbery-faced amiability there lurks a welcome cynicism, one that serves him well in this fresh, cheerful story.
Mr.
Allen plays Scott Calvin, a divorced father who finds himself unexpectedly roped into a career of delivering presents and talking to reindeer, to the surprise and delight of his young son.
If Christmas is the film's nominal subject, its subtext is mending the wounds of divorce.
It deals with that issue in graceful, reassuring ways.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about children serving in rebel military movements referred incorrectly to the role of children in the Zapatista organization in Mexico.
While some were trained by the rebels, the children were never reported to have fought with them.


Discovery Zone
In a continuing drop, shares of Discovery Zone Inc., an operator of children's recreation centers, fell sharply yesterday after a Paine Webber analyst lowered his stock recommendation.
On Wednesday, the company reported a third-quarter loss.


Woman Can Be Buried Beside Husband
The feud between John Biango's wife and his sister began as he lay dying of cancer in 1990.
And it has persisted in and out of court since, with the sister, Dorothy Pagano, insisting that her brother's dying wish was that his wife, Christine, should never be buried next to him.
Today, a New Jersey judge resolved what he called a virulent and soap-operalike dispute with a stinging rebuke of the sister, describing her as a cold, calculating woman and dismissing her entire story as "a classic fraud."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  U.S.
TO SKIRT BOSNIA EMBARGO  Breaking with its European allies, the Clinton Administration has directed the American military to stop enforcing the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government beginning on Saturday.
A1  SARAJEVO ATTACK TIED TO MUSLIMS  Releasing a crater analysis, United Nations officials suggested that the Bosnian Government's Muslim-led forces fired the shell that killed a child in Sarajevo this week.
A10


A Simpler Test for Alzheimer's Is Reported
Researchers at Harvard Medical School believe they may have stumbled upon a simple test for Alzheimer's disease, one that can easily distinguish between those who have the devastating disorder, which relentlessly robs its victims of their minds, and those who do not.
The investigators, led by Dr.
Leonard F. M. Scinto, of the Brigham and Women's Hospital and the Harvard Medical School, and by Dr.
Huntington Potter, of Harvard Medical School, report that people with Alzheimer's appear to be exquisitely sensitive to eye drops similar to those that doctors use to dilate the pupils before performing an eye examination.


Asian Nations Wary on Free Trade
The nations of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, which represent more than half the world's economic output, all say they agree in principle with President Clinton that the path to further prosperity is to lower ever more barriers to trade and investment.
But as leaders from the United States and the other 17 member countries gather here for a summit meeting, the notion of achieving even a vague commitment for a giant Pacific free-trade zone from Chile to China, even far in the future, has led to apprehension as well as expectation.


PRESIDENT ORDERS END TO ENFORCING BOSNIAN EMBARGO
Breaking with its European allies, the Clinton Administration has directed the United States military to stop enforcing the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government, beginning on Saturday.
Under the new approach, which has been sharply debated within the Administration, the United States Navy will not divert ships carrying arms to Bosnia or Croatia.


The Spoken Word
HUDSON VALLEY STORYTELLING FESTIVAL.
A weekend of events sponsored by Bard and Vassar Colleges and the Mid-Hudson Teacher Center.
Tonight at 8, "Storytellers on Stage!" with Donna Bailey, Jim May and Peninnah Schram at Vassar College, Chapel Building, Raymond Avenue, Poughkeepsie, N.Y.; tickets: $9.
Tomorrow, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M., a conference with workshops at Bard College, F. W. Olin Humanities Building, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.; fee: $60.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M., "Storytellers on Stage!" with Motoko, Tom Weakley and Marianne McShane at Bard; tickets: $8 in advance; $9 at the door.
On Sunday, two storytelling programs, at 1 and 3 P.M., with the Ivy Vine Players, Jonathan Kruk, the Storycrafters and Motoko; tickets: $4 in advance; $5 at the door.
Information: (914) 635-3887.
WARTIME STORYTELLING, Seamen's Church Institute, 241 Water Street, lower Manhattan.
Four World War II veterans who spent time in the port of New York City speak.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 349-9090.


Legal Aid Managers Earn Their (Low) Pay
To the Editor:
How unfair to contrast the Legal Aid Society's "young, idealistic and low-paid attorneys" with "bureaucratic," "inefficient" middle managers (editorial, Nov. 4).
We are the same idealistic, low-paid lawyers we were when we attained "management" positions only after years of excelling as Legal Aid trial lawyers.


The Gods Transplanted To Texas
Camp, once largely the province of gay men and the women who loved them, has been sure-footedly working its way into the mainstream over the last several decades.
John Waters movies can be seen at local malls; "Twin Peaks" was, however briefly, a television hit, and aging starlets like Joan Collins have translated the sensibility into flourishing second careers.
A theatrical byproduct of this phenomenon has been a new breed of musical, at once nostalgic and ironic, that embraces what it purports to send up.
It dates back at least to the 1960's and "Little Mary Sunshine," reached a high point in 1982 with "Little Shop of Horrors" and has recently spawned a host of goofy, 1950's and 60's-style revues like "Forever Plaid" and "Beehive."


Copyright Law Covers Electronic Rights
To the Editor:
In "Writers Fight for Electronic Rights" (The Media Business, Nov. 7), addressing the question of who owns electronic rights, you discuss freelancers who might be pressured into signing contracts that grant "universal rights" to the publisher.
You imply that such contracts would leave the artists with no rights at all in their own work.


U.S. Makes Public Millions of Long-Secret Papers
President Clinton today signed an executive order declassifying nearly 44 million pages of long-secret documents, some dating to World War I, in an action delayed for nearly a year by the objections of military and intelligence officials.
The papers represent roughly an eighth of the secret documents held by the National Archives.
All have been classified on national security grounds until today.


Clinton Asks G.O.P. to Back Free Trade
President Clinton appealed today to the newly victorious Republicans to maintain their party's traditional support for free trade and approve a worldwide trade agreement in Congress, arguing that failure to do so would "jeopardize our leadership and our prosperity."
In a speech at Georgetown University Mr.
Clinton, clearly tired as he prepared to leave for Asia on Friday for an economic summit meeting, sounded frustrated that many Americans still suspected that his trade proposals will cost them jobs and cut their wages.


Reagan Revolution Redux
Tuesday's carnage was not, as many liberal pundits have claimed, a revolt of random wrath against incumbents.
The voters directed their fire at liberal Democrats, and set in motion the second stage of the Reagan Revolution, which will make the one-term Presidencies of George Bush and Bill Clinton seem like political hiccups.
The voters want Republicans to address specific problems, some of them spelled out in the "Contract With America," some of them brought to national attention by Ronald Reagan in 1980, some of them brand new.
Now the Republicans must make good on those promises or face another voter backlash in 1996.


An All-Too-Believable Dad Steps In for Saint Nick
It may be early for Christmas, but it's not too early for a clever, entertaining children's film with a realistic edge and a minimum of seasonal mush.
"The Santa Clause" easily transports Tim Allen from success on television (he is the star of "Home Improvement") to bright prospects on the big screen.
Behind Mr.
Allen's rubbery-faced amiability there lurks a welcome cynicism, one that serves him well in this fresh, cheerful story.
Mr.
Allen plays Scott Calvin, a divorced father who finds himself unexpectedly roped into a career of delivering presents and talking to reindeer, to the surprise and delight of his young son.
If Christmas is the film's nominal subject, its subtext is mending the wounds of divorce.
It deals with that issue in graceful, reassuring ways.


After Big Victory, Sri Lankan Says She'll Resume Rebel Talks
After overwhelming her opponent in Sri Lanka's presidential election by a margin of more than two million votes, Prime Minister Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga said today that she would resume talks with the Tamil Tigers rebels to try to end the country's 11-year-old civil war.
Mrs.
Kumaratunga, 49, became President-elect when results from elections held Wednesday showed she had 62 percent of the vote.
Her principal opponent, Srima Dissanayaka, won 35 percent.
Mrs.
Dissanayaka took over the United National Party candidacy from her husband, Gamini, who was killed with 54 others in a suicide bombing on Oct. 24.


New Chairman for a Changed Sears
It was perhaps one of Corporate America's most poignant changings of the guard.
Edward A. Brennan, the gracious merchant who like many of his predecessors had climbed his way up Sears's corporate ladder until he reached the chief executive's aerie atop the Sears Tower, yesterday moved to hand the baton to Arthur C. Martinez, an outsider he recruited about two years ago to turn around Sears's stores.


More Students Than Athletes, as the 44 Losses Prove
The day embraced all the essentials of a grand and glorious homecoming football game for small Prairie View A&amp;M.
The sun was shining brightly in southeastern Texas.
The halftime show featured Prairie View's renowned marching band, typically bold and brassy.
The stands of Blackshear Stadium were filled to capacity with 6,000 alumni, students and supporters.
But when the high-stepping band departed, when the Prairie View players in their gleaming gold helmets and purple jerseys returned to resume play, half the fans had already departed or were flocking to the aisles as though responding to an emergency call.
The score was 42-14 in favor of visiting Tarleton (Tex.) State, and the situation was about to get worse.


When in Rome, Beware of Pickpockets
To the Editor:
I've loved Rome from the first moment I saw it many years ago, and your Nov. 4 "Rome Journal: For the Long-Suffering Colosseum, Intensive Care" brought back a flood of memories and happy confirmation of the loving care and restoration already completed and in progress at my last visit in 1992.
The Trevi Fountain alone was breathtaking in its restored beauty, and everywhere one could see Rome emerging from the decay of centuries.


Right vs. Realities in Romania, 1925
To appreciate "An Unforgettable Summer," it helps to dismiss the mawkish, romance-novel title.
Set in Romania in 1925, the film begins with scenes of cosmopolitan decadence, jazz-age glamour and fierce political undercurrents.
On their way to a glittering, fancy-dress ball, Romanian army officers stop by a brothel, where they beat the women yelling antimilitary slogans at them.
Next, Kristin Scott-Thomas (the sophisticate from "Four Weddings and a Funeral") arrives at the ball.
She plays the beautiful, elegant Marie-Therese Von Debretsy Dumitriu, a woman with bobbed hair, diaphanous dresses and an unaccountably graceful smile.
As Marie-Therese dances, an elderly relative at the party describes her background.
Her wealthy father turned over his land to the Communists when the revolution approached, but was killed anyway, and Marie-Therese was saved from poverty by her marriage to Petre Dumitriu (Claudiu Bleont), a short, fussy officer with a monocle.
Raised in London, she speaks, as her relative points out, "perfect Romanian with a ghastly Oxford accent." Her life is soon to change again, but her elegance never leaves her or this evocative film by Lucian Pintilie.
Like its heroine, the film's serene and beautiful appearance masks a powerful conscience.


The Thomas-Hill Question, Answered Anew
STRANGE JUSTICE  The Selling of Clarence Thomas
By Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson
406 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
Is it a sign of racial progress when a stale political drama can be revitalized by casting blacks in the lead roles?
If so, then the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings were an American triumph.


Hees International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helmerich &amp; Payne (HP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parolee Charged In 12 Robberies Of Customers At A.T.M. Sites
Seized after a wild, crash-punctuated car chase by investigators who linked disparate clues and patiently staked out his stolen vehicle, a paroled holdup man was charged yesterday with 12 robberies in five days in which patrons were terrorized by a gunman at automated teller machines in Queens.
Detectives said the suspect, Vernon Lennon, 26, of Brooklyn, was identified in lineups by victims in all 12 robberies, which netted $3,000 between last Friday and Tuesday at teller machines in Flushing, Fresh Meadows, Woodhaven and Ozone Park.
They said he was suspected in as many as 25 robberies at cash machines in Queens over the last two months.


Sports of The Times; Ewing Ought To Plead No Contest
THE young giant is scary, and just getting started.
Shaquille O'Neal has a turnaround jump shot now, a reliable baby hook, and, of course, he is almost impossible to keep away from the rim for too long.
One night after dropping 46 points on Alonzo Mourning in Charlotte, O'Neal was all over the Knicks at Madison Square Garden last night for 41 more.
The Knicks won the game, 101-99, when O'Neal lost sight of Patrick Ewing in the confusion of the final seconds.
Ewing dropped in a pretty right baseline jumper, and danced victoriously downcourt.
He lost another personal confrontation with O'Neal, but his team won the war, and that is all that should matter to Ewing for as long as he competes at this level against O'Neal.


Presley Cos.(PDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Do Male Athletes Assault Women? Research Begins
Somewhere between the West Point football gropers and the heavyweight rapist, Mike Tyson, may be a vast, troubling, uncharted area of sexual assault on women by male athletes, a kind of Bermuda Triangle of sports in which discussion mysteriously disappears.
Anecdotal evidence pops up several times a week, a paragraph or two here and there about another pro player beating his wife or a college team raping a drunken classmate, but rarely has an attempt been made to pull this information together to find out if there is a pattern of behavior.
Even the coverage of the murder trial of O. J. Simpson, which seems to have diagrammed every racial, sexual, class and economic X and O, seems so far to have avoided dealing with the possibility that football players, as surely as combat soldiers, have been programmed and rewarded for a kind of violence that can't always be turned off.


Restoring the Rails on Staten Island; Plans for Economic Revival Stretch Along 15 Miles of Track
To the people who live on the north shore of Staten Island, the abandoned railroad that cuts through their neighborhoods is an unsightly ruin where prostitutes and drug addicts hide.
It barely resembles the gleaming steel line that 40 years ago linked local factories to their markets and carried passengers to the amusements of South Beach.
But to New York City officials, the defunct Staten Island Railway -- a 15-mile stretch of overgrown, rusty tracks and ramshackle stations -- is essential to revitalizing the area's stagnant economy and could provide an alternate freight route that would reduce pollution from trucks.


**** Dining On East Side (Review, C22)


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Green Isn't One to Mince His Words or Opinions
Dallas Green has never had much sympathy for drug abusers.
He has always held athletes to a higher standard than the average man on the street.
So it comes as no surprise that Green has no desire to see Dwight Gooden back in a Mets uniform when he completes his one-year suspension.
Green yesterday reiterated the stand he had taken nearly two months ago, when it was revealed that Gooden had failed a third and fourth drug test.
Then, Green said that it was "time for Doc to go elsewhere." He has not changed his mind.


Justice Breyer Severs Ties To the Lloyd's Syndicate
Justice Stephen G. Breyer of the Supreme Court has apparently extricated himself, at a hefty price, from an investment in a London insurance syndicate that led to strong criticism during his confirmation hearings last summer.
According to a letter dated Nov. 9 from a senior executive of Lloyd's of London, Justice Breyer is no longer a member of Lloyd's.
The investment led to questions from senators about whether he had been insensitive to conflicts of interest during his tenure as a Federal appeals court judge.
During his time as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, Justice Breyer participated in eight cases concerning pollution.
At the same time he was an investor in a Lloyd's syndicate that faced heavy losses from pollution suits.


Bobby McFerrin's Lively Learning Process
Bobby McFerrin's gentle ditty "Don't Worry, Be Happy" must seem a perverse taunt to American orchestra executives, whose incessant lament over looming deficits and declining audiences would strike the Ancient Mariner dumb.
But could Mr.
McFerrin himself be part of the solution?
The St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra is banking on it.
The group performed on Wednesday evening at Orchestra Hall in Minneapolis with Mr.
McFerrin conducting (to say the least) for the first time since he took over its "creative chair" this fall.


CHRONICLE
There are scholarships for people who study Chinese history, brain surgery, chemical engineering . . . and now, for those who want to design perfume bottles.
The first Marc A. Rosen Package Design Awards, at $1,250 each, will go to DEAN HARRIS of Manhattan and KYUNG SUN LEE of Inchon, South Korea, at a cocktail party on Tuesday at Saks Fifth Avenue.
Both are graduate students at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, which administers the scholarships for its students from funds donated by the cosmetics industry.


Nets' Shots Go Swish And Beard Wins No. 1
Now that the Nets have lent a sense of legitimacy to their fledgling campaign, new questions arise for Coach Butch Beard and his suddenly giddy team.
Is Benoit Benjamin's scowl worth another double-digit night of points and rebounds?
Can the defense that punctuated their 110-109 victory over Chicago at the Meadowlands on Wednesday be parlayed into Friday night's game against the Washington Bullets at the USAir Arena?
And what of those arcing jumpers that kept finding the bottom of the net after shooting 36 percent during a three-game Texas tour -- are they aberrations or learned behavior?


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
GOVERNMENT
Republicans taking control of Congress say they want to make numerous changes in government procedures and operations, including the rules of the House.


S.E.C. Issues Municipal Bond Rules
After more than a year of discussion, compromise and negotiation, the Securities and Exchange Commission enacted new rules yesterday to bring the municipal bond market into the modern age.
The rules will provide investors with annual reports from municipalities -- just like corporate reports -- and make it easier for investors to get bond prices.
The changes are expected to have a profound effect on the $1.2 trillion municipal bond market, where the nation's cities and towns raise money.
Once in place, the rules could encourage more investors to buy municipal bonds, lower the borrowing costs to municipalities and save taxpayer dollars.


Art in Review
Inge Morath
Spanish Institute  684 Park Avenue (at 68th Street)  Through Nov. 29
Inge Morath's black-and-white photographs of Spain in the 1950's offer a timeless view of that country.
Surprisingly, there is little sense of either the political turmoil of the 1930's or the industrial and democratic state that Spain has become.


Temerlin Gets A L'Eggs Account
The L'Eggs Products division of the Sara Lee Corporation in Winston-Salem, N.C., said yesterday that it had named Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., to handle advertising for its Just My Size brand, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $10 million.


4 Teen-Agers Indicted in Death of Ecuadorean Immigrant
Their lawyers say they all come from solid middle-class families.
Three are high school students -- one an honor student -- and one works in his family's funeral home.
They have no previous criminal records.
But the four teen-agers are in serious trouble now -- indicted yesterday on murder charges in what the Brooklyn District Attorney called the savage, bias-related slaying of a homeless Ecuadorean immigrant who was fatally beaten by a band of youths in a Brooklyn park on Sept. 6.


Debartolo Realty Corp.(EJD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Veterans Day
The Government bond market and some banks are expected to be closed today in observance of Veterans Day.
But most financial markets will be open.


3 Boys Held in Robbery of Off-Duty Officer
Three teen-age boys were arrested and charged with robbing an off-duty police sergeant and two other men on Staten Island yesterday, the police said.
One of the boys, a 13-year-old whose name was not released because of his age, was also charged with attempted murder after he fired two shots at the victims' car when the men gave chase, said a police spokeswoman, Detective Mary Ann Mullin.
The other assailants, one 12 and the other 14, were charged with robbery.


Consumers' Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


No Execution For Suspect In Shootings, Judge Says
Colin Ferguson, charged with killing six people on a Long Island Rail Road train, sought -- and received -- reassurance from a judge today that he would not face execution even if he is found guilty and Governor-elect George E. Pataki signs the death penalty into law.
"Your honor, will you please assure my client that he is not under the threat of a death sentence," his lawyer, William M. Kunstler, said at a pretrial hearing.


Fighter Is Indicted
A Federal grand jury in Miami returned a drug indictment against the featherweight boxer RUBEN PALACIO of Colombia, who last year became the first boxing champion to test positive for the virus that causes AIDS.
Palacio was arrested Sunday at Miami International Airport with 5.33 pounds of heroin concealed in the lining of his coat and his undershorts, authorities said.


Corrections
A brief report in the state-by-state election summary yesterday and on Wednesday about the results in Alaska misidentified Tony Knowles, a candidate for Governor.
He was the Democratic challenger; the current Governor is Walter J. Hickel.
The outcome of the race remains undecided.
Mr.
Knowles holds a slight lead over his Republican opponent, Jim Campbell, but absentee ballots remain to be counted.


Zeos Int'l. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


High Anxiety Raises Risk of Heart Failure in Men, Study Finds
Men who complain of high anxiety are four to six times more likely to die from sudden heart failure than other men, Harvard researchers say.
And the risk of sudden cardiac death from anxiety is two to three times greater than that related to cigarette smoking, said Dr.
Ichiro Kawachi, an assistant professor of health and social behavior at the Harvard School of Public Health in Cambridge, Mass.
Cigarette smoking is considered one of the strongest risk factors for heart disease.


WPL Holdings (WPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Getting Serious on Bosnian Arms
Prodded by Congress, the Clinton Administration is now asking the United Nations Security Council to lift its unjust arms embargo against Bosnia and has announced that American military forces will stop enforcing that embargo tomorrow.
Lifting the embargo is the right policy and the fairest, surest path to an honorable and stable peace.
For years, Washington has been saying that it favors lifting the embargo.
But it has never deployed the full diplomatic weight of the United States to get it lifted.
Doing so would mean standing up to European countries like Britain, France and Russia that prefer to keep the Bosnians disarmed and impose an internationally brokered partition plan.
Instead of trying to win over the Europeans, the Administration has repeatedly backed off the issue.
But perhaps there will be a more whole-hearted effort this time.


Scitex Corp.(SCIXF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Broadening of Arbitrations Advances in New Jersey
The New Jersey Senate today passed a bill aimed at turning contract disputes between municipalities and their police officers and firefighters into an exercise in compromise rather than a game of winner take all.
Under the current law, when dealing with an impasse in negotiations an arbitrator must side either with the town or with the unions, rather than seeking middle ground.


King World Productions Inc.(KWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


After Killing, Irish Halt I.R.A. Release Plan
The Irish Government withdrew its plans for the early release of Irish Republican Army prisoners today, hours after a postal worker in Northern Ireland was shot dead by men suspected of being I.R.A. guerrillas.
The attack was the first violent killing in the British province of Ulster since the I.R.A. cease-fire began on Sept. 1.
Protestant paramilitaries began a cease-fire on Oct. 14.


Moss, Wisconsin Star, Suspended After Arrest
BRENT MOSS, a star Wisconsin fullback and the most valuable player in the last Rose Bowl, was suspended from the team yesterday after his arrest on a drug charge, the university said.
Moss, 22, was arrested in Madison Wednesday night when the car in which he was traveling was stopped for a traffic violation.


N.H.L. Union Awaits Response After Offering a Concession
Two months ago, before the beginning of the six-week-old National Hockey League lockout, a top league executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, told how the players could signal that they were ready to make a deal.
The key, the executive said, was for the players to offer a concession on an entry-level salary structure for rookies.
If the players would do this, the executive said, the owners would be willing to compromise on other major issues and a new collective bargaining agreement could be reached.


Greenbrier Cos. (GBX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


F.C.C. Approves New Rate Rises for Cable TV
The F.C.C. giveth and the F.C.C. taketh away.
Having ordered cable television operators in February to cut their rates by 17 percent, the Federal Communications Commission today offset that action by giving the operators the right to raise prices when they add new channels.


Spurious Sequel? Well, Fiddledeedee
"Ah doan know nuthin' 'bout birthin' babies!" the hysterical maid screamed at Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone With the Wind." Maybe the poor girl didn't.
But the Margaret Mitchell estate sure does, especially million-dollar babies with 5-and-10-cent entertainment possibilities.
Blessed by the author's heirs, Alexandra Ripley was recruited to continue the Mitchell tale in "Scarlett." That 1991 best seller has been adapted by William Hanley for a CBS mini-series, which, beginning on Sunday and picking up on Tuesday, runs for eight hours over four nights.
And even as we ponder the mysteries of modern show business, yet another sequel novel is already being prepared for computer processing.


Cancer Activists Boost Immune Response
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 4 news article on breast cancer as a political issue: Women with the disease will be interested to know that political activism can have a potent influence on the body's ability to control it.


For the 49ers, Being in the Hunt Is Simply Not Good Enough
They met at a charity event in Youngstown, Ohio, in 1968, and the chatter flowed so easily.
For Carmen Policy and Edward DeBartolo Jr., the roots were strong.
Both grew up in Youngstown.
Both had grandparents who lived in villages in Italy only 11 miles apart.
And both possessed an insatiable desire to succeed. To win.


Abroad at Home; Anger And Reality
Newt Gingrich was brilliant at playing to the resentment of Americans.
Brilliant and nasty.
But those of us who disliked his tactics must not let that shut our eyes to the fact that the resentment is there.
It is resentment of what many Americans see as an arrogant ruling class, out of touch with their concerns.
What are the reasons for the extraordinary anger, directed at incumbent Democrats right across the country?
I believe it is first of all a matter of economics.


Jessica Tandy Memorial
A tribute to the actress Jessica Tandy is to take place on Nov. 22 at noon at the Shubert Theater, 224 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Among those to speak at the tribute, which is open to the public, are Kathy Bates, Zoe Caldwell, Frances Sternhagen, Karl Malden, Mike Nichols, Alan J. Pakula and Tandy Cronyn, Miss Tandy's daughter.
Hume Cronyn, Miss Tandy's husband, is not scheduled to speak.
Miss Tandy died on Sept. 11 at the age of 85.


Veterans Day
Today is Veterans Day. NEW YORK
PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. at 42d Street and Fifth Avenue, proceeds down Fifth Avenue to Madison Square (23d Street) and concludes at noon.


George Shimamoto, Architect, Dies at 89
George Gentoku Shimamoto, an architect of Japan House, the home of the Japan Society, and a former senior partner of the Gruzen Partnership architectural firm, died on Friday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 89 and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.
The cause was pneumonia, said Dr. Teruko S. Neuwalder, his daughter.


But Just Who Spoke on Election Day?
To the Editor:
Over and over on election night we heard, "This is a rejection of the welfare state," "This is a rejection of Bill Clinton's policies," or "The American people say . . ." Say what?


Clinton Picks New Director of AIDS Policy
President Clinton today named Patricia S. Fleming, a former assistant to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to be White House director of AIDS policy.
She succeeds Kristine M. Gebbie, who resigned after 11 months, saying that people expected too much from her as the Government's "AIDS czar."


Veterans Day at a National Shrine


U.S. Changes Stance in Case On Obscenity
Stung by Congressional criticism of its legal interpretation of a child-pornography law, the Clinton Administration reversed course in a brief filed with the Supreme Court today and disavowed its previous position that the law applied only to depictions of nude children.
The filing of the brief, as well as a statement accompanying it, disclosed an unusual fissure in the top ranks of the Justice Department.
The brief was signed by Attorney General Janet Reno and not by Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d, the Government's top Supreme Court advocate, whose narrower view of the child-pornography law, as expressed in a brief last year, unleashed a storm of criticism on Capitol Hill.


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
FOREIGN POLICY
With Jesse Helms of North Carolina in line to become chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Republican majority in Congress is expected to push to cut foreign aid as well as money for the U.N.
Republican lawmakers also say they will require a Congressional vote before the United States contributes troops or money to any U.N. peacekeeping mission.


IRAQIS TO ACCEPT KUWAIT'S BORDERS
Iraq said today that it would recognize the independence and current borders of Kuwait, a major step apparently intended to allow at least some United Nations sanctions against Baghdad to be lifted.
A declaration of the Revolutionary Command Council, signed by President Saddam Hussein, said Iraq accepted the "sovereignty of the State of Kuwait, its territorial integrity and political independence." The recognition, more than four years after Iraq invaded Kuwait and provoked the Persian Gulf war, was also approved by the Iraqi Parliament and is to be published in the Government's gazette, as required by United Nations resolutions.


New York, Shown at Its Best Through a Hero at His Worst
"Manhattan by Numbers" was shown as part of the 1993 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 2, 1993.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
Amir Naderi's "Manhattan by Numbers" is a quite beautiful if uninvolving exercise in urban alienation, prettily shot against a variety of photogenic New York locations.


But Just Who Spoke on Election Day?; Death Penalty Boycott
To the Editor:
The United States election results will affect no one so much as those on New York State's death row.
As soon as the first person is executed in New York, I will boycott the state, viewing it in a similar light to countries that continue to think that the government has the right to execute its own population as punishment.


Coke Adds to Operations Of Fruitopia Drink Unit
Intensifying the fruit-drink wars in one of the fastest-growing beverage categories, the Coca-Cola Company announced yesterday that it had invested $150 million to expand production of its Fruitopia beverage division and would introduce a new lower-calorie line of Fruitopia flavors as well.
The investment has been used to purchase plants in Waco, Tex., and Northampton, Mass., the company said, and to upgrade the bottling lines in existing operations.


Defections Among Men to G.O.P. Helped Insure Rout of Democrats
Large numbers of men abandoned Democratic candidates in Tuesday's elections, a trend that gave Republicans an edge in races around the nation and one that Democratic leaders fear might be hard to reverse.
The overwhelming advantage that men gave Republicans touched races all over the country.
For example, in Senate races in Michigan and Tennessee, where Republicans picked up open seats that had been held by Democrats, 61 percent of the men voted for the Republicans.


Zilog Inc.(ZLOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


COMPANY BRIEFS
KAMAN AEROSPACE CORP., Bloomfield, Conn., said the Egyptian military had agreed to buy 10 Kaman SH-2G helicopters from the United States Navy in a deal expected to exceed $100 million.
Kaman said it expects to receive a Navy contract soon for the order.


La-Z-Boy Account Goes to Doner
The La-Z-Boy Chair Company of Monroe, Mich., said yesterday that it had selected W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., to handle its national brand account, which had been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., for the last 14 years.
While billings on the account have ranged from $6 million to $8 million, the company said it planned to increase spending in 1995 to $10 million to $12 million.
Doner, which already handles retail advertising for the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries retail chain, was awarded the account after a six-month review that was narrowed to Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis, DDB Needham Chicago and Doner.
The assignment brings Doner's total La-Z-Boy billings to an estimated $20 million.


A Victory for Public Justice
The issue in the Supreme Court case the other day was technical and arcane: Can a losing party, appealing a decision to a higher Federal court, settle out of court with the other side and have the adverse decision erased from the lawbooks?
Hardly the stuff of legal legend, yet the Court's handling of the question constitutes a significant boost for public justice.
No, said Justice Antonin Scalia for a unanimous Court, a losing party may not get the courts to withdraw a decision just because the contestants no longer disagree.
Judicial precedents "are not merely the property of private litigants," he said, quoting an opinion of Justice John Paul Stevens.


Southwest Gas Corp.(SWX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Giants Coach Is Named OTB President by Giuliani
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani named a new president yesterday to take over the city's Offtrack Betting Corporation, which for the second year in a row finished the fiscal year with a deficit.
The Mayor named Allie Sherman, an executive at Time Warner Communications better known for his years as coach of the New York Giants, as the $110,000-a-year head of the quasi-independent agency, which has administered offtrack horse race betting in the city for 23 years.


Kenneth H. Ross; Manufacturer and Philanthropist, 68
Kenneth H. Ross, the chairman of a family-owned clothes-making company based in Milwaukee and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Milwaukee.
He was awaiting a heart transplant at the time, a company spokeswoman said in New York.


Vons Cos.(VON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Pension Liabilities May Lead To Charge at Westinghouse
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation may take a pretax charge of $200 million to $250 million against its fourth-quarter earnings, as workers retiring or being laid off under its restructuring program withdraw money from the company's pension plan.
But the noncash charge, disclosed in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday, would be taken only if so-called lump-sum distributions topped a threshold that has not yet been reached, company officials said last night.


Claire's Stores Inc.(CLE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Law Firm's Removal Is Urged Again
The Federal official overseeing the bankruptcy case of the Leslie Fay Companies reiterated his recommendation yesterday that the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges be removed from the case and be forced to forfeit a large portion of $5.3 million in fees it has billed in the case.
In a rebuttal to Weil, Gotshal's response to his earlier motion calling for the firm's disqualification, Arthur J. Gonzalez, the United States Trustee for New York, wrote that "Weil, Gotshal failed to adequately respond to -- and in certain instances completely ignored -- the critical issues raised in the motion."


Boycott Threatened
JOSE SULAIMAN, the president of the World Boxing Council, threatened yesterday to lead a Mexican boycott of fights in California to protest a new law that would deny social services to undocumented immigrants in the state.
At a news conference in Mexico City to promote five title fights to be held there on Saturday night, Sulaiman criticized the passage of Proposition 187, calling it "discriminatory, inhumane and totally racist."


Corrections
A map caption yesterday about Rwandan refugees referred incorrectly to the town of Murambi in some editions.
It is in Rwanda, not Zaire, and there are no Rwandan exiles there.


XL Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Robert Berlind  Tibor de Nagy Gallery 41 West 57th Street Through Nov. 26
The paintings in Robert Berlind's lovely solo show depict the gently agitated surfaces of creeks or streams and their reflected landscapes, each of which suggests a time of year: bare trees and a milky winter sun in one case, russet autumn foliage in another.
In "Calicoon Creek," the water is an edge-to-edge web of sky blue dotted with a few bright yellow floating leaves, and in "Shallow Bottom," the stones lying on a creek bed are visible through drifts of white foam.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Chooses Bozell
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. of Rochester said yesterday that it had selected Bozell New York to handle advertising for its Curel and Soft Sense skin-care products, which had been handled by Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York since June 1993.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Bozell was awarded the account after a eight-month review that was narrowed to Bozell and two other New York shops, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.


Addis Ababa Journal; Where Tyrants Ruled, Cry for Justice
Berhanu Meshesha is now 71 and frail, and the events he describes are nearly two decades past.
But he remembers every moment clearly.
The 10 armed soldiers, he said, knocked on his door at 5:30 A.M. on April 22, 1976, pulled his four sons and two nephews out of bed and dragged them off, saying they were going to a police station.
The boys, ages 12 to 18, were needed for questioning about a street demonstration, the soldiers said.
They promised to bring them home.


Dibrell Brothers Inc.(DBRL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plea Offered In Gun Death Of 3-Year-Old
A drug dealer has pleaded guilty to manslaughter for showing off his gun to two children and leaving it on a television set, where one of the children picked it up and fatally shot the other.
"We have an 8-year-old who was trained on how to use an illegal gun by a drug-dealing uncle," said Jeanine Pirro, the Westchester County District Attorney.
"It's the uncle who bears the responsibility for the homicide."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Flu Knocks Edberg Out  Stefan Edberg yesterday pulled out of the $1.1 million European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium, because of a throat infection, giving Jared Palmer of the United States a free ride into the quarterfinals.
Edberg had a fever of 101 degrees and could barely speak because of tonsillitis when he withdrew from the tournament.
In other tournament play, Pete Sampras beat Richey Reneberg, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday to reach the quarterfinals.
Sampras remains the only star player in the $1.1 million event. (AP)


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
WHITEWATER
The unanswered question on Whitewater is not whether the Republicans will hold hearings -- there is no doubt they will -- but how broad those hearings will be and whether the lawmakers will yield to the Republican special prosecutor.


Pataki Says Thank You In Happy Visit To Upstaters
A weary but joyful Governor-elect George E. Pataki delivered a thank-you letter today to the upstate voters who supported him overwhelmingly in Tuesday's election, hop-skipping through four northern cities that he had frequented like weekend homes in the campaign's final days.
At each of his stops, which included Rochester, Syracuse, Buffalo and Albany, Mr.
Pataki took off his suit coat and strode into crowds, bear-hugging acquaintances, signing photographs and promising not to forget his supporters once he was ensconced in the "insulated environment" of the Statehouse.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  LAR LUBOVITCH DANCE COMPANY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Producer Prices Fell Last Month
Producer prices dropped by five-tenths of 1 percent in October for the second consecutive month, the Labor Department reported yesterday, providing more evidence that inflation remained mild despite strong economic growth for more than a year.
More than anything else, car prices pulled down the Producer Price Index in October.
The index measures the prices charged for finished goods as they leave factories, mills and refineries ready for use and are sold to wholesalers, retailers, auto dealers and others.





New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
EDUCATION
Student loans, school voucher programs, money for special education and a renewed move to bring prayer into America's schools are likely to become the new stumbling blocks in education policy under a Republican-led Congress.


Sabatini Is in Sensitive Spot
Painful to win, painful to lose.
That's how Gabriela Sabatini characterized the singular opportunity of facing retirement-bound Martina Navratilova in the opening round of the Slims Championships on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Sabatini, who is 5-15 against the 38-year-old Navratilova but has won two of their last four meetings, learned of next week's bittersweet assignment just after winning her second-round match in Philadelphia.
More accurately, Sabatini instantly came up with the correct answer when a WTA Tour official asked her who she thought she had drawn.


Power Corp. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rapture and Terror, Bound by Blood
EROTICISM bubbles beneath the surface of every vampire story, but Anne Rice is a writer to make the pot boil.
Ms.
Rice's hothouse blend of pretension, swooning seduction and avidly sensual horror has brought strikingly contemporary nuances to the vampire genre, infusing it with the literary equivalent of new blood.
Her dense, suffocating novels have done as much to plumb old mysteries of the occult as to create new ones atop the best-seller list -- but that's another story.
Ms.
Rice once insisted publicly that her heady brew could not possibly be captured on film, at least not in a film directed by Neil Jordan and starring a noted nonvampire like Tom Cruise.
Now rightfully eating her hat over such pronouncements, she ought to be the most appreciative viewer that Mr.
Jordan's "Interview With the Vampire" has.
His sumptuous film is as strange and mesmerizing as it is imaginatively ghastly.
It's a sophisticated, spookily intense rendering of Ms.
Rice's story.


Bosnia Army Said to Shell Its Own Area
Releasing a crater analysis of a shell that exploded here on Tuesday, wounding a child, United Nations military officials today gave what appeared to be the first compelling evidence that the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army carried out a mortar attack on a Sarajevo neighborhood under its control.
A United Nations crater analysis of another mortar shell that killed two children about two hours earlier on Tuesday, however, showed it was fired from a position under the control of the Bosnian Serbs, who have renewed artillery attacks on densely populated city neighborhoods in response to Bosnian Army offensives elsewhere.


Dr. James Watts, 90, Pioneer In Use of Frontal Lobotomy
Dr.
James W. Watts, a neurosurgeon who performed the first frontal lobotomy in the United States, died on Monday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 90 and lived in Washington.
The cause of his death was cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Curb on Aliens Dims Dreams in Hollywood
The names of former students on the Wall of Fame at Hollywood High School unscroll like credits from the movie of all movies.
Judy Garland . . .
Mickey Rooney . . .
Lana Turner . . .
Carol Burnett . . .
James Garner . . .
Tuesday Weld . . .
Linda Evans . . . with music by the Four Preps.


Greyhound Deal Averts Bankruptcy
Greyhound Lines Inc. avoided a second plunge into bankruptcy by agreeing today to give bondholders 45 percent of the company's stock and two seats on a nine-member board.
Greyhound, the remaining coast-to-coast bus network, missed a $4.3 million bond payment due Sept. 30.
Talks that began earlier in September had, in recent days, turned into an exercise in brinksmanship.


Schlichter Pleads Guilty
The former Ohio State and National Football League quarterback ART SCHLICHTER pleaded guilty yesterday in Las Vegas, Nev., to a Federal charge of bank fraud for stealing and writing $175,000 in bad checks.
Schlichter, 34, entered the plea agreement in United States District Court and was taken into custody immediately.


Value City Department Stores Inc.(VCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Speedy Muffler reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Stocks Rally, Then Retreat; Dow Off 9.76
The stock market, after a short-lived morning rally, drifted lower yesterday in moderate trading, with only four stocks advancing for about every seven declining on the New York Stock Exchange.
The slight fall came despite an unexpected drop in producer prices, signaling once again that inflation was under control and that the economy was performing well.


Equity Residential Properties Trust (EQR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Matthew Antezzo
Basilico Fine Arts  26 Wooster Street (near Grand Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 22
If you've been around the art world for more than 20 years, Matthew Antezzo's highly specialized brand of Photo Realism may trigger amusement and nostalgia, as well as a meditation on art's stylistic cycles.
His sizable grisaille paintings are based on black-and-white photographs of art and exhibitions taken from the pages of Artforum magazine in the late 1960's and early 70's, when that publication was the dominant arbiter of the next new thing.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a deal for the Sears Tower misstated the effect of the transaction on Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's fourth-quarter earnings.
The company will record an after-tax gain of $195 million; it will not pay $195 million.


Pepsico's No. 2 Official Will Head New Unit
In a move widely seen as strengthening his status as the heir apparent at Pepsico Inc., Roger A. Enrico, the company's second-ranking executive, was named yesterday to head a new unit that would oversee the international operations of its KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell fast-food restaurants.
Mr.
Enrico, the Pepsico vice chairman, will become chief executive of Pepsico Restaurants International, a new unit based in Dallas.
Analysts said his appointment and the creation of the new division were intended to increase Pepsico's international opportunities, as well as bolster the restaurant companies' disappointing performance in the United States and Canada.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd. (ECO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big 3 Want Clinton Aid On Rules
Saying a Government finding of a safety defect in General Motors pickup trucks "threatens the entire automotive industry," the chief executives of the Big Three auto makers sent a joint letter to President Clinton today urging him to "address the intolerable state of regulatory uncertainty" that the pickup issue could create.
But a White House spokeswoman said Mr.
Clinton could not intervene in a regulatory matter.


Contest In Doubt In Maryland
The Maryland governor's race remained in doubt today as state election officials continued to count absentee ballots.
With partial results reflecting the same voting patterns as Tuesday's, it would appear that Parris N. Glendening, a Democrat, will prevail over Ellen R. Sauerbrey, who was trying to become Maryland's first Republican governor since Spiro T. Agnew in 1966.


Cisco Systems Inc.(CSCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


After 10 Years, Wrongful Death Trial Begins
With thunderous, incantatory accusations, a lawyer for the father of Libby Zion, whose nearly decade-old lawsuit against New York Hospital went to trial yesterday, blamed the 18-year-old woman's death not only on the hospital staff's "litany of errors," but on established medical training, which he said produced residents who were "inexperienced, unsupervised, overworked and sleep-deprived."
But the lawyer for New York Hospital and three doctors being sued said the attention given Ms.
Zion was "careful, not careless," and indicated that he would offer an all-out defense of postgraduate medical education, particularly as offered by Cornell Medical College, whose students do much of their clinical training at New York Hospital.
The residents, he said, had been well rested.


CHRONICLE
How far will powerful women travel to meet other powerful women?
Quite a distance, said GAEL GREENE, the restaurant critic, who has noticed increasing numbers of women from out of town and out of state making reservations for the eighth annual Citymeals-on-Wheels Power Lunch for Women.
This year, 340 women (and a dozen men) are expected to converge for lunch at the Rainbow Room on Monday.
For example, Dr.
Mae C. Jemison, the astronaut, is coming from Houston; Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, is coming from Washington, and Margie Profet, the biologist who theorizes that menstruation evolved as a mechanism to protect against infection from male-borne diseases, is coming from Seattle.


Rodman Misses Drill
DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs missed practice yesterday, the day after his three-game suspension by the club was to have ended.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 23 about anti-incumbent sentiment in Congressional races in the New York region referred incorrectly to the Congressional service of members of the Hamilton Fish family.
It has not been continuous since 1922; a Hamilton Fish was elected in 1920 and represented the Hudson Valley area until 1944, and his son, Hamilton Fish Jr., held the seat from 1969 until this year.


G.O.P. May Drop New York From List
The chairman of the Republican National Committee said yesterday that he would recommend dropping New York City from the list of places the G.O.P. is considering for its 1996 convention.
The chairman, Haley Barbour, did not say that his recommendation was made in retaliation for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to cross party lines and endorse Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat.
But Mr.
Barbour noted in a statement, "From the beginning we have said facilities, financing and politics are the three criteria."


Jet Defense Gets Physical, Gets Well
It was never the downfield hit that defined the Jets' defense.
It was the phenomenon of the Sack Exchange: a relentless, quarterback-chasing front four that became the darling of Madison Avenue in the 1980's.
These days, the Jets' defense has a more nasty image.
They'll attack anyone with the same ferocity that they would a quarterback.
And they revel in dishing out punishment.
Last Sunday the Jets sent wide receivers Andre Reed (knee) and Don Beebe (concussion) and tight end Vince Marrow (separated shoulder) to the sidelines and battered Jim Kelly (bruised rib) several times to the turf.


Suffolk Lawmakers Seek District Attorney Inquiry
The Suffolk County Legislature voted today to ask Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to investigate allegations that District Attorney James M. Catterson Jr. abused his powers by threatening lawmakers and other county officials with grand-jury investigations.
The lawmakers voted 16 to 0, with one abstention, to ask the Governor to look into the allegations and, if necessary, to appoint a special prosecutor to determine whether Mr.
Catterson should be removed from office.


At Trenton State, Titles Up for Grabs
The defense is so efficient, the goalkeeper has nothing to do for long stretches of games.
And if the opposition happens to break through, Jeanne Bizzoco is there to deny anyone threatening the goal of the Trenton State field hockey team.
Bizzoco and the Lions are the only undefeated and untied field hockey team in Division III, which is staging its final four tournament this week.
Not only have the Lions scored 88 goals and allowed only 4 this season, but 14 of their 18 victories have also been shutouts.


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
THE MILITARY
Republicans are vowing to increase Pentagon spending, but competing priorities to cut taxes and reduce the deficit may leave President Clinton's military program relatively unchanged.


Sbarro Inc.(SBA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Bond Prices Decline After Early Rally
Prices of Treasury securities dropped yesterday, falling back from substantial early gains and ending a two-day rally as the dollar stumbled and investor fears again turned to the threat of inflation.
Some of those fears were attributed to comments made by a Texas Republican, Bill Archer, the incoming chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
He said in an interview on the cable channel CNBC that he favored cutting taxes.


Reliance Steel &amp; Aluminum Co.(RS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Bob Miscik manager of Bowie of the Eastern League and Moe Drabowsky minor-league pitching coordinator.


Worthy Says His Goodbyes
James Worthy chose retirement rather than another season of decline.
His knees are arthritic, his new teammates are of another generation and his old teammates sit in the Lakers' board room.
"It was time," said Worthy, 33, the last link to Lakers' championship era.
At his side at a news conference today were his former partners Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Magic Johnson (now a team part-owner) and Michael Cooper (now an assistant coach).


Restaurants
A great restaurant is like a racehorse: it may take a while to discover its style, but once it does the ride is exhilarating.
Daniel, a year and a half into the race, has finally hit its stride.
"Four stars?" asks a friend one morning.
It is 8 A.M., and he is calling to say thank you for the dinner we finished a mere seven hours earlier.
"I have never had a better dinner," he says, dreamily recalling ethereal linguine topped with slender shavings of white truffle.
"If I concentrate," he adds, "I can still smell the truffles and feel those noodles dissolving in my mouth like gossamer ribbons. What a meal!"
"Can't we talk later?" I ask crossly.
But he is busy remembering a veloute filled with plump caviar-topped oysters, butter-drenched leeks and sea urchin roe.
The voluptuous flavors were rich and decadent, so that the hint of lemongrass in the cream soup combined with the bracing taste of caviar to deliver a gentle shock.
"It was perfect!" my friend insists.
"Aren't you going to give them four stars?"
"I don't know," I say. "I have to go back a few more times."
"But was there anything wrong with the meal?" he wants to know.
I pull the covers over my head and think for a moment.
I hope he'll hang up.
No such luck.
"They were nice to me when I walked in the door," he says, "and it was abundantly clear that I was not one of their regular customers. All my clothes put together did not cost as much as one of those custom-made shirts the other men were wearing. And although neither of us had a single piece of jewelry, the hostess could not have been more welcoming."
"Didn't you think the bar we waited in was awfully small and crowded?" I ask.
"Our knees were hitting those of the people next to us. I thought it was uncomfortable."
"O.K.," he admits, "it was small. But they made up for it by bringing out that plate of lovely little cheese puffs."
"They're called gougeres," I can't resist saying.
"Whatever," he says.
"They were delicious. And we only had to wait seven minutes for our table. I timed it."
"But didn't you think the dining room was awfully noisy?" I persist grumpily.
He has to concede the point; the dining room was crowded, and noisier than it should have been.
"On the other hand," he reminds me, "you said you thought the flowers were fabulous."
They were.
The drama of the flower arrangements dominates the restaurant, transforming a bland beige room into a place with personality.
There are no windows, but the flowers announce the seasons and set the stage for the food with designs so spectacular you find yourself rushing in the door to look at them.
"And you liked the service," he prods.
He is right about that, too: the service that night was smooth and sweet, more like that in a stately mansion than a large restaurant.
It was formal, thoughtful and not at all stuffy.
The waiter passed the amuses gueules as if he were serving at a dinner party, urging us to eat the tiny crab spring rolls and mushroom toasts while they were still hot.
One day at lunch, two Brazilian runners were seated at the next table.
Before they had finished their meal, the waiter had not only offered tips for tourists in New York, but also convinced them that Daniel would be the perfect place to carbo-load before the marathon; the chef, he assured them, would be happy to create some special pasta dishes.
"Remember the nine-herb ravioli?" my friend asks now.
Who could forget it?
The floppy squares of pasta were filled with a bright green puree of herbs and painted with a vivid red coulis.
Colorful leaves of herbs were scattered across the top with fragrant bits of toasted pine nuts and shavings of cheese.
"And the wild hare stew?" he asks.
At that I sit up and sniff the air.
I do remember the civet de lievre.
Its deep red wine sauce was thickened with blood and a touch of chocolate; it was so rich and exotic I was seduced into taking one bite and then another as I tried to chase the flavors back to their source.
Served with a puree of chestnuts and the roasted loin stuffed with porcini mushrooms, the stew was a masterpiece of hearty regional cooking.
Daniel Boulud was, for 6 years, the much-acclaimed chef at Le Cirque, but in his own restaurant he is working with a new confidence.
He seems to be cooking for himself with a menu that offers both hearty French food and classic cooking so technically proficient it takes your breath away.
Chilled lobster consomme is a tour de force.
The soup is as clear as crystal but so expressive of lobster that if you close your eyes and take a bite you are surprised to find your mouth filled with liquid.
The soup, decorated with rounds of lobster topped with creme fraiche and caviar, is dotted with coral cream when it is served.
This is an astonishing dish worthy of a temple of haute cuisine.
Still, if you want to continue with a less complicated course, you could order something as down-to-earth as tripes gratinees, hearty cuisine bourgeoise that would be at home in a great country bistro.
Mr.
Boulud also offers a changing celebration of the seasons: daily specials that depend on little more than great ingredients.
One might be the simple luxury of a large yellow potato mashed with lots of butter and fresh truffles, another an abundance of porcini sauteed in clarified butter, sprinkled with bits of rock salt and a small shower of herbs.
"And wasn't that foie gras fantastic?" my friend asks, reminding me of the way the unctuous liver had been balanced by the austerity of fresh quince.
Fully awake at last, I begin to revel in last night's dinner as my friend and I start shouting the names of dishes, giddily recapturing a cornucopia of flavors.
"Pumpkin soup!" I say, recalling the bright orange puree anchored by a small mound of grated squash topped with black trumpet mushrooms, tiny bits of bacon and crunchy little pumpkin seeds.
"Steamed skate!" he cries, and in my mind I can see a broth the color of clover, and feel the way the corduroy texture of the fish was emphasized by the soft lobster dumplings in watercress-lobster broth.
"Quail salad!" I say, thinking about a lunch when I was served the most appealing salad I can remember.
Leaves of mache were topped with a pair of tiny fried quail eggs and laced with velvety strips of foie gras, silky pieces of grilled quail breast and rough shavings of Parmesan cheese.
"And the wine!" my friend says, reminding me of the sommelier's suggestions from that list of fabulous and fabulously expensive bottles.
We had settled on a '91 Chassagne-Montrachet from Colin followed by a wonderfully plummy '89 Bon Pasteur.
"Desserts," my friend says now, almost reverently.
Together we recite the sweets of the evening, like children recalling Halloween treats.
I liked a fruit soup that looked like a reverse sunset, a mint green verbena ice-cream sun setting in a magenta wine-poached pear.
He liked the gratin of chocolate, a slim disk of warm chocolate on a fragile sugar wafer.
We both loved the creme brulee with macerated strawberries, and were charmed by the finale, a plate of petits fours with its fanciful pulled-sugar birds and flowers.
"So?" says my friend. "Four stars?"
"It was a great meal," I concede, pushing back the covers, "but I still have to go back and see if Daniel can sustain that level of cooking."
Five meals later, it is clear that the restaurant can.
I have had an occasional disappointment: a salty soup, a 15-minute wait for dinner, a lost reservation at lunch.
But even on an off day, the restaurant is so exciting that you wake up the morning after a meal at Daniel eager to remember every bite.
It's quite a ride.
Daniel
****
20 East 76th Street, in the Hotel Surrey, Manhattan, (212) 288-0033.
Atmosphere: The plush room would be blandly comfortable were it not for the spectacular flower arrangements.
Service: The many people in the room achieve a fine balance between professionalism and warm personal service.
Recommended dishes: The market specials, wild game menu and plats classiques, which change daily, are all excellent.
From the regular menu: pumpkin and squash soup; rillettes of squab, duck, foie gras, rabbit and pork; salad of peeky toe crab; curried tuna tartar; nine-herb ravioli; bay scallops with porcini mushrooms; steamed skate in lobster broth; black sea bass wrapped in crisp potatoes; roasted rib-eye chop; gratin de chocolat; creme brulee with macerated strawberries; baked red wine tart.
Wine list: Impressive and expensive; the sommelier is extremely helpful.
Hours: Lunch: noon to 2:30 P.M.
Tuesdays through Fridays; dinner: 5:45 to 11:30 P.M.
Mondays through Saturdays.
Closed Sundays.
Price range; Lunch: prix fixe, 3 courses, $31; dinner: prix fixe, four to eight courses, $55 to $92; a la carte: appetizers $9 to $21, main courses $27 to $32, desserts $9 to $12.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Wheelchair accessibility: Everything is on one level and there is a wheelchair-accessible bathroom.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to Satisfactory *
Good **
Very Good ***
Excellent ****
Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration.
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.


Federal Judge Praises Vote on Nassau Charter
The Federal judge who declared Nassau County's government unconstitutional praised voters today for approving a new county legislature in a referendum on Tuesday.
The vote was 149,573 to 82,043, according to unofficial returns.


Marquette Electronics Inc.(MARQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Choreographer's Meditations on Death and Loss
Death is as eternal as life, as writers and painters -- more than choreographers -- have acknowledged over the centuries.
In the last 10 years, however, AIDS has profoundly transformed the dance world and engendered new themes.
In "Spectators at an Event" and "Fields of View," the experimental choreographer Susan Marshall has created two original and highly different meditations on death and a sense of loss.
Both premieres, presented on Wednesday night at the Majestic Theater (651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene) as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival, resonate with striking images.
They are thoughtful and thought-provoking, the product of a genuinely creative mind.


Gap Inc.(GPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
WELFARE
The Republicans' control of Congress will bring fundamental changes to a welfare debate that was already moving fast and far to the right.


Art in Review
'The Wild Kingdom of Antoine-Louis Barye'  Wildenstein &amp; Company 19 East 64th Street Through Dec. 9
Antoine-Louis Barye (1795-1875) was, like his friend Delacroix, a quintessential artist of the French Romantic movement.
Yet while Delacroix was primarily a painter of dramatic narrative, Barye is best known as a sculptor who early on settled on animals as his theme.
"Animalier" doesn't sound like an exciting category, but Barye managed to do remarkable things with it.


Lands' End Inc.(LE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Louis Nizer, Lawyer to the Famous, Dies at 92
Louis Nizer, the shrewd and voluble trial lawyer who made a long career of representing famous people in famous cases and whose autobiography, "My Life in Court," was a best seller, died yesterday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 92 and lived in midtown Manhattan.
The cause was kidney failure, said Perry Galler, the managing partner in the New York-based law firm Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim &amp; Ballon, of which Mr.
Nizer was the senior partner.


LSB Industries Inc.(LSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Profiles in Opportunism
Talk about slipping out of the hills to bayonet the wounded!
As the most conservative Democrat in the Senate, Richard Shelby had already embarrassed Vice President Al Gore on television with his refusal to support the Clinton economic plan, so his desertion to the ictorious Republicans this week was hardly a huge surprise.


Constructing Images Of the Black Male
BY its title alone, "Black Male" at the Whitney Museum of American Art, which opened yesterday, promised to be an incendiary event from the moment it was announced.
How could it not be?
Given the political and social battleground that the issue of the black man is in our culture.
Given the storms surrounding Rodney G. King and O. J. Simpson, Clarence Thomas and Marion S. Barry Jr.
Given the racial undertones of the recent election.
And given the Whitney's penchant for flamboyant political gestures that can end up looking opportunistic and hapless.
Some people have even wondered aloud whether this is a subject for an art museum to deal with.
The answer to that question, at least, is simple.
Yes, it is.
One thing the show underscores is that artists, black and white, have specifically addressed the topic of the black male, and the amount of art devoted to it grows.
It's a rich, timely and complex vein for a museum interested in contemporary art.


Mayor Forms Special Committee to Investigate Youth Services
Acknowledging that one of his agencies had fallen into disarray, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he was creating a committee to investigate the city's Department of Youth Services and possible mismanagement in its awarding of contracts to community organizations.
The Mayor said the review would complement an inquiry already undertaken by the city's Department of Investigation into possible wrongdoing at the department and he revealed that the department was looking into charges that someone had altered documents involved in the awarding of contracts.


The Rising G.O.P. Tide Overwhelms the Democratic Levees in the South
As Democrats around the country pick up the pieces from the Republican landslide on Tuesday, nowhere is the shock greater, the losses bigger and the implications harsher than in the South.
In 1990, Democrats in 13 Southern states outnumbered Republicans in the House of Representatives by 83 to 46.
Now, Republicans for the first time since Reconstruction outnumber Democrats 73 to 64.
For good measure, Republicans also lead the Democrats in Southern Senate seats and Governor's posts for the first time since Reconstruction.


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
THE BUDGET AND TAXES
The Republicans are holding to President Ronald Reagan's politically tested view that they can lower taxes for middle-income and wealthy people and still balance the Federal budget within a few years.
But that goal cannot be accomplished unless the Republicans find much deeper spending reductions than they have proposed so far.


Home Video
CD-ROM Made Simpler
With more CD-ROM's for sale and for rent in video stores, customers seem to be handling the complexities at least as well as the proprietors are.
"Dealers have this gut-wrenching fear they'll turn into computer outlets," said Jeff Allen of Entertainment Technologies of Colorado, a national distributor of games on cartridge and disk, based in Englewood, Colo.


At the Bar; A code that defines Albania has a mixed role in shaping a legal system for that country.
For the last three years, American lawyers and judges have been journeying here to help this Balkan country develop a modern system of law.
And despite the rejection of a constitution in a national referendum, their combined pro bono efforts have been successful: a bill of rights adopted by Parliament; a criminal code awaiting approval, and legislation passed on hazardous waste, land use and commercial activities.
There have been snags, however.
American legal experts in Albania have invariably come up against a deeply imbedded common law tradition that is at least 500 years old.


Mexican Telephone Shares Drop Sharply
A day after AT&amp;T announced that it would compete against Telefonos de Mexico rather than join with it in providing long-distance service here, shares of the Mexican telephone company plummeted 8 percent, dragging the stock market to one of its worst losses of the year.
The market fell 126.62 points, or 4.83 percent, to close at 2,492.32.
Telmex, the largest private company in Mexico, accounts for 26 percent of the exchange's total capitalization.


Images to Cherish in the Realm of the Word
On the lower level of the Museum of Modern Art there is an exhibition, "A Century of Artists Books," that harks back to the glory days when the museum was still very young.
It has the further merit of being up to date, with the latest in the avant-garde book.
It begins with a celebrated and monumental achievement that is exactly 100 years old: the Kelmscott Press Chaucer, designed and printed by William Morris and illustrated with wood engravings after Edward Burne-Jones.


Video-Cellist Tribute
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 3 review of the tribute to Charlotte Moorman, the topless video-cellist: The video-dance performance and images were conceived, directed and choreographed by me.
Because I was credited only with recording video images, readers may think that Nam June Paik created my video dance section.
AMY GREENFIELD  Staten Island, Nov. 7, 1994


Giacometti, Surveyed From Start to Finish
Exceptional exhibitions of the work of Alberto Giacometti (1901-1966), the Swiss artist who brought a new psychological reality to figurative sculpture in the years after World War II, are becoming somewhat frequent in Manhattan.
In the last 18 months, both the Gagosian Gallery and the Yoshii Gallery have examined aspects of Giacometti's achievement in small, focused shows.
Now the Acquavella Gallery is taking its turn, with an exhibition, far from small, that presents a brisk synopsis of nearly the artist's entire career.
With more than 70 works, a vast majority of them bronzes, that together span nearly five decades, this exhibition lacks the sharp focus of its predecessors (especially the Yoshii show, which presented a rare and touching view of the artist as a young sculptor).
Nor is its synopsis complete: although it includes the haunting 1932 masterpiece "Woman With Her Throat Cut," it passes rather lightly over the artist's Surrealist period of the late 1920's and early 30's and has nothing in plaster or wood, his frequent materials during those years.


Drowning Case Embitters U.S. Race Relations
To the Editor:
The headlines in the major newspapers read similarly: "Mom Killed Kids," "2 Bodies Found, Mother Held in Children's Death." As a human being, I couldn't help being mortified by the senseless tragedy.
As an African-American, I couldn't help being disgusted and angry.
Why?
Because this disturbing ordeal painfully shows that black men have become the symbol for society's ills.


First State Audits Show Two Municipalities How to Save Money as Whitman Cuts Aid
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today delivered the first installment of her promise to show New Jersey's municipalities and school districts how to live with her state tax cuts, releasing audits that list potential tax savings of millions of dollars in one town but less in another.
Kearny, a Hudson County town of 35,000, could save $2.6 million a year, equal to nearly 17 percent of its tax receipts, according to the audit.
A second audit of the town of Ventnor, in Atlantic County, showed much smaller but still significant potential savings.


INSIDE
Inquiry Into Youth Agency
Mayor Giuliani is creating a committee to investigate possible mismanagement at New York's Department of Youth Services.
Page B1.
Producer Prices Decline
Producer prices dropped by five-tenths of 1 percent in October, the Labor Department reported, showing inflation was mild.
Page D1.
Clinton Makes Plea on Trade
Worried that his agenda is threatened, President Clinton appealed to Republicans to approve a worldwide trade accord in Congress.
Page A8.
U.S.
Shift on Obscenity Law
The Justice Department reversed its widely criticized interpretation of a child-pornography law.
Page A15.
Louis Nizer Dies at 92
The flamboyant trial lawyer represented famous and powerful clients for six decades.
Page B7.


Round 1 to Ewing and Knicks in Final 2.4 Seconds
Faced with an early-season test, Patrick Ewing made a Grade A shot under pressure.
Making a 12-foot baseline jumper with 2.4 seconds to play, Ewing lifted the Knicks to a heart-pounding 101-99 victory over the Orlando Magic last night at Madison Square Garden.
Not only did the victory keep the Knicks unbeaten (3-0), but it sent a signal to a team that is one of their biggest threats in the Eastern Conference.


A New Guideline on History Looks Beyond Old Europe
A Federal education panel today will announce new world-history standards that keep William the Conqueror and the Battle of Hastings in public-school lesson plans but also give emphasis to non-European hallmarks like China's Sung dynasty, which developed paper currency, gunpowder and wood-block book printing from the 10th to the 13th century.
The standards, which are voluntary, retain the study of the Greek city-states and the Roman Empire but add the Mauryan Empire in India and the Olmec culture, which influenced the Zapotec and Mayan civilizations.


Berlitz International Inc.(BTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.28
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.22
5.19
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.61
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.98
7.96
5.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.14
8.11
6.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.96
8.93
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.19
7.21
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


William R. Hesse, 80, an Ad Executive
William R. Hesse, an advertising executive who headed one of the nation's largest agencies and the American Association of Advertising Agencies, died Tuesday at his home in Yarmouthport, Mass.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said Charles Stackhouse, his son-in-law.


Angola's Rebel on the Ropes
By the ordinary calculus of war, Jonas Savimbi, the guerrilla warrior whose quest for power has left Angola in ruins, at last appears to be a beaten man.
The rebel leader has lost his ground.
He has lost his allies.
He has lost much of his popular support.
He has lost the diamond fields that financed his army.
And this week he lost his capital when the Angolan Army entered the rebels' symbolic stronghold of Huambo.


Circus Performances to Benefit Goodwill Games


Sears, Returning to Its Roots, Is Giving Up Allstate
Completing a return to its retailing roots, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said today that it would give control of the Allstate Corporation to Sears shareholders, shedding the last remnant of its grand strategy to build a financial services empire on the shoulders of its huge retailing business.
By transferring to its shareholders ownership of its $9 billion stake in Allstate, the nation's second-largest insurer of homes and autos, after the State Farm Group, Sears will complete one of the largest corporate revampings in business history.
The divestment will cap the 37-year career of Edward A. Brennan, the chairman and chief executive since 1986, who steered the company through several years of expansion, crisis and restructuring.


Art in Review
Willie Doherty, Mona Hatoum and Doris Salcedo
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street (at Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Nov. 19
If translating political meaning into convincing visual terms is a challenge of the moment, and for better and worse it is, this exhibition provides a useful lens.
The three artists included have experienced relentless political realities at close hand.
Mona Hatoum is a Palestinian artist who now lives in London; Willie Doherty continues to live and work in Northern Ireland, and Doris Salcedo is from Colombia.


Usery Restarts Talks, But Ravitch Is Silent
In the first bargaining session in two months, baseball's club owners today offered to take their coveted salary cap off the table.
The offer, however, wasn't as magnanimous or as significant as it might appear, because the owners attached a large but to the idea.
They would remove the cap, Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, told union negotiators, if the players would tell them what their labor costs would be.
But the owners have made that request for five months, meaning nothing new transpired between the negotiators as they resumed talks in the 91-day-old strike.


Diner's Journal
Peanut Sauce and Lotus Jelly
Three children stand at the back of Penang, staring with fascination at the water that drips down the rocky walls and across the plants.
"This looks like the jungle," says one little boy.


Topics of The Times; Connecticut Revisits its Income Tax
Let no one quibble about John Rowland's 36 percent victory in Connecticut.
His share of the vote for governor in a four-way race was not significantly less than Lowell Weicker's winning share in a three-way race in 1990.
Governor Weicker used his victory to force adoption of a personal income tax.
Mr.
Rowland, a Republican with the advantage of a newly elected Republican majority in the State Senate, is pledged to repeal it.
Repeal poses two threats: The tax will yield $2.7 billion this year, more than one-quarter of the $9.4 billion budget.
Mr.
Rowland maintains that he can offset half the revenue loss with spending cuts that will not cut services -- a dubious proposition -- and that healthier economic activity will offset the other half.
Just as bad, the state would again be dependent on regressive sales taxes, and taxes on dividends and corporations that drive people and businesses away.


Nash Finch Co.(NAFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 8


Regency Health Services Inc.(RHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Small but Sure Ways, the Art Market Shifts
There were subtle changes this fall in the complexion of the market for contemporary, Impressionist and modern art in Manhattan.
Both Sotheby's and Christie's edited their auctions, making them leaner and more carefully thought out than the spring sales.
Catalogues were smaller, and the art was generally of better quality.
This was the season for repairing the damage done in the spring, when greedy estimates coupled with stale offerings resulted in disaster.
The auction houses wanted their fall sales, which ended yesterday, to inspire confidence.


Paul Frame, 80, Book Illustrator
Paul Frame, an award-winning illustrator of 300 children's books and the designer of Lord &amp; Taylor's signature rose, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Jean.
Mr.
Frame, who was known for painstaking research and attention to detail, illustrated many books in the Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys series, as well as editions of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer," "Casey at the Bat" and "Knights of the Round Table."


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
THE ENVIRONMENT
The Republican majority's environmental agenda can be summed up in three ideas that the party's leaders, and many conservative Democrats as well, would like applied to all environmental laws.


Resorts Int'l.(RT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


King Hussein Visits Rabin in Israel


Claim by Wounded Officer
The black undercover transit officer mistakenly shot by a white New York City police officer last summer filed a legal claim yesterday against the city and the officer who shot him, charging that the Police Department sought to cover up evidence.
The claim by Officer Desmond Robinson, seeking $50 million in damages, was filed with the City Comptroller.


With Waiting Game Over, Graham Is Ready to Roll
If Kent Graham is lacking in anything, it is definitely not confidence.
Now, his task is to spread some of it around to his teammates.
"Any time you lose six games in a row, there's a lull in confidence," said the 26-year-old Graham, who will replace the benched starter, Dave Brown, at quarterback for the Giants on Sunday.
"To say that that's not the case is fooling yourself. We are struggling right now, but hopefully this week, we'll turn things around with a win."


In Their Own Words: The Republican Promises
During the election campaign, Republican candidates for Congress gathered in Washington to endorse a set of proposals for legislative action that they called their "Contract With America." They said that in the first 100 days of the 104th Congress, they would introduce bills they described as follows: 1.
The Fiscal Responsibility Act: A balanced budget/tax limitation amendment and a legislative line-item veto to restore fiscal responsibility to an out-of-control Congress, requiring them to live under the same budget constraints as families and businesses. 2.
The Taking Back Our Streets Act: An anti-crime package including stronger truth-in-sentencing, "good faith" exclusionary rule exemptions, effective death penalty provisions, and cuts in social spending from this summer's "crime" bill to fund prison construction and additional law enforcement to keep people secure in their neighborhoods and kids safe in their schools. 3.
The Personal Responsibility Act: Discourage illegitimacy and teen pregnancy by prohibiting welfare to minor mothers and denying increased AFDC for additinal children while on welfare, cut spending for welfare programs, and enact a tough two-years-and-out provision with work requirements to promote individual responsibility. 4.
The Family Reinforcement Act: Child support enforcement, tax incentive for adoption, strengthening rights of parents in their children's education, stronger child pornography laws, and an elderly dependent care tax credit to reinforce the central role of families in American society. 5.
The American Dream Restoration Act: A $500 per child tax credit, begin repeal of the marriage tax penalty, and creation of American Dream Savings Accounts to provide middle class tax relief. 6.
The National Security Restoration Act: No U.S. troops under U.N. command and restoration of the essential parts of our national security funding to strengthen our national defense and maintain our credibility around the world. 7.
The Senior Citizens Fairness Act: Raise the Social Security earnings limit which currently forces seniors out of the work force, repeal the 1993 tax hikes on Social Security benefits and provide tax incentive for private long-term care insurance to let older Americans keep more of what they have earned over the years. 8.
The Hob Creation and Wage Enhancement Act: Small business incentives, capital gains cut and indexation, neutral cost recovery, risk assessment/cost-benefit analysis, strengthening the Regulatory Flexibility Act and unfunded mandate reform to create jobs and raise worker wages. 9.
The Common Sense Legal Reform Act: "Loser pays" laws, reasonable limits on punitive damages and reform of product liablility laws to stem the endless tide of litigation. 10.
The Citizen Legislative Act: A first ever vote on term limits to replace career politicians with citizen legislators.


Carter-Wallace Inc.(CAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


E.P.A. Delays A Decision On Emissions
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency, which was supposed to announce yesterday whether California's strict automobile emissions standards would be applied to 12 eastern states, will spend an additional month trying to broker a compromise between the states and the auto industry.
Carol M. Browner, the agency's administrator, said yesterday at a news conference in Washington that the delay would allow the E.P.A. to work for improved national emissions standards and a regulatory scheme that is simpler for everyone.


Silence May Speak Against the Accused in Britain
In Britain, as in the United States, people arrested for a criminal offense have received a ritual police warning: They have the right to refuse to answer all questions put to them by investigators.
It is only what they say that can be used against them.
But in the coming months, police officers in Britain will begin delivering another and markedly different caution to those they apprehend.
While suspects will still be told that they do not have to talk to officers, they will be warned as well that their silence might count against them, if their case goes to trial.


Irish End Is Charged
Notre Dame's MICHAEL MILLER, a receiver and return man, has been charged in Texas in what prosecutors call a scheme to steal and forge checks to buy $50,000 worth of airline tickets, clothes and alcohol.
Miller turned himself in on Wednesday, one day after Notre Dame Coach LOU HOLTZ announced without explanation that Miller had left school.
Miller was being held on $5,000 bond.
If convicted on a charge of organized criminal activity, he could be sentenced to 10 years in prison.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a new type of gasoline misstated the given name of a spokesman for the Sun oil company.
He is Bud Davis, not Brian Davis.


Art in Review
Rudolf Stingel  Paula Cooper Gallery 155 Wooster Street (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Nov. 26
The two floor-to-ceiling abstract paintings by Rudolf Stingel in Paula Cooper's front gallery are at once self-effacing and technically complex.
Their brushy vermilion underpainting has been sprayed with a semi-opaque screen of silver pigment, whose sheen turns almost white at a distance.
The paintings' surfaces appear to be interrupted by wrinkles and creases as if the canvas were only loosely fitted to its stretcher.
In fact, these patterns are created by applying enamel paint whipped to a froth to the taut surfaces so that it leaves ridges and indentations when it dries.


Accounts
*
Century 21 Real Estate Corp., Irvine, Calif., to Campbell Mithun Esty, Minneapolis, to handle its consolidated domestic advertising, direct response and promotional account, with combined billings estimated at $40 million.
The account was previously handled by Campbell Mithun and various other agencies.


Up on the Roof


Elron Electronic Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


More Than a Monument: The Spiritual Dimension of These Hallowed Walls
Americans have long revered places that they link to the shaping of their national identity: the bridge at Concord, the Alamo, the hulk of the battleship Arizona at Pearl Harbor.
Few pieces of ground are so hallowed as Gettysburg, where the Civil War battle and Lincoln's address paired national unity and purpose in a way that is seen as almost mystical.
But veneration occasionally imparts even more to a hallowed site: a spiritual dimension that transforms it into something like a sacred shrine, where pilgrims come and devotions are paid.
For generations, Gettysburg was such a place.
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, several scholars of religion and culture say, is becoming one now.


Givenchy Is Suing Discounters
Parfums Givenchy Inc. sued Wal-Mart, Kmart, Sears, Marshalls, Perfumania and several other discount stores today, accusing the stores of of violating copyright laws by selling its Amarige and Ysatis perfumes without permission.
The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Los Angeles, represents a broadening of an attack by Givenchy against sales of its fragrances in unauthorized outlets.
While most marketers of luxury goods have relied on trademark laws to prevent the diversion of their products to discount stores, Givenchy, the American arm of the French perfume company, has been successfully using copyright law.


SunAmerica Inc.(SAI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Newborn Found in Garbage By Building Superintendent
The garbage smelled its usual smell and buzzed with flies just as it always does.
But when it began to whimper yesterday morning, Cesar DeLeon took notice.
That's when the garbage ritual at the apartment building in the Bronx turned into a life-saving adventure for Mr.
DeLeon and changed his title -- at least for a day -- from super to hero.


Foodmaker Inc.(FM,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 2


Kuwaiti Government to Sell Santa Fe's Petroleum Assets
Kuwait, which has been scaling down its United States petroleum operations, announced today that it planned to sell the oil and natural gas properties owned by its Santa Fe International Corporation.
Kuwait's $2.5 billion cash purchase of Sante Fe International in 1981, at the zenith of the petroleum industry, was the largest single Arab investment in the United States at the time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Sears will spin off the rest of Allstate to shareholders, completing one of the largest revampings ever in Corporate America and bringing Sears full circle to its retailing roots.  [ Page A1. ]


Art in Review
The Print Fair  Seventh Regiment Armory Park Avenue at 67th Street Through Sunday
The great buzzing circus known as the Print Fair is back in Manhattan this weekend, featuring not three rings, but 93 booths, staffed by dealers from around the country and across Europe.
This year's fair, sponsored by the International Fine Print Dealers Association, offers the usual smorgasbord of prints of all sorts and periods.


American Travellers Corp.(ATVC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drowning Case Embitters U.S. Race Relations; Sowing Discord
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 6 news article on the pain felt by African-Americans in the wake of Susan Smith's false accusation: I want to add to this sentiment that Mrs.
Smith's reprehensible act of fabricating an alibi by naming an African-American also pains many whites.
To take this step further, any contribution to the racial unrest in this country also affects Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, native Americans and all citizens who care about creating racial harmony.
BRUCE LEVITT  New York, Nov. 7, 1994


Ground Beef That May Be Tainted Is Recalled
The Department of Agriculture has announced the recall of 9,000 pounds of ground beef from Monfort Inc., a food processing firm in Greeley, Colo.
The company is voluntarily recalling the meat because it may be contaminated with E. coli, bacteria that was responsible for the deaths of four children and the illness of hundreds of others in the Northwest last year.
Two products are affected by the recall, which was announced on Tuesday.
One is Monfort 100 Percent Pure Beef Ground Round in 3-pound packages with "freeze by 11/3/94" on the label, sold in Walmart stores in Arkansas and Texas.
The other is Manor House 100 Percent Pure Ground Beef in 5-pound packages marked "use or freeze by 11/03 EST969," sold in Safeway stores in Denver.


For Children
Family Musik
92d Street Y  1395 Lexington Avenue  (212) 996-1100  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Sunday
Classical music concerts for children are going interactive, but this is not about pushing buttons: children conducted at a recent Peter Schickele program, for example, and at the New York Philharmonic concerts for young people, the audience walks through a gallery of instruments to touch and play.
In the latest family concert program, Family Musik, the 40-year-old composer Robert Kapilow roams the audience like a talk-show host, asking provocative questions.
It's all an exciting turn for children's music programs, and who doesn't want youngsters to grow up listening to serious music?


S. O. Adebo, 80, a U.N. Envoy; Pioneered Nigeria Civil Service
S.
O.
Adebo, a pioneer of the Nigerian civil service, and a former United Nations envoy and university president, died of a stroke on Sept. 30 at Sacred Heart Hospital in Abeokuta, Nigeria.
He was 80.
Chief Adebo served as Nigeria's representative at the United Nations from 1962 to 1967 and as United Nations Under Secretary General and Executive General of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research until 1972.
He retired as Chancellor of the University of Lagos two years ago.


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
CRIME
Republican lawmakers say they will try to scale back drastically the $30 billion Federal anti-crime bill enacted in September, beginning by cutting the $5.3 billion approved for prevention programs.


MacKenzie Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mr. Dole's Packwood Problem
For members of Congress eager to exercise real power, there is nothing sweeter than heading an important committee.
This week's election means that House and Senate Republicans are about to get that chance.
But Senate Republican leaders face one awkward dilemma: the all-but-certain elevation of Bob Packwood of Oregon to head the pivotal Finance Committee.
Mr.
Packwood may be a talented legislator, but he remains the subject of a major Ethics Committee inquiry.
In addition to the original charges of sexual misconduct involving numerous women, the Ethics Committee is said to be looking into possible tampering with evidence by the Senator to obstruct the inquiry, and a charge that he improperly asked lobbyists to offer a job to his wife when she was divorcing him.


Hampson Cancels
The baritone Thomas Hampson has canceled his performances with the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra tonight and tomorrow evening, because of a throat infection.
He will be replaced by Kurt Ollmann and James Maddalena, singing works by Charles Ives and John Adams in the orchestra's "American Transcendentalists" program at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, part of the Next Wave Festival.
The concert is at 8 P.M. at the Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Jazz Finds a Lonely Follower in the Australian Desert
One day in the remote Australian village of Poona Flat, strange music drops out of the sky, and a little boy named John Anderson has an epiphany.
It is 1969.
A cargo plane carrying members of a jazz ensemble has been diverted to the outback for an unscheduled layover.
As the villagers stare, dumbfounded, seven musicians file onto the runway and give an impromptu jazz concert.
John is riveted by the sounds coming from the trumpet of the group's lead player, Billy Cross (Miles Davis).
"You seemed tuned into it," Billy tells the star-struck boy afterward.
"If you ever come to Paris, look me up."
So begins Rolf de Heers's film "Dingo," a wildly romantic story about a jazz musician in pursuit of his muse.
The 1991 film, which opens a two-week engagement today at Cinema Village, jumps forward two decades.
John (Colin Friels), now married and the father of two girls, ekes out a living trapping the Australian wild dogs known as dingos.
A largely self-taught trumpeter who has learned the instrument by studying Billy Cross records, he plays on weekends with a local "bush band," whose skiffle-style rock-and-roll has nothing to do with jazz.
Alone in the desert, he aims his instrument at the sky and produces lonely warbling doglike cries that echo the sounds of his idol's records, and earn him the nickname Dingo.


Republicans Stand Ready To Transform the Agenda
Republican control of Congress holds the potential for an upheaval in the capital's legislative agenda, with Republican lawmakers pressing proposals ranging from cutting taxes to changing the welfare system to reducing foreign aid.
The dimensions of the possible changes became clear today when a leading Republican lawmaker said one of his long-range goals was to replace the Federal income tax with other sources of revenue.
Representative Bill Archer of Texas, in line to become chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, where tax laws originate, outlined plans today for a quick tax cut and said he would like to see "a complete replacement of the income tax," perhaps with a national sales tax.


No Headline
"It hurts to walk out for the second half and see everybody leaving -- we hate it. But we've grown accumstomed to it. Happens every home game. At other colleges, football players walk around campus and people respect them. Here, you get more respect being in the band." MICHAEL PORTER, a running back on the ever-losing Prairie View football team.  [ B9:5. ]


At the U.N., Fear Deepens Over Rwanda
Senior advisers to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali met tonight to consider asking that more United Nations troops be sent to Rwanda to counter what they fear is a threat to invade the country by 30,000 members of the defeated Rwandan army.
The advisers said the Rwandan troops, mainly in refugee camps in Zaire, were responsible for a current wave of violence in the camps.


Construction Worker Killed in Accident


Pataki Voices Shock at Learning Size of Gap in Budget He Inherits
Governor-elect George E. Pataki expressed shock today upon learning that he would inherit a projected $4 billion budget shortfall next year from the Cuomo administration, but said he remained committed to his campaign pledge to cut income taxes by 25 percent over four years.
Mr.
Pataki also asserted that the Cuomo administration should have taken steps to close next year's budget gap this year.
"There's no question if there is that much of a deficit looming that it should have been revealed and steps should have been taken during the course of the year to correct our spending problems so we wouldn't be facing them come next April," he said.
The state's fiscal year begins on April 1.


Farm Life of the 20's For Children of the 90's
I TOOK my two children to Muscoot Farm on a dreary Sunday in November, when the bored quarreling that begins on a day to be spent indoors sent me running for a map and extra sweat shirts and dry socks to stuff in a shopping bag.
The farm, in the Westchester County town of Somers, is a long drive from our house in New Jersey, and there were moments, as we approached the Tappan Zee Bridge, when I had my doubts as the rain and the unseasonably warm temperature wrapped the car in a white haze.
My daughters ate the Halloween candy they had brought and submerged themselves in headsets and the silence that usually means the Offspring and Pink Floyd.
But it was raining, and I was on the run from a Sunday indoors.
"A farm?" Susan, 12, had asked in disbelief.
In an instant, she remembered a major school project on Ulysses S. Grant that was due the next day.
She didn't need a trip to a farm.
She had to do her homework.
"Do it later," I told her.


Dumars Helps Fuel Pistons' Late Rally
Pistons 112, Pacers 110
Joe Dumars scored 4 points in the final minute and the Detroit Pistons picked up a 112-110 victory over the Indiana Pacers last night in Auburn Hills, Mich.


On Stage, and Off
At Last, the Opening
"Sunset Boulevard" is finally set to open on Thursday, its golden mansion gliding up and down on steel rails, its $50,000 car onstage for mere seconds, its staircases still slick with the blood of Faye Dunaway and Patti LuPone.
Jammed scenery stalled the London previews, but thus far in New York everything has stayed in its tracks.
"Nothing terrible has happened," said a slightly awed stage manager.
"It was just like we did it in L.A."


Japanese Central Bank Gets a New Governor
Japan has an odd way of doing things, but the Finance Minister chose a bizarre way of introducing the next governor of the Bank of Japan.
He used a post-midnight press conference this morning to announce that Yasuo Matsushita, a former bureaucrat, would become one of the world's most powerful central bankers in December.
Among the worst-kept secrets in Japan are the interest-rate decisions of the Bank of Japan, which are commonly leaked to newspapers here in advance.
And so it has been with the selection of Mr.
Matsushita.


Sybase Inc.(SYBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dramas Played a Week At the Apollo in '51
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 4 Chronicle account of a "street opera" opening at the Apollo Theater in Harlem states that "Bring In the Morning . . . a Wake-Up Call," directed and choreographed by Mercedes Ellington is "the first theatrical production to be performed for more than one night at the Apollo."


All Gassed Up With Not Much Place to Go
At least "Pontiac Moon" is what it sounds like: a movie about a Pontiac and about the moon.
If there is anything else pleasant to be said, it's that the car is a cream-colored 1949 Pontiac Chief convertible in excellent condition.
Both it and the moon look nice.
Now then: the film contrives a connection between the car and the Apollo XI moon shot.
The idea is that because the car's odometer has almost reached the 238,857 miles the astronauts will traverse on their trip to the moon, driving the car the remaining distance will become a meaningful symbolic gesture.
With typical understatement, this plan is referred to as "one perfect act" and culminates in "that day the universe was reborn."


Leucadia National (LUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Allstate's size helps profits, but also makes for added risk.
AS one of the nation's largest insurers of homes and autos, the Allstate Corporation reaps the rewards of name recognition and economies of scale that in normal times help make it very profitable.
But with that size comes additional risk that the company would just as soon avoid, or at least reduce.
A $2.7 billion loss in 1992 from Hurricane Andrew in Florida and a $1.3 billion loss from the Los Angeles earthquake early this year have wreaked havoc on Allstate's profits.
After a loss of $500 million in 1992, the company saw profits jump to a record $1.3 billion in disaster-free 1993, but earnings have slumped to $320.7 million in the first nine months of this year.


For Better Troop Living, $2.7 Billion Is Shifted From Weapons
Aiming to avert potentially serious morale and recruiting problems, the Pentagon plans to spend an additional $2.7 billion over the next six years to improve housing conditions, child care and other programs for troops and their families, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today.
The shift in the Pentagon's priorities comes in response to several trends that have alarmed senior officials concerned about the social consequences of reducing the size of the military.
They say that the number of military families on food stamps is increasing, for example; that spousal-abuse rates are rising, and that troops are spending more and more time away from home.


Glimpse of Things to Come As Lopez Puts on a Show
The maturation process will progress in a methodical manner for the St.
John's basketball team this season with tiny steps being taken here and there.
The Red Storm is young and anxious to learn so their improvement on the court will be a daily grind.
Felipe Lopez will take those steps with St.
John's and will have a significant impact in helping turn those steps into strides.
Lopez was the featured performer last night when Alumni Hall was opened for an organized intrasquad clash and his debut was electrifying.


New Majority's Agenda: Substantial Changes May Be Ahead
When Republicans take control of the Senate and House in January, they will propose a legislative agenda drastically different from President Clinton's, which could lead to substantial changes in a broad array of Federal programs and laws, as well as the workings of Congress.
Following are brief looks at the main issues.
HEALTH CARE
Even before the Democrats lost their majorities, it was clear that comprehensive health care restructuring that guaranteed universal coverage was going nowhere.
All along, Republican leaders have argued for a much more incremental approach that would fix specific problems in insurance coverage while making coverage more accessible and affordable.
This, now, becomes the majority view.


California Immigration Measure Faces Rocky Legal Path
Proposition 187, the anti-illegal immigration initiative approved decisively by California voters on Tuesday, may well turn out to be a classic case of unintended consequences.
It is also likely to provoke years of political debate and litigation about its meaning and its constitutionality.
The measure, called "Save Our State" by sponsors, is based on the premise that California's bounty of social services is the magnet drawing illegal immigrants across the border.
Turning it off, proponents argue, will deter new arrivals.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI VOICES SHOCK AT GAP IN BUDGET
Governor-elect George E. Pataki expressed shock upon learning that he would inherit a projected $4 billion budget shortfall from the Cuomo administration, but said he remained committed to his campaign pledge to cut income taxes by 25 percent over four years.
A1.
The Governor-elect delivered a thank-you to the upstate voters that supported him.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Microsoft takes a user-friendly approach to selling its image in a new global campaign.
MICROSOFT'S first worldwide image campaign is so extensive, so expansive and so expensive, maybe the company ought to rename itself Macrosoft.
In broadcast, print and outdoor advertising by Wieden &amp; Kennedy that begins next week, the Microsoft Corporation asks, "Where do you want to go today?" Of the more than $100 million that the software giant has budgeted through July for the campaign -- which takes a winsome, humanistic approach to demystifying technology -- $25 million will be spent during the coming holiday shopping season.


2 Haitians Working for U.S. Embassy Slain
Two Haitian employees of the United States Embassy here were shot and killed today and a third seriously wounded in what American officials described as a payroll robbery and car hijacking.
The slain workers, said to be administrative employees in their mid-20's, were seized outside a downtown bank after picking up the pay packets of 110 of the embassy's Haitian staff members, the embassy said in a statement.
They were then apparently forced to drive to a secluded road and were killed.


Solemn Salutes for Those Who Served


Transalta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Offer Creates Little Stir By Owners
The National Hockey League didn't accept or reject the latest proposal by its players' association today as the second round of the union tournament was played at Copps Coliseum.
But both sides agreed on one point: The offer didn't include a cap on rookie salaries, although the locked-out players did suggest a few changes in the entry-level system.


Gingrich Claims A Victor's Spoils
Having traded his dusty Honda for a shiny new Cadillac, Newt Gingrich, the Speaker-apparent, made a triumphal entrance into Washington, inveighing against the "counterculture" and warning that "the question is whether or not our civilization will survive." Eschewing compromise with the White House, he asserted a mandate to reclaim old-fashioned values of hard work and swift justice.
Article, page 11.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DRUG EMPORIUM INC., Columbus, Ohio, said it would sell seven Drug Emporium stores in the Washington, D.C., area to Melville Corp.'s CVS drugstore unit for an undisclosed amount.
It will close an additional 14 stores in Washington.


Religion Journal; For School Storyteller, a Task of Biblical Proportions
Rosemary Lea admires the village people.
For sure it's a retro fondness, but not for the macho men of disco fame.
Her admiration is for the folks she knew growing up in the English countryside 67 years ago.
"They were able to express their thoughts and sprinkle their conversations with allusions to quotations from the Bible," she said.
"They put it in everyday conversation. Now, you mention a fiery furnace and nobody knows what the allusion is. I find that very sad."


REPUBLICAN TIDE BRINGS NEW LOOK TO LEGISLATURES
Mirroring the party's huge gains in Congressional and gubernatorial elections on Tuesday, Republicans made striking advances in state legislatures, taking control of at least 15 chambers that had been in Democratic hands.
Republicans also picked up enough seats to cause an even split between the two parties in three other chambers, according to figures compiled by the National Conference of State Legislatures, a nonpartisan group based in Denver.
In no case among the 50 states' 99 chambers did Democrats manage to wrest control from Republicans.
Indeed, the party did not achieve a net gain of seats on Tuesday anywhere except a handful of Northeastern states and Hawaii.


Spelling Entertainment Group Inc.(SP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Only Futures Are Traded In Treasury Bond Market
Futures trading in an abbreviated session was the only activity yesterday in the Government securities market, with the cash market closed in observance of Veterans Day.
Traders said the price of the December contract for a 30-year Treasury bond finished down 17/32 , at 962/32 .
David Ging, manager of MMS Treasury Technical in Chicago, said that the equivalent price in the cash market was 9210/32 or slightly more, for a yield of 8.19 percent.


Many Unknowns in the Lineup Of G.O.P. House Panel Chiefs
On Wednesday morning, after the startling news that the Republicans will control the House of Representatives for the first time in 40 years, a Pentagon official told a colleague that the new chairman of the House Armed Services Committee is likely to be Floyd D. Spence of South Carolina.
"Floyd Spence? Who's that?" the official remarked, half in jest.


Technology Group Rules the Roost So Far
Technology stocks had a smart third-quarter rally that made up for a rough second quarter.
As a result, technology funds continue to outpace other fund categories for the year.
But Laura Lallos, an analyst at Morningstar Mutual Funds, Chicago, said that many portfolio managers expected the group to slow down next year.
The next two categories, foreign and European stocks, are expected to continue their strong showing; astute managers have hedged correctly to overcome the dollar's weakness, she said.
"There is a little more optimism in Europe for growth without inflation," she said, "and emerging markets have bounced back up." The outlook is also favorable for health care funds.


Coach Beard Is All Hot Because Nets Are Not
Halftime in the Nets' locker room tonight came and went with a bang.
Butch Beard, the first-year coach, gave a terse discourse on the merits of playing with effort and courage.
"He blew up like a volcano," said P. J. Brown.
His team let out a rumble early in the second half, but ultimately the Nets' desire faded and their competitiveness nearly reached extinction.


Men's Wearhouse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Undefeated Knicks Get A Road Test
After winning their first three games, the Knicks will find out more about themselves during the next week, when they embark on a challenging four-game trip.
They open their trip against the Spurs tonight, followed by games against Utah, the Los Angeles Lakers and Golden State.
None of those games figure to be easy.
But Pat Riley looks at the trip not as an obstacle but as an opportunity.


CHRONICLE
DAVID BOULEY, the chef and owner of the four-star TriBeCa restaurant bearing his name, is also on the awards circuit.
He will be honored tomorrow by the Michigan State University School of Hotel, Restaurant and Institutional Management at the Righa Royal Hotel in Manhattan.
The school has named him its "Industry Leader of the Year."
"I was struck by what an unlikely place to give me an award," he said yesterday, referring to the school, and added how pleased he was that cooking was moving into academia.


DANCE
The Japanese Art Of Speaking in Metaphors La Mama Annex


Reactors Offer Hope
To the Editor:
"Clean Up Reactors in East Europe Too" (letter, Nov. 8) by S. Jacob Scherr and David Schwarzbach of the Natural Resources Defense Council, calls for a stop to construction of nuclear power stations in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.


Court Eases Restraining Order in Tobacco Document Case
The Kentucky Court of Appeals yesterday lifted an order preventing a paralegal aide who has been accused by a tobacco company of divulging confidential documents from speaking to his lawyers about the case.
The court ruled that a restraining order obtained by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company was so broad that it violated the aide's right to counsel.
The court said the aide, Merrell Williams, could now speak to his lawyers, but would continue to be barred from discussing the documents with anyone else.


City Official Is Charged Over a Deal
After an official of the Department of Finance applied for a $1 million city contract without mentioning that he was employed by the city, he perhaps should have reconsidered announcing his job title on a television news program.
Basil R. Jones, the Deputy Collector for Brooklyn, denied working for the city when he applied for a contract with the Department of Housing Preservation and Development in 1991 to manage and rehabilitate city-owned buildings in Flatbush and Crown Heights, the authorities said this week.


Autumn Warning: Beware of Careless Hunters
To the Editor:
Let me offer a few words of caution to fellow New Yorkers who may be contemplating a quiet weekend in the country this fall: hunting season is upon us.


With Thai Rebuff, U.S. Defers Plan for Navy Depot in Asia
The United States has put on hold a proposal to build a floating war depot in Southeast Asia that would strengthen American military readiness in both Asia and the Middle East, senior United States military officials said today.
The plan was frozen, at least for the moment, after Thailand rejected a proposal last month to base a flotilla of up to six supply ships permanently in the Gulf of Thailand.


POP
A Veteran of Gospel In Songs From Then and Now  Tramps


Cable TV: Finally, Getting It Right
The Federal Communications Commission agreed this week to loosen some of the price controls it imposed earlier this year on cable operators.
Critics charged that the F.C.C. had knuckled under to a powerful industry and cheated consumers.
But the decision is welcome; it is consumers who suffer most from punitive rate caps.
In 1992, Congress responded to viewer outrage and instructed the F.C.C. to rein in price-gouging cable operators.
But where a scalpel was needed to go after a few bad actors, the commission wielded a meat ax against 11,000 cable operators across the nation.
Relying on an unreliable statistical model, the commission imposed a complex set of rules that it promised would yield a rate rollback of up to 10 percent -- the amount of monopoly profit the commission estimated was built into monthly bills.


Serbs Recover Land Lost to Bosnian Army
Nationalist Serbs from Bosnia and Croatia advanced against Government units today in the northwestern enclave around Bihac, regaining some villages, local news reports and United Nations officials said.
The political leader of the nationalist Serbs in Bosnia, Radovan Karadzic, described the attacks as a campaign to "neutralize" the Bosnian Army's V Corps, which captured about 95 square miles of territory from the Serbs two weeks ago.


What Do I.Q. Tests Measure? Not Intelligence
To the Editor:
Columns and letters such as Donald M. Stewart's "Test Score Rise Had Nothing to Do With Race" (Nov. 5) have commented on recent books dealing with racial differences on intelligence tests.
All of the commentaries promulgate the assumption that I.Q. tests measure intelligence.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Nov. 4 about a reduction of American companies' interest in Japan referred incorrectly to the Asian offices of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The headquarters for the Merrill Lynch's Asian operations have long been in Hong Kong; they are not being moved to Hong Kong from Tokyo, where the company maintains an office for Japan.


Reeves's Vocabulary Now Includes 'Playoffs'
O.K., so the season is far from over.
But Dan Reeves talking about the playoffs?


Most Markets Open in U.S.
Most financial markets in the United States were open yesterday, although the cash market for Treasury securities and some banks were closed in observance of Veterans Day, a Federal holiday.
The commodities markets were also open and futures on Treasury securities were traded.


Bally's Grand Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Berg Electronics Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Virulent Potato Fungus Is Killing the Northeast Crop
Nearly 150 years after the Irish famine of the 1840's, new virulent strains of the fungus that devastated the potato crop in Ireland are spreading across New York and many other states, plant pathologists say.
The fungus does not pose a threat to the nation's potato crop.
In fact, this year the national crop was up 7 percent over last year's, with a record 46 billion pounds.


Suicide Bomber on a Bicycle Kills 3 in the Gaza Strip


Religious-Right Candidates Gain as G.O.P. Turnout Rises
Candidates aligned with conservative religious groups scored major gains on Tuesday in an election in which turnout increased among Republicans in every region of the country, two surveys showed today.
A study by People for the American Way, a group that calls itself "a voice against intolerance," found that 60 percent of the 600 candidates for national, state and local offices who were supported by religious conservatives won their elections.


No Headline
"I want to draw a distinction between two words. I am very prepared to cooperate with the Clinton Administration. I am not prepared to compromise. On everything on which we can find agreement, I will cooperate. On those things that are at the core of our contract, on those things which are at the core of our philosophy and on those things where we believe we represent the vast majority of Americans, there will be no compromise." -- NEWT GINGRICH.  [ 11:1. ]


Dr. Robert Henry Strotz, 72, Chief of Northwestern University
Dr.
Robert Henry Strotz, an expert in economic theory and econometrics who served as president of Northwestern University from 1970 to 1985, died on Wednesday in a nursing home in Deerfield, Ill.
A resident of Wilmette, Ill., he was 72.
He had suffered a long illness, the university reported.


Health Care Plan Out; Health Care Stocks In
HEALTH care stocks enjoyed an election bounce this week as the Republican victory dashed any hopes of reviving President Clinton's ambitious health care plan.
But the stocks have been gaining momentum for months.
In fact, some of the mutual funds that invest in them are having outstanding years, in large part because of a sparkling third quarter.
The leaders, both from Fidelity, are its Medical Delivery fund, up 20.9 percent, and its Health Care fund, up 17.5 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  U.S. BOSNIA STANCE CAUSES ALARM
European allies expressed alarm over the Clinton Administration's decision to stop enforcing the Bosnia arms embargo, warning that it could undermine NATO and United Nations peacekeepers.  1


Suicide Bomber Kills 3 and Wounds 12 at Israeli Post in Gaza
A Palestinian suicide bomber on a bicycle blew himself up today at an Israeli Army checkpoint in the Gaza Strip, killing 3 soldiers and wounding at least 12 other people, including both Israelis and Palestinians.
It was the deadliest attack on soldiers in Gaza since Israel evacuated towns and refugee camps in May and turned over control to a new police force loyal to Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Students Protest Clinton in Manila


Poet's Accountant Scans Bottom Line
To the Editor:
Apropos of Michael Blumenthal's "Allen Ginsberg, Millionaire?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 29) and "Should Allen Ginsburg Want to Starve" (letters, Nov. 5): Who am I to be outraged by Mr.
Blumenthal's article?
A humorless bean counter.
An accountant.
Not just any accountant.
Allen Ginsberg's accountant, counting his millions for 30 years or so.


Sacrifice Forms Part of Doctor's Training
To the Editor:
"Medical Fellowships Didn't Benefit in Zion Case" (letter, Nov. 8) by Sima Bernstein, wife of a physician in training to become a pediatric cardiologist, expressed concern that his work schedule was playing havoc with his health and attributed physical symptoms to his intense responsibility to care for patients.
The young doctor in question serves in a fellowship program that dictates that a trainee will spend two months a year for two years with night-call responsibilities, as well as occasional weekends.
When the physician is on call (which does not include arbitrary in-hospital time at night, as resident physicians have), a back-up system is available for unusually long periods.


Grits and Glitter Campaign Helps Actor Who Played a Senator Become One
In an election year when voters all but screamed their displeasure with Democratic incumbents and Big Government, here came Fred Thompson in his canvas work shirt and a rented Chevrolet pickup truck, looking more like a man who would stuff and mount a largemouth bass than like the lawyer, lobbyist and big-time Hollywood character actor that he is.
His political opponents say it was just one more role for the man who has acted in 18 feature films in 10 years.
Mr.
Thompson, a huge 6-foot-6 Republican with a drawl that rumbles like an approaching storm, swears he is playing only himself.


After a Hole-in-One, 79-Year-Old Man Dies
Moments after shooting his first hole-in-one, Emil Kijek collapsed and died on the golf course Thursday.
Emergency medical workers tried unsuccessfully to revive Kijek, 79, of North Attleboro, Mass., but he was pronounced dead at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
The hospital declined to release the cause of death yesterday.
A funeral home said Kijek, who played golf as many as four times a week, suffered from hypertension.


A Singer Who Doesn't Play That Nice Girl Next Door
Diamanda Galas never does anything nice and easy.
She pushes her voice to its limits, shrieking and cackling, rasping and swooping, howling and ululating.
John Paul Jones helped make rock history with his walloping bass lines in Led Zeppelin.
Together, the two connoisseurs of excess have made an album, "The Sporting Life" (Mute), and on Thursday night at Irving Plaza, they performed their new songs.
The program was a set of homicidal love songs, with Ms.
Galas casting herself as rapacious, vengeful, wild-eyed and distraught, channeling pain and fury into tortuous vocal acrobatics.
She was a woman about to murder her husband in "Do You Take This Man?," a lusty predator in "You're Mine." Wearing a black vinyl brassiere and tight pants, she stared into the audience, dropped to her knees or waved her arms in preacherly gestures, an indefatigable banshee.


In Venezuelan Dancers, Shades of Soviet Style
The Ballet Metropolitano de Caracas, which performs again tonight with its engaging and sleekly schooled junior ballerinas, is the equivalent of an American regional ballet troupe.
Visibly the outgrowth of the school in which most of its young dancers have been trained, it aspires just as obviously to the top ranks it has yet to reach.
Keyla Ermecheo studied in New York at the School of American Ballet and the American Ballet Theater school, returned to Venezuela in 1968 and established her own school.
In 1980, she founded Ballet Metropolitano, which has an impressively strong stylistic imprint.


A Wealth Of Facts On Shuttles
There's almost too much information packed into "Space Shuttle" to absorb in two hours.
It comes in fancily photographed bits and pieces, from scientists, engineers, administrators, astronauts and others of the 30,000 people involved in the care and launching of space shuttles and their passengers.
None of it is uninteresting (I learned that astronauts wear diapers), but the documentary, powered by a persistent musical beat, moves along so fast that a serious issue mentioned along the way is nearly lost in the quick cuts and odd angles.
The question raised by scientists like Carl Sagan is whether manned space flight is worth the cost in money and lives.
Critics say the sort of information gathered by the shuttles could be obtained more cheaply and efficiently by instruments on disposable craft.
One scientist points out that since there is no space station out there, the shuttles really have no place to go.


The New York Stock Exchange reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Slater Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Outlook For Tax Cuts, G.O.P. Style
The Republican action plan, known as the Contract With America, calls for tax relief for millions.
Although it might be tempting to disregard the proposal as just another Washington wish list, the contract is far more substantive than campaign rhetoric.
In fact, it is 41 pages of black-and-white details.


Frederick Kappel, 92, Ex-Chief Of AT&amp;T and Former U.S. Aide
Frederick R. Kappel, a former chairman of the AT&amp;T Corporation who later held posts in the Johnson and Nixon Administrations, died on Thursday in Sarasota, Fla., at 92.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Alice.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.25
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.22
5.22
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.64
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.98
7.98
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.14
8.14
6.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.96
8.96
7.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.19
5.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Graf a Question Mark
STEFFI GRAF said she was unsure whether her recurring back problems will allow her to play in next week's Virginia Slims Championships.
Graf, seeded No. 1 in the $3.5 million event at Madison Square Garden, practiced yesterday with MARTINA NAVRATILOVA at the Pennsylvania Convention Center in Philadelphia. (Reuters)


Issues of Race and Pollution Trouble L.I. Town
For years, residents of this predominantly black and Hispanic working-class community have held their noses, shut their windows and tried hard not to dwell on the smells and the unsightliness of the 170-acre industrial site just across the railroad tracks.
The putrid odors from the chemical plants and garbage-transfer stations and fish processing factories make some people sick.
But they are so taken for granted in New Cassel, directly downwind of the plants, that few residents lodge complaints.
In fact, Nassau County health officials say, a vast majority of complaints have come from wealthier, primarily white communities upwind of the plants like Salisbury and South Westbury, where the smells are not nearly so intense.


Whitney Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks Fall as Traders Await Rate Move by Fed
In light trading, the stock market declined for the second straight day as anxious traders awaited Tuesday's policy-making meeting of the Federal Reserve.
Traders expect a rise in short-term interest rates of at least half a percentage point that is sure to raise corporate borrowing costs and perhaps hurt stock prices.


Tredegar Industries(TG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carmen McRae Is Dead at 74; Jazz Career Spanned 5 Decades
Carmen McRae, the jazz singer known for her probing interpretations of lyrics and her bruised but unbowed point of view, died on Thursday evening at her home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She was 74.
She had fallen into a semi-coma four days earlier, a month after being hospitalized for a stroke, said her secretary, Jan March.
She withdrew from public performance in May 1991 after an episode of respiratory failure only hours after she completed an engagement at the Blue Note jazz club in New York.


Getting Back on Track After Investments Go Sour
Julia and Richard Jordan, residents of the San Francisco bay area, sold a second home for a net profit of $224, 000 in 1987, about the time that Mr.
Jordan took early retirement, "It wass scary, "Mrs Jordan said.
"We didn't hav a clue about what to do with it."
They attended a financial planning seminar, contacted the speaker and utimately put most of their moeny in his hands.
A year later, they regretted the decision.
Unhappy with their investment performance, they sought recommendations from friends and switched financial planners.


What Splits Up Groups? (It's Not Performance)
INVESTMENT clubs are forming at a rate of just under a hundred a week despite a troubled investment climate.
But not all will survive, much less prosper.
The National Association of Investment Investors Corporation, which tracks and represents the clubs, said one in four will disintegrate during their first 18 months.
Surprisingly, poor investment performance is rarely the reason for failure.


Leonardo Notebook Sells for $30.8 Million
A rare Leonardo da Vinci notebook containing more than 300 illustrations and scientific writings by the artist was sold for $30.8 million at Christie's yesterday.
The price set a record for a manuscript sold at auction.
Christie's would not identify the buyer, who bid by telephone, but a spokeswoman for William H. Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, confirmed that he was the buyer.


Kuwait Journal; To the Disasters of War Add Defiled Desert
In the desert south of here are two glistening ponds about the size of football fields.
But there is nothing inviting about them.
Instead of fresh water, they brim with tons of crude oil and sludge.
Foul odors rise from their surfaces, and for birds and small animals they are gooey deathtraps.
A rusting Iraqi tank sits on the edge of one of the ponds, sunk up to its axles.


Gingrich Claims A Victor's Spoils
Having traded his dusty Honda for a shiny new Cadillac, Newt Gingrich, the Speaker-apparent, made a triumphal entrance into Washington, inveighing against the "counterculture" and warning that "the question is whether or not our civilization will survive." Eschewing compromise with the White House, he asserted a mandate to reclaim old-fashioned values of hard work and swift justice.
Article, page 11.


Looming Budget Gap Was No Surprise, Cuomo Tells Pataki
Responding to criticism from Governor-elect George E. Pataki about a projected $4 billion budget gap, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told Mr.
Pataki on the phone this morning that the shortfall should have come as no surprise.
Cuomo administration officials, meanwhile, went a step further, issuing a statement to outline the shortfall and suggesting that if Mr.
Pataki had done his homework before promising a 25 percent cut in personal income taxes over four years, he would have realized that there was a problem.


Chaus (Bernard) Inc.(CHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Village to Vote on Whether to Keep a Notorious Police Force
Now that the elections are over, people in this square-mile village near the end of Long Island's North Fork are gearing up for the real contest.
On Tuesday, they will vote on whether to abolish their nine-member police force.
No polls have been taken, but many in this tradition-bound place perched on Peconic Bay are betting on a heavy turnout and a close vote.


So Friendly: Chinese and Christopher
What a difference eight months make.
On his last trip to Asia, in March, Secretary of State Warren Christopher verbally battled the Chinese over their human rights record every day of his visit.


Jeanne Newman, 65, Public Health Expert
Jeanne Sumner Newman, a public health specialist who worked to improve medical services in developing countries, died on Oct. 24 at West Virginia University Hospitals in Morgantown, W.Va.
She was 65 and lived in Baltimore.
She died from injuries suffered in a car accident on Oct. 7, said her daughter Katharine Newman Zohir.
Dr.
Newman had been traveling to an American Friends Service Committee Retreat in Charleston, W.Va., with her husband, John Brown Newman, who was also injured.


Selling Homes: Is the Agent Getting Too Big a Cut?
People are paying real estate agents too much for selling their homes, the Consumer Federation of America says.
In a recent study of 27 urban areas, the nonprofit group found that the typical commission was 6 to 7 percent of the sale price.
By comparison, commissions are 3 to 4 percent in Australia, Britain, Canada and New Zealand, it said.


Atkinson (Guy F.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.Y.R.A. Cuts Week to Five Days
The streamlining of New York racing took a step forward yesterday when the five-day week was approved, starting in December.
Kenneth Noe, the new chief executive officer, pledged, "We may carry it further, too, including Sundays in the pro football season."
When Noe took office as president and general manager of the New York Racing Association two weeks ago, he said: "We've got too much racing. I intend to do something real quick. The five-day week? Absolutely."


Shock Treatment for the Budget
Governor-elect George Pataki finds it "shocking" that New York State faces a huge budget gap next year.
But people who keep an eye on the state's finances have known for months that the situation was bad and getting worse.
The gap will make it that much harder for Mr.
Pataki to deliver his promised tax cuts.
According to sources in the Cuomo administration, as well as outside budget-watchers, revenues in the fiscal year beginning next April 1 are likely to fall short of projected spending by about $4 billion.
Mr.
Pataki must find ways to close that gap before he presents his first budget.
Having promised lower taxes, he will presumably try to balance the books with spending cuts and restraints, and by revenue growth from a healthier economy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a new test for Alzheimer's disease misidentified the journal in which scientists reported their findings.
It was Science, not The Journal of Science.


Green Power
Ever since Popeye hoisted his first can of spinach, children have squirmed under the threat that "You're not going to leave this table until you eat those vegetables." O.K., so maybe there was virtue in kale and broccoli.
But wasn't it possible that telling their progeny to swallow that stuff was just another way for parents to show who was boss?
Maybe it was, but no matter.
The order was worth obeying.
According to two studies in The Journal of the American Medical Association, chemicals in green and yellow vegetables may protect against macular degeneration, the most common cause of blindness in the elderly, and against heart disease as well.


Gingrich Queried By Ethics Panel
The House ethics committee has notified Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia that a number of questions have been raised about his use of a Republican fund-raising organization to develop and finance a college course he taught last year.
The action by the panel, the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, which has seven Democratic and seven Republican members, was first reported in Saturday's issue of The Washington Post and was confirmed by a Gingrich aide.
Mr.
Gingrich was told of the committee's concerns in a letter sent to him a week before Tuesday's elections, in which the Republicans won control of the House and he became Speaker-apparent.


Gingrich, Now a Giant, Claims Victor's Spoils
Once, Newt Gingrich was the man with the big agenda, small press entourage and slightly banged-up Honda Accord.
Today, victorious and shining in the camera lights, he unfurled from the glinting black Cadillac Fleetwood Brougham that matches his new status as the big man in town, strode to a lectern, grinned and spurned any sort of compromise with the White House.
Condemning the "counterculture" and warning that "the question is whether or not our civilization will survive," the likely Speaker of the House called the election on Tuesday a mandate to reclaim old-fashioned values of hard work and swift justice.


JAZZ
Jubilant Music to Dance By, Produced by Actual Humans  S.O.B.'s


Esco Electronics Corp.(ESE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Considering Cuomo, Upstate Voters Saw Revenge
The human toll of upstate New York's lingering recession, and the motives for the revenge visited upon Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo by its voters this week, can be sensed most mornings in the sun-washed dining room of Buckman's Bakery.
Here in Monroe County, middle-aged men, lured into early retirement as companies like Kodak cut back, while away their mornings over endless cups of coffee, rehashing their theories about life, taxes, politicians and the cure for New York's ills.


Europe's Insulation Market Is Target of Owens-Corning
The Pink Panther is coming.
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, the largest manufacturer of insulation in the world, is using its cartoon mascot to spearhead an assault on Europe's $75 billion home improvement market.


INSIDE
Asia Trade Differences
Pacific nations are meeting to talk about lowering trade barriers, but the United States opposes proposals to require industrialized nations to end their restrictions first.
Page 6.
Tough Contract for Legal Aid
After steam-rolling over a strike by Legal Aid lawyers, Mayor Giuliani has offered the organization a new contract with a tight budget and a no-strike clause.
Page 23.
Death in 'Real World' Cast
Pedro Zamora, who tested positive for H.I.V. at 17, spent his last years forcing youths, from church groups to MTV audiences, to confront their own vulnerability to AIDS.
Page 8.





Bridge
One of America's wealthiest and most generous citizens died in Manhattan on Sunday at 92.
He was Milton Petrie, the founder and chairman of Petrie Stores, who gave substantial sums to many victims of fate.
He was less generous to the expert bridge players with whom he crossed swords each afternoon at the Regency Whist Club.
On the diagramed deal, played there in 1987, he outwitted his opponents with a brilliant stroke.


Amerco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


C-TEC Corp.(CTEX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Latin America's Privatization Path
Arching over oceangoing freighters and stretching for 10 miles, the bridge across Rio de Janeiro's bay symbolized Latin America's state-led economic development when it was inaugurated here 20 years ago.
Early next year, the operation of the deteriorating steel-and-concrete bridge is to pass into private hands, once a construction consortium starts renovating it and collecting tolls under a 20-year concession.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in some editions on Wednesday about a woman waiting to vote in Harlem misstated the location of the polling place.
It was at Public School 28, on 155th Street at St.
Nicholas Avenue, not at the Riverton Houses.


The Jets' Creativity Extends to Healing, Too
Mo Lewis's mother sent it to him in a brown bottle, from Peachtree City in Georgia.
Who knows whether the pure turpentine in that little bottle helped Lewis's remarkable recovery from a sprained knee last week?
He thinks it did.
His dominating performance against Buffalo earned him the American Conference award as defensive player of the week.
And he remains healthy enough to practice all week for Sunday's game against the Packers at Green Bay.


METRO DIGEST
A LAST RESORT IS NOW PART OF THE SYSTEM On many nights hundreds of people continue to take refuge in the city's after-hours homeless office in the Bronx, where straight-back plastic chairs or a plot of dirty floor are luxuries for the weary.
The spectacle has become such a fixture that the city has budgeted $5 million to cover fines it owes to families dating back to 1991 and penalties it expects to pay through the end of year.
And beginning next week, families left overnight in the office will be eligible for a $50 penalty payment the first night and $100 payment for each successive night.
Page 1.
CONSIDERING CUOMO, VOTERS SAW REVENGE Interviews with voters in five of the counties that turned against Mr.
Cuomo with especial ferocity this week suggested that the main reason for their defection was their feeling that Mr.
Cuomo had failed to fix their broken economy.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI FIRES BACK AT REPUBLICAN CRITICS Mayor Giuliani called his fellow Republicans petty, ungracious and dangerously overconfident for the retaliation they are inflicting on him for supporting Governor Cuomo, and he warned them that if in trying to punish him, they hurt New York City, they would hurt themselves, too.
Page 24.
When the Mayor gave his endorsement, he knew that Cuomo campaign polls had begun to show the Governor moving ahead.
Page 24.
BUDGET GAP WAS NO SURPRISE, CUOMO SAYS Responding to criticism from Governor-elect Pataki about a projected $4 billion budget gap, Cuomo administration officials issued a statement suggesting that if Mr.
Pataki had done his homework before promising a 25 percent cut in personal income taxes, he would have realized that there was a problem.
Page 24.
THE ADORNED BODY CONSIDERED Once again the Old Guy didn't get it.
Hipper people than himself told him that many women were having their belly buttons perforated so that they could attach rings.
He went to see for himself.
About New York, Page 25.
OFFICIAL ACCUSED OF LYING TO GET A DEAL After an official of the Department of Finance applied for a $1 million city contract without mentioning that he was employed by the city, he perhaps should have reconsidered announcing his job title on television.
Page 25.
REGION  POTATO FUNGUS IS KILLING CROP Nearly 150 years after the Irish famine of the 1840's, new virulent strains of the fungus that devastated the potato crop in Ireland are spreading across New York and many other states, plant pathologists say.
Page 26.
YOUTH FIGHTS REQUIREMENT TO VOLUNTEER Daniel Immediato is an unlikely litigant in a battle over the Constitution.
Just 17, Mr.
Immediato went to Federal District Court to fight his high school's requirement that students perform 40 hours of community service, on their own time, before they graduate.
Page 26.
VILLAGE TO VOTE ON OUSTER OF POLICE People in Greenport, a square-mile village near the end of Long Island's North Fork, are gearing up for a vote on whether to abolish their nine-member police force, which a grand jury report described as ill-trained, inactive and inept.
Page 26.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut is running for Senate minority leader.
Page 11.
Religion Journal.....27


Impersonators Bearing Badges of Dishonor; Police Begin a Crackdown on a Rising Tide of Impostors
It was literally a rude awakening for Steven Greenberg early one fall morning when he stumbled out of bed to loud banging at the door of his Park Avenue penthouse.
The two men on the other side told him they were the police with search warrants and ordered him to open up.
He did.
But they weren't the police.
Putting a gun to his head, the men announced, "This is a robbery," before taking Art Deco antiques valued at $250,000.
They left the confused and angry man clad only in a white cotton robe lying face down on his living room floor with his hands tied behind his back.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Pairing Modern Works With Early Antecedents Alice Tully Hall


Topics of The Times; With Friends Like This . . .
Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, who served as chairman of George Pataki's gubernatorial campaign in New York City, soared high on the insensitivity scale when he told a Columbus Day meeting of policemen that Karen Burstein, the Democratic candidate for attorney general, was unfit for the job because she is a lesbian.
Mr.
Pataki rightly criticized this transparent bigotry and called on Mr.
Molinari to "say it was a mistake for him to inject this into the campaign." But Mr.
Molinari paid no mind.
Instead he now proudly brags that his comments about Ms.
Burstein's homosexuality "probably made the difference" in the victory of her Republican opponent, Dennis Vacco.
By the end of the campaign, Mr.
Vacco was himself making reference to Ms.
Burstein's sexual orientation.


POP
A Pop Landmark Closes On a Mildly Nostalgic Note  The Knitting Factory


John Volpe Is Dead at 85; A Nixon Ally
John Anthony Volpe, a former Governor of Massachusetts, Ambassador to Italy and United States Secretary of Transportation, died last night of natural causes in Nahunt, Mass., the police said.
He was 85.
Mr.
Volpe, who was born in a Boston suburb the son of Italian immigrants, began his long political career as a Republican organizer while operating a successful construction business during the 1930's.
His business was built from the earnings he eked out from the construction jobs he had had since he was 9 years old, with a small loan and with a $300 insurance policy he cashed at the height of the Depression.


What Do I.Q. Tests Measure? Not Intelligence; Recenter Grades
To the Editor:
Donald M. Stewart, in his Nov. 5 letter about the College Board's "recentering" of Scholastic Assessment Test scores next spring, fails to define that term adequately.
It will mean that the board will assign a 500 score to the top of the bell curve no matter where that falls on the scoring spectrum of 200 to 800.


World News Briefs; All That's Wrong: A Russian's Catalogue
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the ultranationalist Russian politician, met with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali here tonight and told him the United Nations should be broken up.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky said at a news conference after his 20-minute meeting that the United Nations should be divided into North-South regional blocs.
When asked about Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's reaction, Mr.
Zhirinovsky said he had been told the United Nations was divided into enough blocs already.


Owners' New Voice Is Peddling Same Line
Maybe if it were Willy Loman selling his wares or Professor Harold Hill selling trombones, replacing him with a better salesman could produce a greater volume of sales.
But John Harrington doesn't figure to have any better fortune than Richard Ravitch selling striking baseball players a salary cap.
It's not the salesman but the product he is trying to sell that stands in the way of peace with the players.


Business Digest
Companies  Chiron said it was in talks on a strategic alliance with another company.
The disclosure came after takeover speculation had sent its stock soaring.  [ Page 39. ] In a shift, Santa Fe Pacific said it would consider a hostile takeover offer from Union Pacific.
Santa Fe, which has agreed to a friendly takeover from Burlington Northern, rejected Union Pacific's first offer barely 24 hours after it was made.  [ 39. ] Owens-Corning Fiberglas is trying to make inroads in Europe's $75 billion home improvement market.
The American company is using the Pink Panther cartoon character in its marketing to help make it a worldwide brand.
But many a brand introduction has turned on the unpredictability of foreign markets.  [ 39. ]
The privatization of bridges, airports, power plants and ports means ample investment opportunities for companies from the United States.  [ 39. ] Questions on the timing of free-trade proposals arose at the opening of the annual meeting of the 18 member nations of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.  [ 6. ] The Economy  The Patent Office is trying to move into the digital age.
The push comes after its reversal in the case of Compton's New Media, which had sought -- and initially won -- a patent on technology that is common to nearly every CD-ROM company.  [ 39. ] Markets  Stocks declined as traders awaited the next move by the Federal Reserve.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 2 points, and the Nasdaq composite index dropped 2.26 points.  [ 40. ]
Sugar prices surged after the Agriculture Department lowered its forecast for world production.
Orange juice prices rose.  [ 48. ] The dollar ended little changed in quiet trading.
The Swedish krona rose against the mark and the dollar ahead of a referendum on whether Sweden should join the European Union.  [ 48. ] The Treasury cash market was closed in observance of Veterans Day.
Futures trading was limited.  [ 49. ] Your Money  What does the Republicans' election sweep mean for taxpayers?
The proposals in the Contract With America, the Republican action plan, provide some clues, tax and investment professionals say.
The proposals include cutting the capital gains tax in half, phasing out the 1993 tax increase on Social Security benefits and creating a new type of individual retirement account.  [ 35. ] Health care stocks have surged since the end of a drive to overhaul the nation's health care system, to the benefit of mutual funds that invest in such stocks.  [ 35. ] Americans are paying real estate agents too much, the Consumer Federation of America argues.
Home sellers should negotiate with agents over commissions, the federation says.  [ 35. ] Many investment clubs collapse in the early going.
Some of the hallmarks of surviving clubs, surveys show, are close links among members and an egalitarian approach.  [ 36. ]


Public &amp; Private; Two Class Acts
The talking heads can argue about whether it was a vote against the President, against the party, against liberalism, about whether it was the revenge of the white male voter or the reaction of the middle class.
And the Republican pols can spout pieties about working together for the American people while Newt Gingrich goes straight for the neck flesh, calling names, talking trash, practicing his patented brand of "I'm-O.K.-You're-Scum" attack politics.
But one thing I know for sure, looking back on this election.
And that is that this country lost its two most compelling and charismatic political figures when Mario Cuomo was rejected by the voters of New York and Ann Richards by those in Texas.


Giuliani Tries to End Feud, But His Phone Isn't Ringing
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called his fellow Republicans petty, ungracious and dangerously overconfident yesterday for the retaliation they are inflicting on him for supporting Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and he warned them that if in trying to punish him, they hurt New York City, they would only hurt themselves, too.
Still feeling the stings of retribution for his stunning -- and, in hindsight, inopportune -- decision to endorse the Democratic Governor, Mr.
Giuliani appeared to be shoring up his weakened political position and trying to send a message that the city's interests could not be ignored.


'Lady Macbeth,' Hated by Stalin, Finally Has Its Debut at the Met
Stalin was right.
Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk," which received its long-overdue Metropolitan Opera premiere on Thursday night, is indeed "crude, primitive, vulgar." That was what Pravda proclaimed in 1936 after the Soviet tyrant walked out on a performance of the work, inspiring the most famous and most devastating music review ever published.
As Pravda noted, a bed is at the center of the action, and there is nothing subtle about the music that accompanies the squeaking of its springs; Shostakovich nearly lost his life over his sound effects.
But this opera is also one of the great masterworks of the century, written by a young composer who had already developed his trademark combination of sarcasm, pathos, farce and fierceness.
Shostakovich created a Soviet version of "Madame Bovary" in which Katerina, a bored, bourgeois housewife, faced with an almost criminally banal society, discovers the pleasures and dangers of love and murder (both of which sound astonishingly similar in the score).


Sports of The Times; A Beacon Of Light In Charlotte
WHEN Bill Simms talks about life, he often talks about "steps." Probably because he was a hurdler, well-versed in the importance of measuring each stride: too many or too few can be the difference between barely winning, narrowly losing.
Even as he looks at the flow of his life -- growing up poor in Indianapolis to running track at the University of Southern California to now serving as a top executive in a major corporation -- Simms thinks steps: "I could have stepped left, instead of stepping right, and walked right into a wasted life."


Taubman Centers Inc.(TCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Preparing for Battle


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL  SuperSonics Topple Suns  Shawn Kemp scored 26 points and Detlef Schrempf got 12 of his 22 points in the fourth quarter to help the Seattle Supersonics defeat the Phoenix Suns by 129-123 at Tacoma, Wash., last night.
The Sonics led 118-109 with 5 minutes 57 seconds left, but the Suns came back with three consecutive 3-pointers, two by Elliot Perry, to tie the score.
Danny Manning scored 27 points and Dan Majerle 23 for Phoenix, which played without Charles Barkley and Kevin Johnson and Danny Ainge.
Rockets 102, Celtics 82: Houston, which began last season with 15 victories, ran its record to a National Basketball Association-best 5-0 as Hakeem Olajuwon scored 26 points at Boston.
The defending champions led by at least 11 points all the way after Kenny Smith's jumper from the top of the key with 5:29 left in the first quarter made the score 17-6. (AP) Mavericks 107, 76ers 100: Jamal Mashburn and Jim Jackson scored 22 points apiece as visiting Dallas held off a late Philadelphia rally.
The rookie point guard Jason Kidd added 19 points and 9 rebounds for the Mavericks.
Clarence Weatherspoon had a game-high 29 points for Philadelphia.
Shawn Bradley had 17 points, 12 rebounds and 8 blocks for the 76ers. (AP) Warriors 112, Jazz 104: Tim Hardaway hit six 3-pointers and scored 30 points as visiting Golden State stayed undefeated by handing Utah its first home loss of the season.
Hardaway connected on 10 of 15 shots from the field, including 6 of 10 from 3-point range. (AP) Hornets 123, Bucks 115: Dell Curry had 28 points as visiting Charlotte won for the first time this season.
Marty Conlon hit the first basket of the final period to give Milwaukee a 95-94 lead, but the Hornets ran off 9 straight points, going ahead by 103-95 on a basket by Larry Johnson with 8:47 left.
Alonzo Mourning had 24 points and 13 rebounds for the Hornets.
The Bucks rookie Glenn Robinson scored 12 points in 21 minutes.
Coach Mike Dunleavy said Robinson, who missed all of training camp, isn't ready to play a whole game.
"He's played pretty good," Dunleavy said, "but the conditioning hurts." (AP) Bulls 112, Timberwolves 100: Scottie Pippen scored 22 points and visiting Chicago used a smothering defense in the third quarter to beat Minnesota, keeping the Timberwolves without a victory.
Despite its best effort of the season, Minnesota has lost 15 straight. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Gains Semifinals  Pete Sampras outplayed Byron Black of Zimbabwe, 6-1, 6-3, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the $1.1 million European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
Seventh-seeded Magnus Larsson survived his second deciding tie breaker in two days to set up a surprise semifinal against Olivier Delaitre of France.
Larsson struggled through three tie breakers to end the challenge of the Canadian qualifier Sebastien Lareau, 7-6 (7-3), 6-7 (5-7), 7-6 (7-5).
Delaitre defeated Jonas Bjorkman of Sweden, 6-3, 6-3. (AP) Pierce, Zvereva, Sabatini Advance: Second-seeded Mary Pierce jumped to big leads in the each set and beat the newcomer Meilen Tu, 6-2, 6-4, to reach the semifinals of the $750,000 Virginia Slims of Philadelphia.
Also advancing to the semifinals were No. 5 Natalia Zvereva, who beat Brenda Schultz, 6-1, 7-6, Anke Huber, a 6-3, 6-2 winner over Kimberly Po, and Gabriela Sabatini, who defeated Chanda Rubin, 6-3, 6-0. (AP) MARATHON  Marklein Sets Race Record  It took a while to double-check the results, but the winner of the handicapped division of the 25th New York City Marathon on Sunday was made official yesterday.
Errol Marklein, a 35-year-old elite wheelchair competitor from Germany, completed the 26.2-mile course in 2 hours 8 minutes 36 seconds.
Marklein's time was more than three quarters of an hour faster than the previous New York record, 2:55, set last year by Bob Neumayer, a perennial New York winner.
Neumayer cut 23 minutes off his previous best by finishing third in 2:37, 5 minutes behind David Maccaccman of New Zealand.
Dick Traum, president of the Achilles Track Club, said yesterday that this was the first time wheelchair competitors had been encouraged, not just tolerated.
The women's wheelchair winner was Tatyawa Tarasova, 35, of Moscow, who finished fifth over all.
S.
N.
Seleznez of Russia, a 35-year-old blind runner, was the first finisher without a wheelchair.
BOXING  Vasquez Retains Title  Julio Cesar Vasquez of Argentina outpointed Tony Marshall of Albany last night to retain his World Boxing Association junior middleweight title.
In a unanimous decision, the judges scored the 12-round bout 117-111, 119-112 and 118-110 for Vasquez, who made the 10th defense of the title he won in 1992. (AP)


Inter-City Products (IPR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Beautiful Reservoir Needs an Elegant Fence
To the Editor:
As I walked around the Central Park Reservoir one sparkling autumn day recently, I was struck by how beautiful and peaceful this part of the park is -- especially on a quiet afternoon when a stroller is not likely to be trampled by thundering herds of joggers.


Homeless Sleeping in City Office: Last Resort Is Now Part of System
Despite a decade of rulings barring the city from keeping the homeless overnight in offices and millions in fines levied for violating those orders, there was 1-month-old Nicholas Brian Gonzalez asleep in his stroller, packed in among the human steerage of New York City's overloaded homeless system.
Sick with fever and diarrhea, Nicholas spent his fourth straight night earlier this week at the city's after-hours homeless office in the Bronx.
On many nights, hundreds of people continue to take refuge in the office, where straight-back plastic chairs or a plot of dirty floor are luxuries for the weary.


Universal Foods Corp.(UFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Beautiful Reservoir Needs an Elegant Fence
To the Editor:
As I walked around the Central Park Reservoir one sparkling autumn day recently, I was struck by how beautiful and peaceful this part of the park is -- especially on a quiet afternoon when a stroller is not likely to be trampled by thundering herds of joggers.


Today's Man reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


From MSG to Sabres
DOUG MOSS, president of the MSG Network since 1992, was named president of the Buffalo Sabres yesterday.
Moss's departure is the first among top MSG executives since Cablevision and ITT agreed to buy Madison Square Garden.
Moss takes over the Sabres' management two years before the opening of Crossroads Arena.
"They want to sell and market the team very aggressively," Moss said.


At the Patent Office, a Digital Dawn
Gerald Goldberg has a dream: to plow through the Patent Office's backlog of 17,000 software patent applications.
But he may also have a nightmare: somewhere in the heap lies another Compton's New Media case, ticking like an unexploded bomb.
A 30-year veteran of patent examination, Mr.
Goldberg directs the Patent and Trademark Office's computer inventions section.
In a warren of tiny offices, he oversees 185 engineers and scientists, who scrutinize tattered, color-coded application files.
But now, largely in response to the recent Compton's case, a 14-month ordeal in which the Patent Office was reviled by most of the software industry, Mr.
Goldberg is trying to drag his operation into the digital age.


Wesco Financial Corp.(WSC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Rollins Redux in New Jersey
Ed Rollins, manager of Christine Todd Whitman's successful campaign to be governor of New Jersey, stunned the political world last year by boasting that his staff had paid opposition Democratic workers not to work on Election Day.
It turned out to be a lie -- according to Mr.
Rollins himself -- but for weeks political conversation buzzed with talk of "street money."
Street money is a perfectly legitimate payment by a political party to workers who go from house to house and into malls and commuter terminals to get out the vote.
Payments were in cash until Mr.
Rollins suggested he had used such money for dirty purposes.
Whereupon the embarrassed Republicans who control the State Legislature required that future payments be made by check, so everyone could know who paid what to whom.


World News Briefs; American in Guatemala Ends Her Hunger Strike
A month after an American lawyer began a hunger strike to force the Guatemalan Government to tell her what happened to her husband, a guerrilla leader, she sipped some diluted papaya juice this morning and called off her strike but vowed to continue to search.
The protest by the lawyer, Jennifer Harbury, 43, on the central plaza in Guatemala City focused attention on rights abuses in Guatemala.


U.S. Supports Asia-Pacific Free Trade, but Questions Timing
A meeting of representatives from 18 countries on both sides of the Pacific Ocean opened on Friday with signs that the United States had reservations about how rapidly different countries should move toward achieving free trade across the region.
The central question at the annual meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, which continued through this morning, was whether the 18 member countries would agree to lower trade barriers by the proposed date of 2020.
The United States is a big backer of the free trade proposals and of the 2020 deadline.


Girl Flees After Clash Of Cultures On Illness
Officials in this Central Valley town are not sure whether to look for Lee Lor, a 15-year-old Hmong girl with cancer who ran away from home two weeks ago with a backpack full of herbal medicines but no money.
The authorities here are uncertain because the girl's parents -- and the entire community of Hmong, transplants from the mountains of Southeast Asia -- say they do not believe Lee has cancer and do not want her to have chemotherapy.


Topics of The Times; Parents Get Their Say
Parents, who could make a positive difference in New York City's neglected schools, are themselves a neglected resource.
That can be corrected during Open School Week, which runs from next Monday through Thursday.
It is important for the schools and for employers to make it as easy as possible for parents to participate.
This is the time of year when parents are formally invited to discuss their children's progress with teachers and to become more familiar with school programs.
The United Federation of Teachers has issued more than a million booklets with suggested questions parents might want to ask.
The booklet also contains a questionnaire on conditions in schools.
Parents are asked to report on a range of subjects: whether classrooms and bathrooms are dirty or clean, for example, and whether their children receive instruction in music and art.


Flower Glower: Paterno Isn't Ready to Stop and Smell the Roses
Joe Paterno was making a point.
From the time his Penn State Nittany Lions defeated Michigan nearly a month ago, expectations focused on the imposing defensive unit of Illinois.
But as the matchup with the Illini came closer, attention shifted to the loss of a share of the No. 1 ranking last weekend and a trip to Pasadena, Calif., that may be secured Saturday afternoon.
In the Happy Valley, everything is coming up. . . .


Benzonia Journal; Deer Season Is Back, But It Isn't What It Was
This time of year in northwestern Michigan, it seems as if there are two kinds of people: those who hunt, and those who don't.
And because the number of those who don't is increasing in this fast-growing rural area, the deer hunting season, once a time of elaborate preparation and restless expectation, is becoming something else entirely.
For many people -- hunters and nonhunters alike -- the 16-day deer season, which begins on Tuesday, is bringing unresolved conflicts and a sense of menace.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Saturday about suicides at Cornell University misstated the number of people who have jumped to their deaths in gorges on the Cornell campus in the last four years.
It is four, not five.


Discovery Zone Inc.(ZONE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beatrice Kneeland Hartford College Trustee, 99
Beatrice Kneeland, who helped to establish the Hartford College for Women in 1939 and had served as a trustee since then, died on Sunday at the Cherry Brook Health Center in Canton, Conn.
She was 99 and lived in Bloomfield.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, said her niece, Annabelle Hall Noland of Oakton, Va.


Walter Ward, 83, Ex-Member Of City Council From Queens
Walter Ward, a former Democratic member of the New York City Council who fought for clean beaches and against airplane noise, died on Wednesday at his home in Howard Beach, Queens.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.(ALU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Move on Bosnia By U.S. Alarms Allies in NATO
European allies expressed alarm today over the Clinton Administration's decision to end Washington's role in enforcing an arms embargo against the Bosnian Government, warning that the unilateral move undermined NATO and could diminish the chances for peace in the Balkans.
The decision seemed to thrust the United States into its most serious diplomatic rift over the Balkan war since early 1993, when Washington failed to convince NATO partners to lift the embargo and to bomb Serbian forces who were trouncing Bosnia's mainly Muslim Government.


Charles H. Tenney, 83, Judge and Deputy Mayor
Charles H. Tenney, a senior judge in the Federal District Court in Manhattan and a former deputy mayor under Robert F. Wagner, died yesterday at his home in Islip, L.I.
Mr.
Tenney, who also had an apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, was 83.
The cause was cancer, said Marguerite T. Embry, his daughter.


Gibson Greetings Inc.(GIBG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Unsolved Rwanda Mystery: The President's Plane Crash
The death of Rwanda's President in a plane crash last April touched off a frenzy of killing: several hundred thousand people, most of them Tutsi, were slaughtered, mostly by Hutu soldiers and militia.
It was widely assumed, but never conclusively established, that the plane carrying President Juvenal Habyarimana was shot down.
In any event, those responsible have never been identified.


Student Fights Requirement To Volunteer In Community
Daniel Immediato might seem an unlikely litigant in a battle over the Constitution.
Just 17, and sporting a goatee and a Mickey Mouse tie, Mr.
Immediato went to Federal District Court here this week to fight his high school's community-service requirement.
Mr.
Immediato is not the first teen-ager to attack the notion of compulsory volunteer work.
But unlike most others, he has enlisted the help of an organization with a mission to stop government interference in what it considers to be family matters.


Tennessee Valley Authority reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Players Go to Europe
Calgary wing THEOREN FLEURY and Philadelphia forward MIKAEL RENBERG yesterday became the latest National Hockey League players to join teams in Europe.
Fleury agreed to play on a game-to-game basis for Tappara of Tampere in the Finnish Hockey League, and Renberg was cleared to play for his former Swedish Elite League team, Lulea, during the N.H.L. lockout.


The Adorned Body: Who? How? Why?
ONCE again, the Old Guy didn't get it.
Living in the city, he was aware that there were more and more people who were wearing rings in their noses, lips and ears.
Hipper people than himself told him that many women were having their belly buttons perforated so that they could attach rings.


Welbilt Corp.(WBLT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Giuliani Sends Contract Offer To Legal Aid
Six weeks after steamrolling over a strike by staff lawyers for the Legal Aid Society and threatening to stop doing business with them altogether, the Giuliani administration has offered the organization a new contract with strict terms like a no-strike clause, monthly and quarterly audits, a taut budget and creation of a bureau to handle new cases more expeditiously.
Officials for Legal Aid staunchly maintained that the proposed contract, which will pay the Society $62.4 million a year, preserves the nonprofit organization's standing as the primary representative for the city's indigent criminal defendants.
But the Giuliani administration made it clear that City Hall was keeping its options open.


Viking Star Shipping Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Getting Back on Track After Investments Go Sour
Julia and Richard Jordan, residents of the San Francisco bay area, sold a second home for a net profit of $224, 000 in 1987, about the time that Mr.
Jordan took early retirement, "It wass scary, "Mrs Jordan said.
"We didn't hav a clue about what to do with it."
They attended a financial planning seminar, contacted the speaker and utimately put most of their moeny in his hands.
A year later, they regretted the decision.
Unhappy with their investment performance, they sought recommendations from friends and switched financial planners.


CHRONICLE
A.
LEON HIGGINBOTHAM JR., a former judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia, will receive the first Spirit of Raoul Wallenberg Humanitarian Award there tonight.
The award is to be given by the American Swedish Historical Museum, in Philadelphia, and the Elizabeth Ellis Foundation Trust.
The presentation links two names renowned in the annals of human rights.
Mr.
Wallenberg, a Swedish diplomat, rescued 100,000 Jews in Hungary during World War II.
Judge Higginbotham, who retired from the bench last year, went with an international team to South Africa to negotiate disputes between political factions prior to the elections there.
He also served as the chairman of an American Bar Association panel that issued a landmark report, "America's Children at Risk," in 1993.


Johnson Worldwide Associates Inc.(JWAIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taiga Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Protesting the Pain of Budget Cuts


Jess Richards, 51, an Actor In Shows on Broadway and Off
Jess Richards, a versatile actor who appeared in 11 Broadway shows and numerous Off Broadway, touring and regional productions, died on Sunday at his home in Indianapolis.
He was 51.
The cause was AIDS, his agent, Beverly Anderson said.


A Politician At the Rubicon
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani bolted his own party and endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, he knew something the public did not: that Mr.
Cuomo's campaign polls had begun to show him moving ahead of State Senator George E. Pataki.
The public polls still had Mr.
Cuomo behind and would not show him moving ahead until days after Mr.
Giuliani's endorsement.
Some analysts attributed that movement to Mr.
Giuliani's strong support for the Governor, and that could have been the reason, or one of the reasons.
Still, it was no surprise to the Cuomo camp or to the Mayor: The Cuomo campaign conducted tracking polls every night, was making them available to Mr.
Giuliani, and they were optimistic.
On Saturday afternoon, two days before the Mayor's endorsement on Oct. 24, Mr.
Giuliani, Deputy Mayor Peter Powers, David Garth and a Garth associate, Richard Bryers, met in Mr.
Garth's office and examined the polls.
They placed Mr.
Cuomo four to five percentage points ahead.


Transactions
Baseball  National League COLORADO ROCKIES -- Promoted Paul Egins, assistant director of player development, to assistant director of player personnel.
Eastern League NEW HAVEN RAVENS -- Named Chris Canetti director of operations; Diana Kuen assistant director of merchandising; Mark Tomey marketing assistant; and Lori McCarthy administrative assistant.
Basketball  National Basketball Association MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Micheal Williams, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Winston Garland, guard.
TORONTO RAPTORS -- Named Glen Grunwald assistant to the vice-president of basketball.
Football  National Football League NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Jeff Mills, linebacker.
Signed Darren Reese, guard, from their practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League BUFFALO SABRES -- Named Douglas Moss president and chief executive officer.
Central Hockey League WICHITA THUNDER -- Activated John Vary, defenseman, from the suspended list.
Waived Jason Hines, defenseman.
Colleges  MARYLAND -- Signed Gary Williams, men's basketball coach, to a seven-year contract extension.


In Defeat, Clinton Aides Find Their Silver Lining
In the Pennsylvania Avenue home of the Comeback Kid, the talk to reporters since Tuesday has been about rising again from the canvas and rolling the stone back up the hill.
"Remember, this is a resilient President," one staff member said.


Observer; Tempers Hot and Tarry
Recent lunatic attacks on the White House had the President's Secret Service guards in an unusually keen state of alert.
The public knew it, so hesitated to tar and feather the President and ride him out of the White House on a rail.
Still, it was a close thing.
Americans had never been so angry, at least in the past five years, which was as far back as anyone could remember.


What Do I.Q. Tests Measure? Not Intelligence; Preschool Study
To the Editor:
In " 'Bell Curve' Critics Say Early I.Q. Isn't Destiny" (Education page, Nov. 9), you inaccurately attribute the High/Scope Perry preschool study to Edward Gramlich, an economist at the University of Michigan.
W.
Steven Barnett of Rutgers University conducted the benefit-cost analysis referred to in the article.


Life of 22 Years Ends, but Not Before Many Heard Message on AIDS
Tonight was the homecoming football game at Pedro Zamora's alma mater, Hialeah High School, his stomping grounds when he learned he was infected with H.I.V. and the place he returned to as a public speaker to warn young people like him to be careful.
The message, it seems, got through to many of them, even those who said they never met him.
Mr.
Zamora, 22, a well-known AIDS educator and a cast member of "The Real World" on MTV, died of complications from AIDS today at Mercy Hospital in Miami.


Reaching Out, Bad Shoulder and All
Juan Nieves, who has made his living as both a pitcher and a pitching coach, one day plans to resume his education, most likely in sports medicine.
But Nieves, whose intellect and physical abilities helped carry him from Puerto Rico to one of the nation's top prep schools, is smart enough to know one thing: He will never learn as important a lesson about sports and medicine as he did the day the doctors opened up his left shoulder.


Newt Gingrich, Authoritarian
Newt Gingrich is going to talk for a while now, and thoughtful citizens will be well advised to listen.
As long as he is in the throes of post-election gloating, Mr.
Gingrich cannot avoid providing useful glimpses of the personality and policies with which he modestly proposes to reshape America.
His language is as revelatory as it is familiar.
He describes himself as a battler against McGovernites, liberal elitists and the media.
He will restore order and middle-class values.
Welcome to Speaker Gingrich's Retro-World.
Mr.
Gingrich has reinvented the political landscape of his youth -- a Sun Belt where politicians communicate in the venerable code words of Barry Goldwater and George Wallace.


Gould's Legacy: Rail Regulation For Another Era
WHEN it comes to battles for corporate control, railroads have provided by far the most colorful contests in American financial history.
They include sagas of shareholders suckered by their president, of bribed judges and legislators, and of takeover efforts flustered by the fact that, for every share the raider could buy, the insiders could print another.
By the standards of the last century, the current battle for control of the Santa Fe railroad is tame.
But the excesses of that era live on in the reactions to it, which created a byzantine regulatory organization so slow that its lethargy has become a major factor in the current battle.


Miss Talieh, Mr. Woodville
Faeze Talieh, a daughter of Mehrmah Talieh of St.
Davids, Pa., and Manouchehr Talieh of King of Prussia, Pa., was married yesterday to Richard Warren Woodville, the son of Mrs.
Jefferson Burrus Jr. of Washington and the late Capt.
J.
L.
Warren Woodville Jr.
The Rev.
Douglas G. Scott performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Martin's Church in Radnor, Pa.
Earlier in the day, a Persian Shiite ceremony was performed by Ziaddin Mirmirani, an uncle of the bride, at Bolingbroke, the parish house of St.
Martin's.
Mrs.
Woodville, 33, is an antiques dealer in St.
Davids.
She graduated from Amherst College.
Her father was a former judge in Iran.


Fresh Ferom a Watery Grave
AFTER GREGORY By Austin Wright. 292 pp. Dallas: Baskerville Publishers. $20.


Student Protesters Ransack Haiti's Education Ministry


The Queen and the Mathematician
CLEOPATRA By Diane Stanley and Peter Vennema.
Illustrated by Diane Stanley.
Unpaged.
New York: Morrow Junior Books. $15. (Ages 7 and up) THE LIBRARIAN WHO MEASURED THE EARTH By Kathryn Lasky.
Illustrated by Kevin Hawkes. 48 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Saving the Flag


POSTINGS: 'Supported Environment' in 4 Buildings; New Housing For Mentally Ill
A demonstration program to provide quality longterm housing for individuals who are chronically mentally ill, many of whom were formerly homeless, has begun with four buildings in Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn.
Joe Sultan of Gran Sultan Associates, the architects, said that instead of isolated group houses or unsupervised S.R.O.'s, the buildings provided individual apartments, optional group dining, laundry, 24-hour supervision and regular on-site treatment.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE Pianist, 13, to Play Bach With New American Group
Elina Teplinsky, a 13-year-old piano prodigy who came to the United States with her parents two years ago from Belarus, will perform with the New American Chamber Orchestra Tuesday at Merkin Hall.
She will present J. S. Bach's piano concerto in D-minor, under the conductor Beth Cohen.
And her father, Roman, will be watching from the cello section of the all-refugee orchestra.


Ms. Glick, Mr. Francavilla
Linda J. Glick, a singer, was married last evening to Leonard D. Francavilla, the security manager in Brooklyn for The Daily News.
Cantor Bob Abelson performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Friars Club in New York.
The bride is also the owner of Glick Advertising, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, from which she also received a master's degree in French and French literature.
She is the daughter of the late Rose M. and Irving H. Glick.
The bride's father founded Glick Advertising.


Sex Shops and Peep Shows: Hard to Avoid or Ignore
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to counter the perspective of "mildness" in the Sept. 25 Coping column, "Checking It Out: A Walk on the Mild Side," by Robert Lipsyte.
As a woman, I do not believe it is possible to saunter obliviously by sex shops or peep shows and, as Mr.
Lipsyte suggests, not be "aware" of them.
I find it hard to believe that I might be alone in my sense of discomfiture, irritation and sometimes outright uneasiness.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Some will consider Malcolm W. Browne's review of Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray's "Bell Curve," J. Philippe Rushton's "Race, Evolution, and Behavior" and Seymour W. Itzkoff's "Decline of Intelligence in America" politically faulty, and I am sure you will receive many letters criticizing the politics of both the reviewer and the authors.
My criticism comes from a different point of view.
I see little in this review to suggest that either Mr.
Browne or the authors understand some basic principles of evolution.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Considering the cover photograph, it is no surprise that Edmundson feels the need to keep reminding us that Bennington is a "site for self-invention," where students "try to reinvent themselves." What emerges is a dreary, lock-step uniformity, with all the students dressed identically, in the latest conventions of deliberate ugliness.
KENNETH R. CRAYCRAFT JR.
San Antonio


Johnson &amp; Johnson Sued Over Dismissal
A former senior research scientist at Johnson &amp; Johnson is claiming in Federal court that he was dismissed when he resisted pressure to present "inadequate and misleading" test data to win quick Food and Drug Administration approval for a new treatment for cancer and other diseases, like AIDS.
Dr.
Daniel Tripodi, 55, asserted that his career was abruptly derailed after he was assigned by Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest health products company, to guide the development of the device, called Centrinet.
He is seeking more than $3 million in damages for lost pay and other benefits in a civil jury trial that started last week.


Q. &amp; A.
Seeking A Solution To the Key Q Years ago, for security reasons, our co-op installed on the front door an expensive lock whose keys supposedly cannot be duplicated without a "key card" that is held by the board president.
In an effort to control access to the building, we voted on a policy of one key per adult per unit, and one extra key per unit for emergencies.


A Manhattan With Michelle
WRAPPED in fog and mist, Seattle during the dark season feels like a set from a film noir -- all whispered conspiracies and huddled alliances over strong coffee and thick beer in local hangouts.
For decades, when the seasonal gloom takes hold, people in trench coats and fisherman-quality rain slickers have slipped into an elevator in the Camlin Hotel and pressed a button that causes a blue cloud to light up on the floor indicator.
At the top of the hotel is the Cloud Room -- a piano bar of dark wood and stiff drinks.
Michelle Pfeiffer would have been comfortable here when she played a sultry Seattle lounge singer in "The Fabulous Baker Boys."


An Interim Deputy With the Skills of a Sheriff
Exactly three years after the final American forces left Saigon, John Krimsky arrived in Hanoi on April 30, 1978 -- flying, as it were, by the seat of his pants.
"I found out I was the first American in Hanoi after the war," said Krimsky, who now is the interim executive director of the United States Olympic Committee.


F.Y.I.
Awaiting 'the Big One' Q.  I understand there is a fault line that runs under New York City.
Where does it run?
When was the last earthquake?
Are there any predictions about the next one -- and are New York skyscrapers designed to withstand such a thing?
I've heard reports that a large earthquake (over 5 on the Richter scale) is overdue for New York City.
Is this true?
A.
Everyone knows New York City has more than its share of faults.
At least two run across upper Manhattan, one along 125th Street and another near Dyckman Street in Inwood.
The last big earthquake in the city was on Aug. 10, 1884.
Equivalent to 5.5 on the Richter scale and centered under New York Harbor, it toppled hundreds of chimneys in the city and woke up chickens in western Pennsylvania.
John Armbruster, a seismologist at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., said the next "big one" might not be far away.
"A magnitude 5 hits the New York area about every 100 years," he said.
"This is the longest period known without a magnitude 5 in New York."
And what might a magnitude 5, apparently 10 years overdue, do when it comes?
Mr.
Armbruster said the major skyscrapers in New York, including the older ones like the Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building, have been built to withstand that kind of shock.
Some other buildings however, especially those built before the age of modern construction techniques, like brownstones, might not fare as well.
Unlike Los Angeles, New York City has no building regulations specifically meant to prevent earthquake damage.
Barriers of Progress
Q.
While walking my dog in Riverside Park, I've noticed very sturdy barriers -- about chest high and built from two-by-four's -- around a lot of the trees.
I've seen smaller versions in dog runs and in other parks, but these are much more forbidding.
Why are they there?
A.
Well, it has nothing to do with your dog.
The presence of these large barriers usually means that there's a capital works project somewhere in the area, said Parke Spencer, director of public information for the Parks Department.
The department makes the barriers big enough to protect trees from asphalt trucks and other heavy equipment.
The barriers also provide protective skirts around the bases of trees, where roots might be damaged.
While they are not attractive, the department says the barriers are effective in minimizing harm to trees.
And like most projects, they are temporary.
Out of (but in) Business
Q.
Has a midtown "going out of business" retailer ever actually gone out of business?
Is there a city "going out of business" license, and how long is it good for?
How much is the fine for having a "going out of business" sale without a permit?
A.
A license to go out of business?
In New York, yes.
The Department of Consumer Affairs issues licenses to failing businesses that give them 30 days to hold closing sales and shut up shop (with the option for two 30-day renewals).
The move to begin licensing these merchants came after consumers complained about nonstop farewells, with inflated prices instead of the expected bargains.
Electronics stores on Fifth Avenue in midtown were particularly blatant, said Pat Cohen, a spokeswoman for the Department of Consumer Affairs.
"People would open with a going-out-of-business sale," she said.
Businesses that violate the terms of the license or restock their merchandise can be fined up to $100 a day, though Ms.
Cohen admits that checking for restocking is difficult.
Under a 1982 law, the Department of Consumer Affairs can close businesses that violate its permits, so long-term "going out of business" businesses could, eventually, find themselves closed for real.
Although midtown is full of stores that are faking failure, Ms.
Cohen says progress is being made.
"Word has gotten around," she said.
"There's fewer of these places than 10 years ago."
Complaints about chronic closers can be made to the Department of Consumer Affairs, (212) 487-4398.
JESSE McKINLEY


A Gal and Two Guys
AT the beginning of "Fighting Over Beverley," one would think that Israel Horovitz were concocting a fairy tale for elderly lovers, but don't be fooled.
At 69, Archie Bennett has traveled from England to Gloucester, Mass., for the hand of Beverley Shimma who ditched him 49 years ago to run off with Zelly Shimma, a decorated World War II officer.
Beverley made a terrible mistake doing that, Archie tells her.
"Enough is enough, isn't it?" he asks, pleading with Beverley to leave Zelly to start fresh, to reignite an old flame.


BEST SELLERS: November 13, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
37
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
1
4
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
3
2
6
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
4
6
21
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
5
5
11
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
6
4
3
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of a fantasy saga.
7
7
8
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
8
11
118
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
7
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
10
8
3
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
11
1
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
12
9
9
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
13
12
16
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
14
1
A TANGLED WEB, by Judith Michael. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The sequel to "Deceptions," a novel in which twin sisters -- a glamorous divorcee and a quiet homemaker -- swapped places.
15
10
6
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
2
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
1
2
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
3
6
2
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
4
3
5
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
5
4
6
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
6
7
5
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
5
7
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
8
8
9
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady's life.
9
9
10
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
10
10
47
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
13
36
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
12
11
7
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign.
13
12
5
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
14
14
3
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
15
22
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) Near-death experiences.
16*
1
PRINCESS IN LOVE, by Anna Pasternak. (Dutton, $17.95.) The romantic life of Diana, the Princess of Wales.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
77
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
29
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
4
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Ways to cope with life's problems.
4
3
7
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE AFTERLIFE: And Other Stories, by John Updike. (Knopf, $24.) Mr.
Updike's 11th collection of short stories, unashamedly autobiographical, returns to eastern Pennsylvania, its motherly wives, its minute realities, its occasional moments of grace.
AS SEEN ON TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s, by Karal Ann Marling. (Harvard University, $24.95.) Themes of the mythic decade -- Disneyland, tail fins, Elvis and others -- shrewdly observed by a witty, rompish historian.
A CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK, by Irving Howe. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) The book Howe was working on at his death last year, a collection of freestanding essays on the art of fiction, is mainly a record of the pleasures of thinking, and thinking acutely, about novels.
DANCER WITH BRUISED KNEES, by Lynne McFall. (Chronicle, $18.95.) A delightful (honestly!) novel that examines the nature of depression with a straight-shooting voice; its protagonist, Sarah Blight, never succumbs to self-pity even when drunk and blubbering.
FAMILY, by Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) An extraordinary history of an ordinary family, in which the author plays the roles of gossip, pedant and loyal member, yielding a reunion strangers are welcome -- and fortunate -- to attend.
THE FOLLOWING STORY, by Cees Nooteboom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.
HIMMELFARB, by Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $18.50.) An unsettling first-person novel, the confession of an 80-year-old German ethnologist whose reputation depends entirely on research he appropriated from a Jew from 1939 to 1941.
LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS: The Rise of Elvis Presley, by Peter Guralnick. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A meticulous marshaling of the facts about the ascendant career of a "real decent, fine boy" whose rise to the top (10 million singles for RCA in 11 months in 1955-56; he was 21) startled him as much as it did the rest of the country.
LONDON, by John Russell. (Abrams, $45.) Not a guide but a personal survey and celebration by a fine critic who seems to know his hometown as much through osmosis as through industry.
UNDER MY SKIN: Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949, by Doris Lessing. (HarperCollins, $25.) A remarkable life in a remarkable place -- the declining British Empire in Africa -- told by a novelist who for three-quarters of a century has conceded nothing to political, psychological or literary fashion.
WINCHELL: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity, by Neal Gabler. (Knopf, $30.) The life of Walter Winchell, inventor of the modern gossip column, who reached two-thirds of adult Americans in the 1940's and left behind him a national habit of confusing notoriety with news.


Deadly Gifts to Greece and Turkey
In recent years U.S. arms have poured into Greece and Turkey, making them two of the biggest recipients of America's lethal largesse.
The United Nations arms registry reveals that in 1992 and 1993 the U.S. turned over 1,163 tanks and 23 combat aircraft to Greece and 1,509 tanks, 54 fighter planes and 28 heavily armed attack helicopters to Turkey.
All of these weapons were slated for reduction under the 1990 treaty on conventional forces in Europe.
Instead of scrapping them, the Pentagon is giving them away.


Susan Rotmistrovsky, David Kahn
Susan B. Rotmistrovsky, the daughter of Hector Rotmistrovsky of New City, N.Y., and Eva Rotmistrovsky of Mahwah, N.J., was married on Thursday to David Roger Kahn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mike Kahn of New York.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner officiated at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Mrs.
Kahn, 26, graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She was until recently an associate at the law firm of Rubin Baum Levin Constant &amp; Friedman in New York.
Her father is the director of regulatory affairs at Mane U.S.A., a perfume manufacturer, in Wayne, N.J.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Teaching history from the ground up, with photos of vermin and hogs, simulated smells, even a retired outhouse.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 When Matthew Lee scans the South Bronx, he sees a host of budding businesses and few banks to help them.
LETTERS 7 On sex shops and peep shows, Village politics, Times Square preachers.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 The Month of the Dead in Grand Central; Zimbabwean sculpture in Park Slope.
GOOD EATING 18 Midtown east, in the lap of luxury: Lespinasse, the Four Seasons, Le Chantilly, La Cote Basque.
SOAPBOX 19 When open-school week was open.
Plus, Photographer's Journal and a cry of "Enough, already" in the East Village.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Any intelligence test on which high scores can be achieved by people capable of believing in anything so preposterous as the efficacy of intelligence tests is obviously fundamentally and irremediably flawed.
JEFFERY EWENER  Toronto


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Ah, the poker games.
During those notorious all-nighters, every human aptitude and sentiment was on exhibition.
I know.
I was there -- a student cum faculty wife.
The one-liners around that beat-up dining room table were the attar of education.


Seeing Is Believing: The Cat in the Hat Comes Back


The Sublime, the Modern and the Literal in Views of the Land
IN the Neuberger Museum at Purchase College, it is all landscape -- painted, drawn, printed and photographed or else implied by sculpture.
The show, titled "Inspired by Nature," may not be a survey, but it covers a lot of ground with 80 works by 53 artists, many of them polar opposites, like Thomas Cole and Alex Katz, Raoul Hague and Louis Eilshemius.
Dr.
Lucinda H. Gedeon, director of the museum, and Cornelia Butler, its curator of contemporary art, made the selection, drawing for the most part on the Neuberger's own collection and dividing the results into categories.


Talks Halt As Owners Map a New Proposal
Negotiators for baseball's striking players and owners made it into the third consecutive day of renewed talks today, then suddenly adjourned to give the owners' bargaining team more time to develop a proposal it will present when they reconvene.
Shepherded by Bill Usery Jr., the mediator who kept them here this long, the two sides will gather again Thursday at a conference center near Dulles Airport in the Washington area.


Pro-Life Preacher Denies Charge of Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
The New Yorkers of all races who over the past decade have heard me speak, whether preaching in Times Square or sidewalk counseling pregnant mothers in front of a midtown abortion clinic, can attest to the falsity of the attack upon me by Jason McDonald in the Oct. 30 Letters.


Time and 'The Shadow Box'
Michael Cristofer was 32 when his play "The Shadow Box," about three terminally ill patients and the people close to them, won a 1977 Tony Award and the Pulitzer Prize.
Why would such a young man write about death?
"It was never about death," Mr.
Cristofer said, relaxing in the downstairs lobby at Circle in the Square on Broadway, where a revival of "The Shadow Box" opens next Sunday.
"It's about families -- what family is, who you end up with."


A Simple Song That Lives Beyond Time
IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE suicide of Kurt Cobain, lead singer of the rock band Nirvana, last April, MTV broadcasted almost continuously an hourlong "Unplugged" special that the band had recorded the previous fall.
The final song on the program was unexpected: it was the only one not previously recorded by Nirvana or even written by an alternative rocker.
Called "Where Did You Sleep Last Night," it had the cadences of an old ballad or blues tune and lyrics that Mr.
Cobain's deathly rasp made absolutely haunting.
In fact, the song was a folk song, usually known as "In the Pines," which dates back at least to the 1870's.
Its appearance in the repertory of a Seattle grunge singer is only the latest chapter in its complex history. (An album of Nirvana's MTV concert, "Unplugged in New York," was recently released on the DGC label.) Those who have recorded the song include the folk legends Leadbelly, Joan Baez and Pete Seeger, the country pioneers Bill Monroe and Chet Atkins, the rockers Sir Douglas Quintet and Duane Eddy, the pop vocalist Connie Francis and the jazz saxophonist Clifford Jordan.


TRULY GROSS ECONOMIC PRODUCT
In "Truly Gross Economic Product" (Method and Madness, Oct. 16), Nicholas Wade did a fine job of using economics to describe the rise in American obesity.
How can this trend be limited?
In economics, one way to balance an uneven market is through tariffs.
Perhaps a "fat tax" on fatty meat and cream would do us good.
JASON PRICE New York


Sexism by a Thread?
IN "Eat Drink Man Woman," the director Ang Lee explained the relationship between men and women via food.
But it could just as well have been sartorial, a sort of "Pants Shirt Man Woman."
More than Monday night football, more than sharing emotions, it is clothes that continue to separate the sexes.
Consider trousers.


N.H.L. Players Consider International Tourney
Hoping for the best, but preparing for the worst, the National Hockey League Players Association is considering several major arenas across North America for an international tournament this winter if the labor lockout continues.
Arenas being considered include the Palace of Auburn Hills in suburban Detroit, which features major league basketball and minor league hockey, and the Rosemont Horizon in suburban Chicago, which showcases college basketball and minor league hockey.
Other cities that could be play host to the games, according to the union, are Los Angeles, Minneapolis, Hamilton and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Vancouver, British Columbia and Quebec.


RICHARD FERBER
Refusing to cuddle a tired, crying baby in the early months and years of life is like withholding sustenance.
For babies, night is often a frightening time of enforced separation from parents.
I fear that "Ferberized" babies have not been taught so much to put themselves to sleep as to give up all hope of comforting when they most need it.
NANCY STIEFEL New York


Word for Word/Euthanasia; Helping a Man Kill Himself, As Shown on Dutch TV
THE movement in the United States to allow mercy killing -- Dr.
Jack Kevorkian is its most controversial exponent -- reached a milestone last week when voters in Oregon approved the nation's first law allowing doctors to hasten death for the terminally ill.
The law takes effect Dec. 8, and doctors following its guidelines cannot be prosecuted if they prescribe a lethal dose of drugs to terminally ill patients who request it.
At least two doctors must first agree that the patient has six months or less to live, and the patient must ask three times, the last time in writing.
Doctors have to wait 15 days before meeting the final request for a lethal prescription.


2 Plans to House Elderly Opposed by Neighbors
TWO unrelated projects that seek to provide housing for the elderly have triggered opposition in two disparate communities.
Along the Hudson River here, a 122-bed nursing home proposed by St.
John's Riverside Hospital is being opposed primarily on environmental grounds.
The hospital wants to build the home about 260 feet from the old Croton Aqueduct and 70 feet from Untermyer Park.


Sports of The Times; Forever the Regal Champion
SHE became America's black Cinderella.
But her early dreams were not to find Prince Charming, or to be Queen of the Debutante's Ball.
Or even to be adored, as she would be, and cheered lustily and mobbed around the world, with her fans sometimes even stealing off her shoes -- while she wore them.
"The only thing I ever really wanted when I was a child," Wilma Rudolph once told me, "was to be normal. To be average. To be able to run, jump, play and do all the things the other kids did in my neighborhood."


Role of District Leader Requires No Redefining
To the Editor:
As Greenwich Village's Democratic District Leader, I am writing to take issue with the Nov. 6 Coping column by Robert Lipsyte, "In a Glum Election Season, Politics as Unusual."


More Than One Way to See Art
FOR MUCH OF THIS CENTURY, there has been one way of looking at contemporary art, and that is the way the Museum of Modern Art does it -- on right-angled white walls in evenly lighted, shadowless spaces within a highly controlled sequence of rooms.
But a growing number of architects are resisting what they regard as restrictive spaces that limit viewers to a single position in front of an object.
One architect weary of what he calls the missionary position is Wolfgang Prix, who has designed -- among many other art projects -- studios for Anselm Kiefer, a painter who climbs ladders, lies prone and stands on his head to "test" his compositions.
Two weeks ago, when Queen Beatrix opened the Groninger Museum of Art in Groningen, the Netherlands, Mr.
Prix, its designer, led her on catwalks through a turbulent landscape of tilted and angled walls that afford more than one way to see a painting.


Atop the Nation's Polls Come Many Close Calls
Alabama 29, Mississippi State 25
Dennis Riddle, a seldom-used freshman tailback, scored on a 1-yard run with 51 seconds left as Alabama edged Mississippi State, 29-25, yesterday in Starkville, Miss.
The battle between nationally ranked teams -- Alabama No. 12 on The New York Times computer and No. 6 in The Associated Press poll, and Mississippi State No. 23 with The Times and No. 20 with A.P. -- clinched for the Crimson Tide its third straight Southeastern Conference Western Division title.


Around Town The Scenes Had Possibilities
SOME OF THE QUESTIONS likely to be asked when it's learned that you're a theater reviewer: "How many plays do you see a week?" That depends.
"Do you ever walk out before the end?" Not unless the actors do.
"How do you feel about standing ovations?" Skeptical.
"Do you like your job?" Yes.
"Is it fun?" That's not the right question.
Consider the theater week beginning Tuesday, Nov. 1.
Petersburg.


RICHARD FERBER
As a pediatrician, I was dismayed to see, beneath the photo of Ferber, a picture of a cuddly infant sleeping on his tummy.
Excellent recent studies show an increased risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome in infants put to bed on their stomachs.
The SIDS prevention motto is now "Back to Sleep." STEPHEN J. HARRIS, M.D.
San Jose, Calif.


Behind the Macy Thanksgiving Parade
REMOVED from this city's trendy boutiques and sidewalk cafes is a warehouse, a former factory where once Tootsie Rolls trundled off an assembly line.
Today the only clue of what might lie behind the building's massive roll-up door is some scattered confetti on the ground.
But come Thanksgiving morning, just after midnight, the building's contents will be revealed when the large pulleys crank open the door of the 45-foot-high workroom and out will roll a convoy of floats and folded balloons headed to New York City.
By 9 A.M., that day it is expected some two million people will line up to be bedazzled as the re-assembled convoy winds its way through the canyons of the city, while another 35 million will watch on television.


Daphne M. Kane, Stephen Murtha
Daphne Mautner Kane, a daughter of Elizabeth Mautner of New York and Robert F. Mautner of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Amos Murtha, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Murtha of Somers, N.Y.
Mayor Raymond Mass of Shrewsbury, N.J., officiated at McLoone's Rum Runner restaurant in Sea Bright, N.J.
Mrs.
Murtha, 35, is a computer-systems applications manager at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.
Her father retired as a management consultant in Ridgewood.
Her mother retired as a personnel specialist in the United States Office of Personnel Management in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


For Another Sort of Deadhead
IF a little white skull arrives with your name clearly written across the front of it, there's no need to worry.
The skull is made of sugar; it's just a holiday gift.
In Mexico at this time of year, said Mireya Teran, executive director of the Mexican Cultural Institute, death is both mocked and honored, with hanging skeletons, mariachi bands and yes, skulls made of sugar, in a celebration known as El Dia de los Muertos or the Day of the Dead.


Liann Schottenstein, Paul Walborsky
Liann Fay Schottenstein, the daughter of I. Morris Schottenstein of Columbus, Ohio, and Rosalyn Kirkel of Denver, is to be married today to Paul Walborsky Navarro, the son of Hy and Aura Walborsky of Miami.
Rabbi Aaron M. Petuchowski is to perform the ceremony at Capsouto Freres, a restaurant in New York.


Basta With That Pasta: Neighbors Say No to Entrees-to-Go
Residents and neighbors of the Oliver Cromwell at 12 West 72d Street are organizing in haste to oppose plans to replace the current ground-floor tenants -- a seafood restaurant, two doctors' offices and a pharmacy -- with a restaurant and food market.
Not just any market, either, but a new breed: a gourmet retail food market with a restaurant that features its own wares.
There would be French charcuterie, expensive cheese plates, truffle oil . . .


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Cuomo, a Mystery in an Enigma in a Politician, and His Final Race; Friends Look for an Answer
After all the years in which the riddle about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was why he didn't (run for President, take a Supreme Court nomination), the question that lingers after his defeat is why he did (run for a fourth term that it was clear he would have a hard time winning).
The short answer is that the Governor, reluctant to withdraw from the fray after a third term in which a recession had sapped his popularity and forced him to manage scarcity, saw running again as the best way to secure a legacy that already loomed as too intangible, and thus end on a high note.


In Houston, The Symphony Reclaims Its Past
A USIC CRITIC BORN AND raised in Houston, as I was, constantly bumps up against the assumption that anyone so marooned, beyond the pale of the northern culture belt, could have had no early opportunity to hear first-rate performances of symphonic music.
Yet during my childhood and adolescence, the Houston Symphony Orchestra was led successively by Ferenc Fricsay, Sir Thomas Beecham, Leopold Stokowski, Sir John Barbirolli and Andre Previn.
What orchestra in the United States, or Europe for that matter, can boast a more lustrous lineage than that?
True, by the mid-80's, under the leadership of Sergiu Comissiona, the Houston Symphony was playing indifferently and was on the verge of dropping from the top tier of regional orchestras into sheer mediocrity.
But in 1988, Christoph Eschenbach, then better known as a concert pianist than as a conductor, was appointed music director, and by all accounts he has transformed the orchestra, which is said by some to be playing at the highest technical and interpretive levels of its 81-year history.
New Yorkers may judge for themselves when Mr.
Eschenbach and the Houston Symphony perform at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening.


There's a Wall In the New Berlin; You Just Can't See It
THE Berlin wall came down on Nov. 9, 1989, for the same reason it went up on Aug. 13, 1961: to keep the people of East Germany from running away from Communism.
It worked only too well.


Anticrime Tactic: Shut Footbridge
The 103d Street footbridge, the only direct pedestrian access from Manhattan to Wards Island, will be closed in mid-December as an experiment in crime prevention, officials from the police, the Parks and Recreation Department and the Department of Transportation say.
The closure is waiting only for workers to finish the bridge's latest coat of green paint.
Plans are to reopen the bridge in early spring, though there is no exact date.
Allan J. Fromberg, a Transportation Department spokesman, said the closing would last "as long as the police and the Parks Department deemed necessary."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
19TH CAT SHOW
Ailurophiles will be converging on the County Center in White Plains next weekend for the Westchester Cat Show, lured by the sheer size and scope of this 19-year-old event.
More than 250 felines, including 30 champion breeds, will participate, competing for ribbons and championship points.
As always, the plain old Archie and Mehitabel type cat without portfolio is eligible for the Household Pet Competition, based on looks and a certain je ne sais quoi.
There will be cats and kittens for sale, and cats and kittens cared for in shelters will be available for adoption.
Judges, breeders and lecturers will dispense information and advice about cats, and lots of vendors of cat-related merchandise will have suggestions for gift giving.


Nov. 6-12; The News, Virtually
A newspaper strike that began Nov. 1 has not quite shut down The San Francisco Examiner and The San Francisco Chronicle.
Within hours of the strike, both sides in the labor dispute had created electronic versions of their own newspapers on the the World Wide Web portion of the Internet.
Striking editors, reporters and columnists of both papers joined to form The San Francisco Free Press, while the both management teams used news agency reports to send out news and photos through a service called The San Francisco Gate.


Greetings From . . .


Penn State, 21 Down, Saves Its Season in Last 0:57
There was more than roses at stake.
Much more than that was slipping away in the windblown mist of Memorial Stadium.
Penn State's perfect season, and any hope of a national championship, was in jeopardy with time running out.
From the start of the day, when a power failure threw Penn State's hotel into darkness and its pre-game preparation into disarray and two early turnovers allowed Illinois to build a stunning 21-point lead, so much was going wrong for the Nittany Lions at the worst possible time.


Rhodes
To the Editor: That was a terribly unfair portrait of Rhodes.
Methinks that Ms.
Spano's experience there must have been a projection of her sour mood, maintained as a result of the frustration of her plans.
Admittedly, traveling around the Greek islands requires some resiliency, as well as an aquiescence to both the laws of nature and the quirky scheduling of ferries.
Personally, I found Rhodes to be a delight, a real potpourri of everything Greece has to offer.
The city, to me, had the flavor of a capsule Paris, without wide boulevards or plazas.
The stores contained an excellent array of goods.
I bought a bronze chess set there, with figures from Greek history and myths, that is now one of my most prized possessions.
And all else was glorious: the Valley of the Butterflies, the Castle of the Counts, the Temple of Diana on its promontory overlooking the sea and a delightful white town that Ms.
Spano can only denigrate because of the large number of tourists.


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; Bug Bijoux
Charlie Hines has designed a jewelry line that Morticia would love.
It features dead insects encased in beads of acrylic resin.
"When I was a kid in the late 1970's, I began wondering how they suspended insects in paperweights," says Hines, the creator of Bedebug.
"Twenty years later, I figured it out."


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
C.H.S.F.L.
OPPOSITES ATTRACT: CHAMINADE and ST.
ANTHONY'S advanced to the Catholic High School Football League's AAA Finals with playoff victories yesterday at St.
John's University.
Although both teams looked impressive, they won in completely different fashions.
In the first game, Chaminade edged ST.
FRANCIS PREP, 10-7, in a classic defensive battle.
The second game, featured last year's champion, St.
Anthony's, which outscored MONSIGNOR FARRELL, 37-20, in an offensive slugfest.


World Markets; Moderation Plays Well in Johannesburg
THE clunk of discarded Marxist baggage has been audible all year on the floor of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.
The market is enjoying the sound of the African National Congress of President Nelson Mandela chucking its more radical economic notions.
The latest example came Oct. 29 when Thabo Mbeki, one of South Africa's two deputy presidents, reversed the A.N.C.'s traditional commitment to state ownership.
He revealed that the Government may privatize such state-owned companies as Eskom, which generates half the electricity produced in sub-Saharan Africa, Transnet, a transportation conglomerate that owns South African Airways, and Telkom, the telecommunications company.


Capturing a New Sense of Freedom in Eastern Europe
THE walk-up apartment in which Mark Sadan lives here is not quite the artist's garret of "La Boheme," but the ambiance comes close.
After climbing to what was once the attic of an old house, guests are asked to remove their shoes and step into a pair of waiting slippers -- a custom that Mr.
Sadan, a photographer, said he adopted after visiting the Far East.


Orange Glow In the East
FOR many visitors to Berlin today, the neighborhoods in the formerly Communist east hold a special attraction.
Buildings are being renovated, museums reinvigorated and houses painted, repaired and tidied up.
But there are frustratingly few places where one can escape the feverish pace of construction, not to mention the bitter wind, and find a moment of peace and warmth.
One inviting place is Cafe Orange, which is close to some of the former East Berlin's most famous attractions.
Next door is the newly rebuilt synagogue, its gold-patterned dome once again resplendent.
The Postfuhramt, once the central post office and a gem of 19th-century architecture, stands on the corner.
Nearby are the Pergamon Museum, noted for its Greek and Babylonian collections, and Unter den Linden, the handsome boulevard that has been a center of Berlin life for centuries.


Play Nice. Play Tough.
President Clinton is getting a lot of free advice about how to deal with Tuesday's election disaster.
Most of it is telling him to abandon his left-wing agenda and rediscover the inner moderate who propelled him to victory in 1992.
Bipartisan accommodation should be his goal, it is said.
This isn't completely wrong, but there are three problems with it.
First, the notion that Mr.
Clinton ran as a moderate "new Democrat" and then has governed as some kind of McGovernite left-winger is mostly the product of Republican agitprop and lazy journalists' shorthand.
The most familiar items in the indictment -- his top-bracket tax increase, his proposal to overhaul the health care system, homosexuals in the military -- were all things he clearly promised in the campaign.


Olympic Rentals
When hotel rooms in Lillehammer, Norway, grew scarce during this year's Winter Olympics, local residents rented out their homes.
An Atlanta entrepreneur has already organized a network of home rentals for the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
Bob Buchan, president of Event Management and Travel, expects around 10,000 private homes to be available for the 18-day event.
Maid service will also be available at an added cost.
Prospective renters can look at slides or videos supplied by property owners.
Average price is about $200 a night for each bedroom.
More information, (800) 695-3665.


Army Lets It Slip Away, And Boston U. Cashes In
After trailing Army, 6-0, at the half, Boston University scored three second-half touchdowns to beat the Cadets, 21-12, before a crowd of 33,762 at Michie Stadium.
The Cadets had hoped for better, and before the game -- at least on paper -- it looked as if they might deserve it.
Coming into today's game against the Terriers, Army, a Division I-A school, had won only three games, and two of the victories had been over Division I-AA teams, Holy Cross and The Citadel.


New Paris Rail Station Is Link to Major Cities
A new stop on France's rail network is about to be added at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, making it possible for air travelers to connect to cities throughout France and Europe.
French National Railroads' new airport terminal was scheduled to open today.
It allows passengers to go directly to Lyons, Avignon, Nice and Lille via high-speed TGV trains that bypass Paris.
More information: (800) 438-7245.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Plugged In
MAYTAG was more popular than Mario for some voters in the 4th Election District in Valley Stream.
Their polling place featured the latest in washers, along with voting booths.
Forget spin doctors.
These voters were checking out spin cycles.
Since the 1950's the residents of the 4th E.D. have voted in the Granado Appliance Center on Merrick Road.
"It works out good," one voter, Richard Ammann of Valley Stream, said.
"While I was waiting I saw a TV stand I need. Last year I picked up a microwave. What could you get if you voted in a school, pencils?"


Class of '95: What's New, Improved or Laid to Rest
The average car on America's street is getting somewhat long in the tooth - from an average of 5.6 years in 1968, for example, to 8.1 years in 1992.
This graying of the consumer demand, and both dealers and manufacturers expect 1995 new-vehicle sales to outpace the record levels of 1994.
Straining to meet the demand, auto makers are pushing their manufacturing capacity to the limit.
With the market booming, many car companies are venturing into new segments.


To Dance In Veracruz
IN Veracruz, everyone dances.
When I close my eyes on the city, a deep, methodical drumbeat throbs without flagging and everyone is in motion, from little boys gently guided by older girls to ancients like the decrepit woman I saw in the zocalo who put aside her tray of Chiclets and plastic doodads to dance with an equally old man in a shiny-elbowed suit jacket.
Her face transformed, she moved with great spirit, hips in subtle motion, loose and comfortably graceful, her shoulders perfectly still.
When she stopped to pick up her burden again and released her partner to the shaky gait in which he apparently lives his nondancing life, it was clear that "danzon," the very sober and formal dance favored by Veracruzanos, had held them upright as long as the music lasted.


For Warhol, 15 More Minutes
The Baltimore Museum of Art has opened its New Wing for Modern Art with an exhibition of 15 newly acquired paintings by Andy Warhol in the Caplan Family Gallery, which has a total of 42 Warhol works.
This acquisition, announced last May, makes the museum home to the second-largest collection of Warhol paintings on regular public display, after the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh.
The 16 galleries in the 35,000-square-foot addition, which opened last month, house the museum's permanent collection of 20th-century art.
More than 75 American and European artists of the post-1945 period are represented in the wing, including Willem de Kooning, Helen Frankenthaler, Jenny Holzer, Jasper Johns, Ellsworth Kelly, Roy Lichtenstein, Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg and Frank Stella.
The Warhol paintings are shown in the central main-floor gallery.
Works in less traditional media, and with more contemporary form and content, are contained in the upper-floor galleries.


Heartwarming Fare for the Fall Table
BRAISED rabbit, pappardelle in a wild boar sauce and venison chops with a red-currant glaze signal fall as much as turning leaves and ripening gourds.
This heartwarming seasonal fare stands out on the autumn menu at Pentimento.
More than the menu is decked out for fall at Pentimento, which opened in the summer in quarters in Stony Brook once occupied by Franzi &amp; Nell's and, before that, by Pasta Viola.
Pots of mums in shades of copper, brass and bronze fill a bay window.
Fresh flowers and tiny pumpkins adorn the tables.
Walls are sponge painted in soft gold, the color of creamy pumpkin bisque.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; The Resistance Movement
THE OTHER DAY THE COLLAGEN Corporation invited some writers and editors to a presentation by Debbie Then, a social psychologist from Stanford University who gave a talk on women's new attitudes toward "cosmetic procedures," meaning anything from chemical peels to collagen injections to surgery.
We saw a video of attractive (but not flashy) women talking openly and positively about how they'd had work done to please themselves, and how much happier and more confident they felt afterward.
These women didn't look old and they didn't look young; they had the smooth look of affluence.
According to Then's survey, women who elect to have cosmetic procedures are trend-setters.
Heroines of consumerism, they'd been the first to equip themselves with VCR's and cellular phones.
One member of the audience objected to the cost -- $400 for collagen injections that in some cases might have to be redone every four months.
She didn't mention surgery, which could easily run as high as $8,000, none of it covered by health insurance.
Nobody from the Collagen Corporation said anything about trying to bring down the price.
But then no one would ever consider bringing down the price of a Prada backpack, either.
Wasn't that part of the point, that the ageless face signaled membership in the consumer elite?


Dole Gets Back on Top In Usual Laconic Style
The world here has flipped upside down, and suddenly Bob Dole is on top.
But with the low-key Senator Dole, it can be hard to tell.
"S'pretty good," he muttered into the telephone on Friday from his office in a standard Dole growl of understatement.


No Crystal Ball Needed on Crime
POLITICAL oratory and people's fears notwithstanding, crime is decreasing across the country.
But the drop has less to do with all the get-tough talk than it does with the fact that fewer children were born to American mothers in the 1970's.
Criminologists are sure that in the next decade, crime will rise again to record levels because of the far different demographic trends of the 1980's.
And while no one has easy answers, the near-certainty of demography raises disturbing questions, among them: What can be done for today's troubled toddlers to keep them from becoming criminals a decade from now?


Beware the Kudzu Gang and All Its Kind
This is about outlaws.
Not the gun-toting kind, but the kind with roots, leaves and stems.
Invasive species, the professionals call them, and a rich field of study they offer.
By definition they are the sorts of plants that usurp the territory of others, rampaging out of control.
To many gardeners and landscapers, they seem attractive and worthwhile at first, and are introduced to an area on purpose.
But then reality takes over.
Those who live in Florida know this kind of story well.
The melaleuca tree was introduced from Australia because the tree was known to have considerable water-absorption capabilities.
It sounded like the perfect solution to drain some of what were considered nasty wetlands, and melaleuca trees were planted freely.
Floridians never knew what they were getting into.


The Word From the Pope
AS LANGUAGE MAvens gathered at the New York Public Library recently to hear a panel discuss "Words in the Next Millennium," a crisis was building in the greenroom.


Dad Grabs the Reins but, Wait, There's a Hitch
The Santa Clause  Eric Lloyd, Tim Allen Directed by John Pasquin PG 95 minutes


Strange Conduct Test for Justice Thomas; Committee's Failure
To the Editor:
Re "Apologies to Anita" (column, Nov. 5): I agree with Anna Quindlen's observations about the book "Strange Justice," but she stops short of stating the obvious.


Alletta Laird, William Tate
Alletta d'Andelot Laird, a daughter of Mrs.
Calhoun W. Wick of Wilmington, Del., and the late George W. Laird, was married yesterday to William Still Tate, a son of Mary C. Adams of Richmond and James P. Tate 3d of Roanoke, Va.
The Rev.
Luis Leon performed the ceremony at the Old Swedes' Episcopal Church in Wilmington.
Mrs.
Tate and her husband, both 24, graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father was an aeronautical engineer in Ridley Park, Pa., at the Boeing Company Her stepfather, Calhoun W. Wick, owns Wick &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in Wilmington.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
TURNING BACK THE SUN By Colin Thubron.
Harper Perennial, $12.
In an unnamed landscape that resembles Australia, a provincial doctor confronts racism as he attempts to treat a mysterious disease that turns white skin a deep brown.
Drought heightens tensions in the town, whose residents blame the aborigines for their suffering.
In 1992 our reviewer, David Sacks, called this novel "admirable, thought-provoking . . . urgent in its message."


Fresh Herbs Add a Hint of the Exotic to Desserts
MINT is losing its monopoly.
Other fresh green herbs that have long been associated with savory dishes, not sweets, have begun showing up on dessert plates in restaurants.
Chefs have found that some fresh herbs, notably rosemary, tarragon and basil, can provide a lovely, if unexpected, whiff of fragrance and flavor.
Home cooks can easily follow suit.
Why not garnish that apple tart with a sprig of tarragon, crush some rosemary into the lemon sorbet or add basil to an orange custard?


INSIDE
Harder Line on Russia?
The policy toward Russia may cause conflict between the White House and a Republican-dominated Congress.
News analysis, page 12.
Reprise of a Tenants' Fight
Tenants and others involved in the wars at the Belnord apartments in Manhattan say something about the building inspires venom.
Page 45.
Wilma Rudolph Dies at 54
Wilma Rudolph grew from a sickly child unable to walk into a statuesque sprinter who won three Olympic gold medals.
Page 53.


Stephanie Hairston, Cornelius Martin
THE Rev.
Cornelius Martin, 36, and Stephanie Hairston, 32, teach at Brown Academy, a public middle school in the Clinton Hills section of Newark, N.J., a forbidding, rundown neighborhood.
"The homes are neat inside, but the buildings are falling apart," said Miss Hairston, who teaches seventh grade.
"There's drugs in the stairwells, people getting shot and stabbed in the elevators. The violence goes on and on."
Mr.
Martin, who teaches special education at the school and is a co-pastor at the neighborhood's Unity Freedom Baptist Church, added, "It's so rough that the nursery school is in the police precinct."


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
I come from Ashkenazi Jewish stock and, not surprisingly, do better than most people on standardized tests.
Also not surprisingly (I suspect), I do less well than many people at, among other things, giving parties, playing basketball and making money.
Finally, I am a biology professor in a prestigious college.
Like most of my colleagues, I am increasingly encountering "learning disabled" students in my classrooms.
I have also spent time teaching in urban precollege settings.
Several weeks ago, I taught some classes in a Chapter 1 middle school, Chapter 1 being the designation of a school for children who score substantially less well than most on standardized exams.


A Medalist on His Mettle


The Future Governor And the One He Beat
Pressed for anecdotes about the colorful side of the man chosen to lead 18 million New Yorkers, friends are -- well, pressed.
They offer words like "plain," with no stigma attached.
Indeed, Governor-elect George E. Pataki seems to have cultivated just such an image.
As for the man he will succeed, associates say Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is, if not plain, perhaps less complex than he is often portrayed.
Still, they wonder at some of the choices he made and chances he passed up.


Jennifer Marcus, Brent Barbara
Jennifer Rebecca Marcus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Buzz Marcus of Boca Raton, Fla., and Brent Scott Barbara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Barbara of New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Richard Agler performed the ceremony at the Ritz Carlton in Palm Beach, Fla..
The bride, 25, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is the product publicity manager in the corporate communications department of the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York.
Her father, a former race car driver, retired as the owner of Buzz Marcus Glenside Motors, a Toyota dealership formerly in Glenside, Pa.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Worries over American citizens' declining I.Q.'s and the supposed consequences for the labor force baffle me.
Such fears seem predicated on the canard that in years past the brightest and the best were hired and promoted commensurate with their abilities.


At Work; A Fond Farewell to Big Government
THE message of the Democratic debacle last week, Washington pundits tell us, is that America dislikes Bill Clinton and hates liberalism and its evil twin, Big Government.
This may be so.
Certainly, inhabitants of the liberal sanctuaries accustomed to being out of step with the rest of the country are asking themselves how many times in one life they will have to ponder moving to Canada.
For now they are just pulling raincoats tight around their "Great Society counter-cultural McGovern-ik" T-shirts and poring over David McCullough's "Truman," looking for nuggets that might help the First Boomer.
President Clinton may be no liberal's idea of a liberal, but in the Damien-gone-respectable context of Newt Gingrich, even to the die-hards in Berkeley, Cambridge and New York, he must now look pretty good.
Is it churlish to note that many of the people who say they feel burdened by Big Government are in a position to be so because they, or their parents and grand-parents, were its principal beneficiaries?
Collective memory is an Etch-a-Sketch, easily erased.
Barely 60 years have passed since the Government's response to the Great Depression reshaped the American social compact, redistributing wealth and creating opportunities for the dispossessed and disenfranchised, or as the phrase of the time put it, "one third of the nation." True, as liberal critics would point out, Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal missed a lot of people but it did put the "upward" back in mobility for millions of Americans.
It also set a standard for government activism -- particularly in protecting the rights of workers -- that lasted until it ran into a stone wall called Reagan.


Journal; The Mother Next Door
How could she do it?
That was the question Americans asked incessantly upon hearing of Susan Smith's confession, as if its constant repetition, in the most shocked tones we could summon, would somehow keep us at a safe distance from a mother's most heinous crime.
But try as we might to suppress the ugly thoughts, they leapt up anyway.
In truth, we already know the answer to our own question -- no matter how incredulously we keep asking it.
Anyone who has ever felt rage -- at a child, a parent, a spouse, a vanished lover -- has at least entertained the fantasy of losing control, even if only in the involuntary form of a nightmare.
We feel the horror of Susan Smith's crime not because it's unimaginable but precisely because we can imagine it.
And once we do, we are left nervously contemplating the thin line that separates the unhinged few who act on such impulses from those of us who do not.


Commercial Property/Fifth Avenue; A Banking Corner Tries on a New Wardrobe
IN A MOVE that strengthens the renewed growth of middle-level retailing on Fifth Avenue in the mid-40's, Today's Man, the off-price clothing chain, is to open its third Manhattan superstore outlet next spring in the vacant former bank branch at 529 Fifth Avenue.
The two-level, 25,000-square-foot storefront site on the southeast corner of 44th Street, was vacated in 1989 by Bankers Trust.
Part of the space was leased to Chemical Bank in May 1991, but Chemical closed its A.T.M. branch there almost a year ago as a result of its merger with Manufacturers Hanover Trust.


Sun Becomes Shine
NIGHT BECOMES DAY Written and illustrated by Richard McGuire.
Unpaged.
New York:  Viking. $13.99. (All ages)


Albany Seeks Managed Care for Mentally Ill On Medicaid
In an effort to provide better, more reliable community-based care for people with psychiatric disorders, New York State says it will seek to create a managed-care network for 35,000 of the state's most seriously mentally ill who are covered by Medicaid.
Under the program, which would require a Federal Medicaid waiver, patients who enroll in the network would lose the freedom of choice they now enjoy.
But in return they would be assigned to a single mental-health provider, like a hospital or nonprofit agency, and would be guaranteed access to special housing programs, social workers and outpatient services.


Is Tracey for Real?
LETTERS FROM THE INSIDE By John Marsden. 146 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Patricia Gozum, Celso Sanchez
Patricia Carmen Gozum, a daughter of Dr.
Carmen Z. Gozum and Alfredo T. Gozum of Bethlehem, Pa., was married there yesterday to Celso William Sanchez, a son of Karen and Celso J. Sanchez of Highland Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Ronald Yarrosh performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Sanchez, 28, is a marketing manager at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a civil engineer at the Bethlehem Steel Corporation in Bethlehem.
Her mother is an emergency room physician at Redicare Medical Center in Easton, Pa.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.73
97.45
105.68
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5313
1.5145
1.6944
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3582
1.3560
1.3130
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5963
1.6160
1.4925
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$385.20
$383.50
$373.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Brooklyn Co-op Tries Acting Like a Condo
A CENTRAL goal of many co-op apartment buildings in New York City is to build up the level of owner-occupancy.
These are buildings that are owned by co-op corporations but are largely occupied by long-term rental tenants.
The collapse of the market for these apartments throughout the city in the late 80's and early 90's has caused financial problems for owner-residents and conversion sponsors and may even threaten the quality of housing and housing services.


Brothers Under the Skin
To the Editor:
It is certainly nothing new that composers of an older generation refuse to accept the changes brought by younger ones  [ "How Does a Young Composer Spell Success? Security," Oct. 23 ] .


Ruth and Loyal: A New York Love Story
IT is nearly noon, an unseasonably warm Friday, and all down Columbus Avenue people are dawdling in cafes and strolling the street.
But Dr.
Ruth Klebaner's and Loyal's strides are brisk, purposeful.
Dr.
Klebaner has things to do -- checks to deposit, groceries to buy.
Loyal, a golden retriever with soft, dark eyes and long, disheveled reddish hair that bounces with each step, is equally focused.
Her head is up and her body protectively slanted toward Dr.
Klebaner, who firmly grasps the dog's harness.
Together, the gait of their six legs is smooth.


Strange Conduct Test for Justice Thomas
To the Editor:
Re "Apologies to Anita" (column, Nov. 5): Anna Quindlen thinks Clarence Thomas is not qualified to be a Supreme Court Justice because he showed an interest in X-rated movies and Playboy centerfolds!
Most would not agree with her implication that an expressed interest in pornography equals sexual harassment.


Tally in Feinstein-Huffington Senate Race Is Still a Week Away
The official tally in the hotly contested Senate race between Dianne Feinstein and Michael Huffington will take at least a week to finish as another 600,000 absentee ballots are counted, the California Secretary of State's Office said on Friday.
By the latest count, Ms.
Feinstein, the Democratic incumbent, defeated Mr.
Huffington, a Republican Congressman from Santa Barbara, by 123,610 votes of 7.1 million cast, a spokeswoman for the Secretary of State's Office, Caren Daniels-Meade, said.


Sketches of Sound
JAZZ My Music, My People.
Written and illustrated by Morgan Monceaux. 64 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18. (All ages)


Jennifer E. Green, Clifford Seltzer
Jennifer Ellen Green, a daughter of Peter and Susan Green of Harrison, N.Y., and Clifford Seltzer, a son of Stephen and Sandy Seltzer of Roslyn Heights, L.I., are to be married today.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights.


50 Years Later, a Romantic What-If
In the summer of 1944, Allied forces gained a foothold in France, and the great proletarian class struggle continued in the Coops.
And Vera Shain, 13, a quiet, petite girl with wavy chestnut-colored hair, and Richard (Teykie) Treadwell Taylor, 14, a husky football player, fell in love.
"He was so handsome," she recalled. "I was crazy about him."


Using 'Gentle Persuasion' to Hurry Nature Along
DAVID HEADLEY has been forcing bulbs since he was 7 years old.
"I'd save up my allowance and buy one hyacinth bulb," said Mr.
Headley, who grew up on the Jersey Shore.
He is the former assistant director of Trees New York, a nonprofit group that plants and protects trees, and he left the city when it was buried in snow last February to direct the Buffalo and Erie County Botanical Gardens in Buffalo.


Battered but Unbowed, a Maestro Rebounds
HOW QUICKLY HAS Franz Welser-Most, a 34-year-old Austrian with a complicated personal history, risen to the top tier of international maestros?
A scant 10 years ago, he was the principal conductor of the Austrian Youth Orchestra, scarcely known outside his homeland.
He has already announced his resignation in 1996 from his first position as music director of a major orchestra, the London Philharmonic.
He takes up a similar post next season at the Zurich Opera, having conducted only 12 operas (at prestigious houses, to be sure).
Perhaps most remarkable, Mr.
Welser-Most, now in demand at leading American orchestras as well as the Berlin Philharmonic, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam, the Bavarian Radio Symphony and the Salzburg Festival, has yet to conduct several of the concert staples stockpiled by every budding maestro, like Dvorak's "New World" Symphony.


Up From Propaganda
IN a macabre way, the murder of Dmitri Kholodovthe 27-year-old reporter who was blown up in his newsroom by a booby-trapped briefcase -- testifies to the influence and impact of the Russian press these days, as it struggles honorably to do its job in a rather lawless time.
Mr.
Kholodov was investigating corruption in the Russian military, and someone obviously judged his work for Moskovsky Komsomolets to be extremely threatening.
He is the third Russian journalist to have been killed this year, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, and many more have been injured or assaulted, sometimes by the police.
Vladislav A. Starkov, editor of the mass circulation newspaper Argumenty i Fakty, puts an optimist's face on this news when he says, "If the press were not influential, these things wouldn't happen."


Mashburn Pours in 50 as Mavs Belt Bulls in Overtime
Mavericks 124, Bulls 120
Jamal Mashburn set a team record with 50 points and Jim Jackson added a career-high 38 as the visiting Dallas Mavericks beat the Chicago Bulls, 124-120, in overtime last night.


Sam Shepard, Storyteller
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN the East and West Coasts, at least part of "Simpatico," one of the season's most anticipated plays, was written in a moving truck by its driver.
That's Sam Shepard, who says he believes "all good writing comes out of aloneness." And you're not too likely to be interrupted driving along an Interstate.
"You have to do it on an open highway," explains the playwright during a lunch break for rehearsals of the drama, which opens tonight at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, with Mr.
Shepard directing.
"You wouldn't want to do it in New York City. But on Highway 40 West or some of those big open highways, you can hold the wheel with one hand and write with the other.


Beware the Kudzu Gang and All Its Kind
This is about outlaws.
Not the gun-toting kind, but the kind with roots, leaves and stems.
Invasive species, the professionals call them, and a rich field of study they offer.
By definition they are the sorts of plants that usurp the territory of others, rampaging out of control.
To many gardeners and landscapers, they seem attractive and worthwhile at first, and are introduced to an area on purpose.
But then reality takes over.
Those who live in Florida know this kind of story well.
The melaleuca tree was introduced from Australia because the tree was known to have considerable water-absorption capabilities.
It sounded like the perfect solution to drain some of what were considered nasty wetlands, and melaleuca trees were planted freely.
Floridians never knew what they were getting into.


Beth L. Smith, Joseph Mark Korn
Beth Lauren Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence E. Smith of Harrison, N.Y., is to be married today to Joseph Mark Korn, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Korn of Washington.
Cantor Bernard Dienstag is to officiate at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
The bride is the new-products manager at TKR Cable Communications, a national operator of cable systems, in Warren, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father retired as a senior partner in B. Smith &amp; Sons Furs in New York.
Her mother, Gloria Smith, is a sales agent at Weichert Realtors in Rye, N.Y.


Wall Street; Look Who's Selling Solomon-Page
WHAT more could investors ask?
A hot public offering, an affordable $4-a-unit price, and a company in a business that takes off in a good economy.
As if that wasn't incentive enough to scramble for shares of the Solomon-Page Group, an executive recruiting firm that went public last month, consider this deal-closer: some of the very brokers who were recommending the stock owned it in their own accounts.
A ringing endorsement if ever there was one.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


RICHARD FERBER
My son was successfully "Ferberized" 10 years ago.
Recently, my daughter, Carly, 11 months, began to wake and cry at night.
Our pediatrician said that Carly, too, needed to be Ferberized.
The technique works just as well now as it did then.
SUSAN NOVAK SMITH Fairfield, Conn.


Nov. 6-12; At a Snail's Pace
North Korea sent ripples of anxiety through Asia last Wednesday when Pyongyang radio reported that an important announcement was imminent.
With rumors flying of grave political developments, the Government made its disclosure: the leadership had ordered the construction of a new bridge and tunnel in Pyongyang.
The report provoked nervous, but inadvertently or not it carried a pithy message about the changes slowly working on the divided Korean peninsula.
After two years of confrontations over Pyongyang's suspected nuclear weapons program, the agreement reached with the United States last month just might have turned the focus in the desperately poor North from bombs to economic development.


'The Living' Recalls The Bubonic Plague
IT doesn't take a mind reader to figure out that "The Living," a play about the bubonic plague in 17th-century London, is not just a play about that.
The playwright, Anthony Clarvoe, has euphemisms to spare.
A "concerned neighbor" is really the local doomsayer who decrees that a patient has dropsy, apoplexy -- or has "fallen ill" with the nameless fatal affliction.


From Our 'Get a Life' Department
To the Editor:
With reference to "The Good Life After Goldman" (Oct. 16), am I supposed to admire these three individuals because at long last they've discovered there's more to life than making money?
Let's face it, these are mediocre people with mediocre minds, but because they've made a lot of money, they are noticed (and they get special treatment).
I suggest you follow up this article with others in a similar vein, and make it a regular feature entitled "Life Styles of the Rich and Self-Indulgent." DAVID JUNKER  San Francisco, Oct. 16


Shoulder Pain Sidelines Jeter
DEREK JETER's rapid ascent to the majors has hit a minor snag as the Yankees announced yesterday that the 20-year-old shortstop had been removed from the Arizona Fall League because of a shoulder injury.
Jeter, who played in 154 games in four leagues this season, had complained of soreness in his right shoulder since last month and Dr.
STUART HERSHON examined him Wednesday and detected minor inflammation.


Now, a Live Report From Somebody or Other
THEY TURN UP ON EVERY local newscast in the country: reporters speaking live at the faraway scene of a natural disaster, a plane crash, a big criminal case.
They look and sound exactly like the reporters from the local station, even to the point of finishing their reports with the familiar sign-off, "Back to you in the studio."
But there's one difference.
No one in that city has ever seen them covering the fire downtown or the children's Christmas pageant at Our Lady of Perpetual Help School.
There's a good reason for that.
These reporters do not work for the local affiliate.
They are instead a new breed of television newsperson: generic reporters.


2 Inventive Women Targeting Youths
THE telephone next to Carol Coleman's bed rings at 2 A.M., waking her from a sound sleep.
A caller from Idaho or Iowa or Maine asks her to "play 'Misty' for me." Ms.
Coleman is not a disk jockey; she is an entrepreneur and mother of three children who has chosen to run a business out of her home -- a balancing act that can be a bit chaotic and full of surprises.
Ms.
Coleman has an 800 number to help with this business, which she and another resident, Anne Herman, started in 1991 and, unfortunately, the number closely resembles the number for the request line of a radio station with a wide broadcast range.


Sports of The Times; The Tyson, Olajuwon Connection
AS sports' new odd couple, it's as if they're living in different apartments but with the same landLord: Hakeem Olajuwon, the towering basketball player, and Mike Tyson, the jailed boxer.
Early last week, Olajuwon was contacted at his Barakaat Holdings office in Houston by some of Tyson's people.


Shopping Center Threatens An Avenue Worth Saving
To the Editor:
The groundbreaking for the Atlantic Center in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, has passed, but one issue involving the huge complex, anchored by a 60,000-square-foot Pathmark, remains unresolved.
The people of South Portland Avenue are still threatened by the plan to designate this narrow, residential street ("avenue" is a misnomer) as the only two-way thoroughfare for the entire project.
This guarantees that we would be inundated by around-the-clock truck and car traffic.


Cashing Checks
To the Editor: My wife and I recently went on a trip to Germany and the Netherlands.
Before we went we purchased Dutch guilders and German marks from a local bank.
We also purchased considerable American Express traveler's checks in German marks.
Once we arrived in Hamburg, we were dismayed to find that it was very difficult to cash the traveler's checks.
Restaurants and shops would not take them.
Most banks, including a Citibank, would not cash them.
We cashed one at a Postal Exchange at a 12 percent discount.


Is 3-D Imax the Future or Another Cinerama?
FOR A HUNDRED YEARS, THE cinema and technology have been locked in a tight embrace.
Sometimes the relationship has been a case of misguided passion.
Believe it or not, Smell-o-vision once seemed pretty sexy.
At other times, infatuation blossomed into love and marriage.
Sound and color swept cinema off its feet, and the change was permanent.
Big-screen 3-D has been an on-again, off-again affair.
For the moment, it's on again.
On Friday, Sony will open the doors to a new theater complex on the Upper West Side of Manhattan that will include 12 traditional theaters and, as its crown jewel, a theater that will use 480 of its 600 seats to show 3-D Imax films on a screen 80 feet tall.
It will be the first commercial 3-D Imax theater in the United States.


TAKING HAITI
Alex Webb's photograph of the United States Army's "invasion" of Haiti, with soldiers in full battle gear, and the cameramen in the line of fire to get the best picture, will be ranked as a classic of the 1990's -- alongside pictures of the news media following the O. J. Simpson Bronco chase ("Taking Haiti," Oct. 23).
However, journalists should use the correct adjectives when describing these events.
The invasion was in reality an excursion, and the Bronco chase was more like a procession.
JOHN O. HELGESEN Southold, L.I.


Nov. 6-12; Holding onto Their Land


Streetscapes/Harperly Hall; Restoring an Arts and Crafts Co-op Masterpiece
THERE are two ways to restore a building: Establish a big budget and spend it all at once, or undertake separate projects a little at a time over years, even decades.
The co-op shareholders at Harperly Hall, a 1911 Arts and Crafts masterpiece at 64th Street and Central Park West, have chosen the second path, and the history of their 11-year effort demonstrates the patience -- and money -- that a complicated building can require.
In 1909, a group headed by the architect Henry Wilhelm Wilkinson bought the northwest corner of 64th Street and Central Park West to build a co-op "suitable for artists' studios," according to their corporate papers.


The View From The Former Top
SPECIAL TRUST By Robert C. McFarlane with Zofia Smardz.
Illustrated. 399 pp.
New York:  Cadell &amp; Davies. $25.


Churches Raise Funds By Staying in Touch
To the Editor:
Those who raise funds for churches have recognized for years that people give greater support to organizations they are more familiar with and with which they are more involved (news article, Nov. 6).
However, your article never mentions a primary difference between the Assemblies of God and the Roman Catholic Church.


Margaret F. Mudd, Fulvio V. Dobrich
Margaret Farris Mudd, a managing director in the emerging markets division of Chemical Bank, was married yesterday to Fulvio Vladimir Dobrich, a founder and the owner of DLF Inc., specialists in the trading of international debt obligations.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
The bride, 39, is a graduate of Manhattanville College.
She is a daughter of Vivienne Crichton Mudd and Robert Clayton Mudd of St.
Louis.
Her father, a career diplomat, retired from the State Department. .


Midtown East: The Lap of Luxury
DAWAT ** (212) 355-7555; 210 East 58th Street; $$; all major credit cards


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
A few days after you published Malcolm W. Browne's quite favorable review of three new books that attribute intelligence primarily to genetic factors, I came across a discussion of intelligence testing in William Broad and Nicholas Wade's 1982 book, "Betrayers of the Truth." Mr.
Broad and Mr.
Wade list "three cardinal principles" for the use of intelligence tests, as laid down by the tests' inventor, Alfred Binet: "Binet's Rule 1 was: The scores do not define anything innate or permanent. Rule 2: The scale is a rough guide for identifying and helping learning-disabled children; it is not a way of measuring normal children. Rule 3: Low scores don't mean a child is innately incapable."


DUMBING DOWN
The bell curve is certainly a slippery slope these days.
Robin Marantz Henig's Hers column ("Dumbing Down," Oct. 23) illustrates, in a variety of ways, the kind of black-and-white thinking that passes for discourse on education.
While it is possible for schools to hold back quicker learners through poorly planned heterogeneous grouping, it is equally possible to create narrowly focused students by accelerating their achievement in homogeneous groups.


Agreement in San Francisco Newspaper Strike
San Francisco's bitter and sometimes violent newspaper strike appeared near an end as management and a conference of eight unions announced a tentative agreement early today.
Members of the unions are expected to meet on Sunday to ratify the proposed five-year pact.
Union officials said they expected that the two newspapers affected by the strike, The Chronicle and The Examiner, would be published with union labor early next week in their full sizes and at full circulations.
The strike was the first at the papers in 25 years.


Now Come the Holidays: Discomfort or Joy?
THE elections are over, so let's get serious. We are entering . . . the HOLIDAY ZONE.
"My busiest time," said Caryl Ehrlich, who is a one-on-one counselor for people with eating disorders and other habits they want to change.
"There's such fantasy about the holidays. We think that everyone else is surrounded by loving family while we're alone in our isolation and depression. Especially here in the city, where so many of us came to do what we wanted, and to hide our loneliness.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
In response to Malcolm W. Browne's review of books on race and I.Q., Will Pflaum has written a letter to The Times Book Review that was also distributed on the E-mail network of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society, a discussion group composed mainly of evolutionary scientists.
Mr.
Pflaum repudiates racial groupings as they appear in "Race, Evolution, and Behavior" and "The Bell Curve," and also demands a fully worked-out theoretical rationale for racial differences before we even begin to consider the empirical evidence.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
There is a dimension that is missing from your intriguing examination of Bennington College and its president, Elizabeth Coleman.
Your photographs played a phalanx of sympathetic-looking former faculty members against a stark, "the cheese stands alone" portrait of an embattled administrator.
But there is another side of Coleman, as an educator.
I attended the freshman-year program at the New School for Social Research in 1972, when Coleman was both the program's dean and my most challenging teacher.
In her art of fiction seminar, she taught with passion and intensity.
She was demanding and always engaged.


Anti-Indonesia Protest at U.S. Embassy
In an incident that raises questions about the security of American diplomatic outposts, 29 unarmed demonstrators climbed over a fence into the United States Embassy compound here on Saturday and have refused to leave in a protest of Indonesia's policies in East Timor.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said at a news briefing on Saturday that Washington has "no plans to throw them out."


A Chef's Sure Hand, French Style
IN 1986, when we first found Ondine in Danbury, it was just beginning to hum, striving to overcome an edge-of-town location and the reputation of previous businesses that had occupied the premises.
In spite of these handicaps it was obvious that Dieter Thiel, the chef-owner of Ondine, knew how to cook.
The question was, would he persevere?
Now, eight years later, Ondine is not just humming, it sings lustily, in its food, menu and atmosphere.
The decor now evokes memories of French country inns: fresh flowers, candles, Staffordshire dinnerware, comfortable plush chairs and a green and white rose motif.


Speaking Of the Devil
IF you tromp around Moscow enough in winter, you'll want a bit of deviltry, or at least some decent hot tea.
After you've done Red Square, seen the "smoked fish" (as young Russians call Mr. Lenin's corpse) and become tired of running into other foreigners in the hotels, take a walk through the lovely square around Patriarch's Pond.
Now one of the most desirable neighborhoods in central Moscow, after serving as a kind of Latin Quarter for students in the last century, the square is a good place to relax, read and meet strangers.
On wintry days, there is ice skating.


Trip to Old Trout Haunt Is Bountiful in Waders
Returning to his old haunts, an angler should be prepared for change.
More than 35 years ago, Vic Pomiecko and I decided to fly fish all of the remote trout ponds in west-central New Hampshire, and Cole Pond in Enfield became one of our favorites.
Other anglers visited it so rarely that we began to regard it as our own private preserve.


'Garbage!': Municipal History From the Bottom Up
"THIS discussion . . ." said Mierle Laderman Ukeles, standing under an arch bristling with 6,000 worn-out work gloves.
She paused and looked gently at her audience of half a dozen volunteer tour guides.
"This public discussion, with deep learning that surrounds you, is on the question of," she paused again, choosing her words, "whose city, whose dirt."
"This public discussion" is the latest exhibition at the New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue.
For the next three months or so, the library's Gottesman Hall -- with its marble columns and carved wooden ceiling -- will be filled with the sights, sounds and, yes, the smells, of garbage.
That all this tossed-away banality has been done up and gleefully packaged as "Garbage! The History and Politics of Trash in New York City" is no more unlikely than Ms.
Ukeles herself.
She is the artist-in-residence of the city's Sanitation Department, and of the Fresh Kills landfill to boot, and the arch of gloves is her contribution to the show.


What's a Sunrise Without Chickens?
MY HOUSE Written and illustrated by Lisa Desimini.
Unpaged.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $15.95. (Ages 2 to 5)


Trouble in Paradise, 2 Wide Views; How the Belnord Battle Took Shape Along Classical Lines
In 1975, Thomas Bitullo-Martin attained many a New Yorker's fantasy: an eight-room, rent-stabilized apartment in the Belnord, the landmark Upper West Side apartment house.
His joy at the find lasted three years, until his refrigerator and freezer broke down, touching off 16 years of warfare with his landlady, Lillian Seril.
"She wouldn't fix them, wouldn't let me fix them and wouldn't let me replace them," he said.
"Eventually, she moved up a refrigerator from the basement that was 20 years old, that was rusted and mildewed, that had roaches in it, and it turned out it was short-circuited, too."


On a Peaceful Sound, Memories of Normandy
MOST of the assembling passengers were unaware they were about to board a Green Monster.
After all, it looked like a benign white whale, and it was, in fact, a ferryboat.
But to 42 men at the New London docks, it was the old LST-510 and, like each of them, a survivor of the Normandy invasion at Omaha Beach on June 6, 1944.
For those of its original crew gathered for a 50th reunion, it was the first glimpse of their Green Monster -- and of each other -- in half a century.


Islamic Guard Unit Ousted
Under pressure from a Brooklyn Assemblyman, state housing officials have decided not to renew a building-security contract held by a unit of the Nation of Islam.
But outraged residents, along with the buildings' management, have vowed to fight the move, saying the company had greatly increased safety in the Coney Island housing project.


Jill Golden, Joshua Tarnow
Jill Ann Golden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Golden of Meadowbrook, Pa., was married last evening to Joshua Robert Tarnow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Tarnow of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Fuchs performed the ceremony at Temple Rodeph Shalom in Philadelphia.


Editorial Notebook; A Supreme Court Exhibition
The hype surrounding "Strange Justice," the new book that castigates Clarence Thomas and the Senate committee that confirmed him, has obscured an interesting development: Mr.
Thomas's campaign to bypass his critics by appealing directly to what he seems to view as his natural constituency, the conservative black middle class.
The campaign has been conducted mainly below radar, through private receptions like the one in Chicago for a former welfare mother who put several children through college.
But late last month, Mr.
Thomas convened a more public gathering of 35 African-Americans, including some from the black press, for three hours of off-the-record meetings at the Supreme Court.
The guests were plucked from the Rolodex of the Washington talk-show host Armstrong Williams, one of Justice Thomas's closest friends.
Mr.
Williams invited a select few to a special meeting in the Justice's chambers.
The Thomas camp asserts that race had nothing to do with who was invited to the meetings.
Given what transpired, that is difficult to believe.


Job Goes Unfilled And Youths Suffer
At first, after Kelly Vilar quit her job as Community Board 11's youth coordinator, the spot went unfilled because of a Dinkins administration mandate that laid-off city workers be given hiring preference.
Of the more than 100 people interviewed -- former sanitation workers, former Health Department workers, and former child welfare caseworkers -- none passed muster.
But then, last year, the Department of Youth Services cut financing for the job.
In Catch-22 fashion, the department said, the money was revoked because the position had not been filled.


Stephanie Gruber And Peter Ross
Stephanie Ann Gruber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Gruber of Woodbury, L.I., was married last evening to Peter Jonathan Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Ross of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.


Would You Swap Bodies With A Baby
THE DAYDREAMER By Ian McEwan.
Illustrated by Anthony Browne. 192 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $14. (Ages 10 and up)


The Election and the Kremlin
A Republican-dominated Congress in Washington is expected to create new strains in the Russian-American relationship, which is already showing stress as Boris N. Yeltsin's Government moves toward a more centrist, nationalist position at home and abroad.
The shift in Mr.
Yeltsin's stance has been due in large part to his own legislative opposition, which has taken strong nationalist stands on Bosnia, Iraq, NATO and other issues of concern to Washington.


Tough Guy In Love
To the Editor:
To see humanity and goodness revealed by a killer in "Pulp Fiction" was certainly not what I expected.
Nor did I expect to see a love scene that would make me want a relationship just like the one between Bruce Willis and Maria de Medeiros.


On a Budget; Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Income and Marriage
To the Editor:
Re "When a Woman Earns Like a Man" (The Week in Review, Nov. 6): According to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, women's earnings have risen to 77 percent of men's, significantly more than your 70 percent.
In addition, nearly one-third of working married women earn more than their spouses, another rising proportion.


For Rebel Bosnia Muslisms, Life in Chicken Coops
Where 60,000 chickens once clucked and fed, thousands of Bosnia's ragged dispossessed now mingle in the mud, lugging containers of water and bundles of soiled clothing through a landscape awash with sewage and misery.
They are Bosnian Muslims, these children playing amid stinking piles of garbage, these women crouched in vast chicken coops stirring soup over makeshift fires, these men chopping firewood in the gloom, yet the distinction between their lot and that of animals is not easy to discern.


Once Upon a Time In Prague
THE THREE GOLDEN KEYS Written and illustrated by Peter Sis.
Unpaged.
New York: Doubleday. $19.95 until Dec. 31; $22.50 thereafter. (All ages)


1 Million Italians in Piazza to Protest Government Budget
More than one million Italians filled the ancient squares of Rome today to protest an austerity-budget proposal that the conservative Government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is to submit to Parliament on Monday.
Independent commentators described the rally as the largest in Rome since the end of World War II, with crowds jamming the Piazza del Popolo, Circus Maximus and the Square of Saint John Lateran as well as smaller piazzas.


I Am the Center of the Universe
A TEENY TINY BABY Written and illustrated by Amy Schwartz.
Unpaged.
New York: Orchard Books. $15.95. (Ages 2 to 6)


Ramsey Murray, Pen Alexander
Sarah Ramsey Murray, a cartographer at the National Geographic Society in Washington, was married yesterday to Dr.
Edmund Pendelton Alexander, the chief of cardiothoracic surgery at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
John R. Price performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Annapolis, Md.
Mrs.
Alexander, who is known as Ramsey, is the daughter of Francis W. Murray 3d of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and the late Sarah W. Murray.
She is the stepdaughter of Shirley F. Murray.
The bride graduated from Briarcliff College.
Her father, now retired, was the director of private banking, in New York, at the Bank of America.


Data Bank/November 13, 1994
Data Bank/November 13, 1994
Producer Prices
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
-0.5
-0.5
0.6
U.S. Productivity
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
Percent change
2.7
-2.1
2.9
Consumer Borrowing
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
14.6
21.3
9.6
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 28
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
In thousands
323
324
329
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 10
Nov. 4
Oct. 28
Rate in percent
5.22
5.17
4.99
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.64
5.61
5.42
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
8.14
8.15
7.95
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.04
$18.76
$18.23


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $375,000
139 West 13th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,312-sq.-ft. co-op in a brick town house; dining area, den, fireplace, roof deck; maintenance $704, 71% tax deductible, listed at $399,000, 4 1/2 years on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman; Nannette Smith-Gordon/IBC)


Fresh Herbs Add a Hint of the Exotic to Desserts
MINT is losing its monopoly.
Other fresh green herbs that have long been associated with savory dishes, not sweets, have begun showing up on dessert plates in restaurants.
Chefs have found that some fresh herbs, notably rosemary, tarragon and basil, can provide a lovely, if unexpected, whiff of fragrance and flavor.
Home cooks can easily follow suit.
Why not garnish that apple tart with a sprig of tarragon, crush some rosemary into the lemon sorbet or add basil to an orange custard?


No Headline
"Why should people expect politics to be any different from the rest of culture? It's not as if politics is deteriorating but everybody's watching Shakespeare." BARNEY FRANK, Democratic Representative from Massachusetts, on the nature of campaigns.  [ 20:6. ]


Just Try Dancing to These Soundtracks
LISTEN to the soundtracks for the movies "Pulp Fiction" (MCA) and "Ed Wood" (Hollywood), and you'll hear something a bit out of the ordinary: dialogue.
And not just a few lines to move the plot along, but entire swaths.
The "Pulp Fiction" soundtrack, besides the music, uses seven clips of dialogue, including some of the most memorable scenes from the movie in full, including gunshots.
The "Ed Wood" soundtrack contains Martin Landau doing Bela Lugosi's monologue from "Bride of the Monster" ("hunted, despised, living like an animal") and other classic and campy scenes.
Perhaps the Ed Wood movie "Plan 9 From Outer Space" (Performance) was more influential than imagined.
Its soundtrack is a complete transcript of the film, with all the so-bad-it's-good dialogue.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne cites Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray's argument that they can prove that intelligence tests are not systematically biased against blacks because "if the S.A.T. is biased against blacks, it will underpredict their college performance." Since their examination of "hundreds of studies" reveals that such tests do correctly predict performance, they conclude that these tests are therefore not biased.


Vietnam: Behind a Red-Tape Curtain
THE big day had finally arrived.
The hotel had set out its finest china and crystal.
There were starched linen napkins around a centerpiece of tiny American and Vietnamese flags.
Everything seemed to be ready for the inaugural meeting of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ho Chi Minh City, the city still remembered by most of these American business people and bankers as Saigon.
It was to be a day of celebration and optimism last April, just three months after President Clinton lifted a 19-year-old American trade embargo on Vietnam.


In America; A Simple Case of Fraud
The beauty of Ronald Reagan, Newt Gingrich and so many other Republicans is that they make it all sound so simple.
If the Republicans can reduce taxes, increase defense spending, balance the budget, get people off welfare, reconstitute the American family and accelerate the current reduction in crime -- if they can do all that -- they deserve to be in power.
God bless them.
They should be running the world.


A Choir in Reunion Sings Schubert Mass
THE 1994-95 season is a time for nostalgia and celebration," says Richard Coffey, who conducted the first concert of the South Church Choral Society in November of 1974, and continues to preside as music director of its successor ensemble, Connecticut Choral Artists (the group is also known as Concora). "The mission then, as now," he says, "is to perpetuate, and perform with excellence, choral music of the highest quality for the broadest possible audience."
Tonight's 7:30 program in New Britain proclaims the anniversary in grand style.
Not only does it list Schubert's Mass in G, one of the works performed at the choir's 1974 debut, but it sets up a festive reunion, with former singers in the group coming from all over the country to swell Concora's ranks for the post-intermission group of pieces by Barber, Poulenc and other composers.
Larry Allen, the organist at the choir's inaugural concert 20 years ago, will be at the console again this evening, the music followed by a reception.
For details of future Concora events, call 224-5700.


The Cruelest Game
THE LAST SHOT City Streets, Basketball Dreams.
By Darcy Frey. 230 pp.
Boston: A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Vaulting Ambition
To the Editor:
I have generally not disliked Madonna  [ "Madonna's Return to Innocence," Oct. 23 ] .
In fact, I've enjoyed much of her work over the years, particularly in the early 1980's, when her emerging persona was authentically interesting.


Taking Life, Twice
To the Editor:
I felt a chill when I learned a jury had recommended the execution of Paul Hill, convicted of murdering a Florida abortion doctor.
The case lacks the ambiguities in many capital punishment cases.
There is no doubt the person convicted was the murderer.
And Mr.
Hill is not black.


Escape From Puberty
THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR By David Grossman.
Translated by Betsy Rosenberg. 343 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


After Happily Ever After
A PART OF THE SKY By Robert Newton Peck. 163 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
THE BEST SCHOOL YEAR EVER By Barbara Robinson. 117 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
JULIE By Jean Craighead George.
Illustrated by Wendell Minor. 226 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


Fresh Herbs Add a Hint of the Exotic to Desserts
MINT is losing its monopoly.
Other fresh green herbs that have long been associated with savory dishes, not sweets, have begun showing up on dessert plates in restaurants.
Chefs have found that some fresh herbs, notably rosemary, tarragon and basil, can provide a lovely, if unexpected, whiff of fragrance and flavor.
Home cooks can easily follow suit.
Why not garnish that apple tart with a sprig of tarragon, crush some rosemary into the lemon sorbet or add basil to an orange custard?


Left to Die, the South Bronx Rises From Decades of Decay
When Fausto Rodriguez, his wife and three children fled East Harlem two years ago in search of a house in a quieter, safer neighborhood, they headed across the river.
Not the Hudson -- the Harlem.
Not to the suburban retreats of New Jersey -- to the South Bronx.


Raising Funds To Preserve A Way of Life
The Historic Hudson Valley group holds a dinner-dance at the Rainbow Room, Nov. 8.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne cites me as saying that American I.Q.'s have fallen about five points since 1900.
If I said that, I was wrong.
Average American I.Q.'s have, if anything, remained stable, if not grown, over that period.
He goes on to cite the decline in S.A.T. scores between 1962 and 1990.
But such a change cannot be hereditary.
Hereditary changes occur across generations; the period 1962-90 is within a single generation.
DANIEL R. VINING JR.
Philadelphia


At Play in Old Miami Beach
(The budgets for the $500 weekends covered accommodations, sightseeing, food and drink, but not the cost of transportation to and from the cities.)
THERE is nothing subtle about the charms of Old Miami Beach, and nothing particularly authentic.
Imported palm trees and trucked-in sand line the shore just opposite the blocks and blocks of pastel Art Deco hotels and outdoor cafes that are packed, in the middle of the afternoon, with people drinking liquor and smoking up a storm, listening to piped-in Edith Piaf and Nat (King) Cole.


G.O.P. Strength Denies Cuomo A Close Finish; Suburbs Give Pataki Bounce
VOTERS in the New York City suburbs played a pivotal role in George E. Pataki's victory last week, sending him to the Executive Mansion with a margin of victory that far exceeded his statewide performance.
Interviews with 379 voters leaving polling places on Long Island and in the seven counties immediately north of New York City indicated that 60 percent voted for Mr.
Pataki, compared to 38 percent for Mario M. Cuomo, whose 12 years in Albany came to an abrupt end.


Behind the Macy Thanksgiving Parade
REMOVED from this city's trendy boutiques and sidewalk cafes is a warehouse, a former factory where once Tootsie Rolls trundled off an assembly line.
Today the only clue of what might lie behind the building's massive roll-up door is some scattered confetti on the ground.
But come Thanksgiving morning, just after midnight, the building's contents will be revealed when the large pulleys crank open the door of the 45-foot-high workroom and out will roll a convoy of floats and folded balloons headed to New York City.
By 9 A.M., that day it is expected some two million people will line up to be bedazzled as the re-assembled convoy winds its way through the canyons of the city, while another 35 million will watch on television.


It's 5, 4, 3, 2, Graham: Bring On the Cardinals!
Every Thursday until last week, Giants quarterback Dave Brown would meet the press.
As a cast of seemingly hundreds crammed themselves in front of Brown's locker, Kent Graham sometimes could not help staring.
Watching the spectacle from his nearby locker, Graham never felt envious or jealous; in fact, he would sometimes laugh and say that he was glad Brown was the one having to deal with the news media and not him.


An Epidemic Of Youth In Middle Age
LIKE a pugilistic Norma Desmond, George Foreman eased on a pair of old velvet trunks last week and headed for the prize ring, a bald and flabby trouper of a certain age out to avenge the darkest night of his youth.
In some fleeting way, Mr.
Foreman also set out to strike a blow for the relaxed-jeans generation, the baby boomers who are now hoping that with modern medicine and some latter-day Ponce de Leon in their corner, they will stay forever vital and young, defying gravity and the years.
With his knockout victory in the 10th round over a stunned opponent a generation younger, Mr.
Foreman became the latest god in the pantheon of the middle-aged -- celebrated and ordinary -- who are defying conventional boundaries of age.


Beware the Kudzu Gang and All Its Kind
This is about outlaws.
Not the gun-toting kind, but the kind with roots, leaves and stems.
Invasive species, the professionals call them, and a rich field of study they offer.
By definition they are the sorts of plants that usurp the territory of others, rampaging out of control.
To many gardeners and landscapers, they seem attractive and worthwhile at first, and are introduced to an area on purpose.
But then reality takes over.
Those who live in Florida know this kind of story well.
The melaleuca tree was introduced from Australia because the tree was known to have considerable water-absorption capabilities.
It sounded like the perfect solution to drain some of what were considered nasty wetlands, and melaleuca trees were planted freely.
Floridians never knew what they were getting into.


Unhand Me, You Cad!
AT THIS POINT, there is only one good thing to say about Capt.
James Hewitt, the cavalry officer who wooed Princess Diana and blabbed to the world.
With one audacious stroke, he has brought back the cad.
When Hewitt sold his story to The Daily Express in March, then compounded his offense by telling all to the author of "Princess in Love," newspaper columnists and editorial writers had to reach back a generation for the right word to characterize him.
He was a cad.
There was no other way to put it, although one magazine, in a 90's update, called him "supercad." Overnight, a seemingly vanished male type sprang back into life, if only for a brief, nostalgic moment.


Blame Stressful Student Life, Not Cornell Gorges, for Suicides
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 5 news article on the suicides at Cornell University never confirms or denies if the suicide rate at Cornell is higher than at other universities.
I suppose it is easier to invent some sort of mythological danger in the gorges on the Cornell campus, or in the weather, or the cows, than to analyze what drives a young person to take his or her own life.


Correction
A foreign exchange listing in the Travel Watch column last Sunday misstated last year's rate for the Italian lira.
One dollar was worth 1,585 lire.


Hey, Syracuse Did Make It to the 47 Once
For what it's worth, Boston College trounced Syracuse today with more conviction and more points than Miami did a week ago in the Carrier Dome.
Today's Eagle victory was 31-0 and last Saturday's Hurricane spanking of the Orange was 26-7.
The relevance has to do with the Big East standing, the final conference game, which will have Boston College at Miami on Nov. 26, and the bowl-game selections.


A Voice Raised for Freedom


Exotica in a Chinese Banquet
LONG ISLAND has many fine restaurants, but few unusual ones.
A good meal is not difficult to find but a very different one is.
Interesting dining experiences are rare, and exotic ones are even rarer.
But they do exist.
A goodly number of diners of Chinese background and a trickle of other adventurous eaters have found such a dinner at the Imperial Wok, on Marie Street in Hicksville (933-8688).
It is called a Fong-Wei or local specialty banquet.
This multicourse meal features the dishes of Yunnan province in southwestern China.


Wilma Rudolph, Star of the 1960 Olympics, Dies at 54
Wilma Rudolph, who grew from a sickly child unable to walk into a statuesque athlete of 20 who won three gold medals as a sprinter in the 1960 Olympics in Rome, died yesterday at her home in Brentwood, Tenn., near Nashville.
She was 54.
Her sister, Charlene Rudolph, said Rudolph learned in July that she had a malignant brain tumor.


Palm Bech On Wry
I shudder to think what it says about my character, but when I'm on vacation there are two things I like to do, almost to the exclusion of all others.
Number one, I like to drive around fancy neighborhoods, and number two, I like to browse through expensive stores.
And this is why I like Palm Beach so much.
These are not only the best things to do in Palm Beach; they are virtually the only things to do in Palm Beach.
Most normal, sensible, well-educated people wouldn't dream of going to Palm Beach for a vacation.
It's thought to be expensive, snobbish, boring, formal -- and it is.
But for the arrivistes, the social climbers, the would-be novelists, those among us who live in one room in the East Village but still thrill to each issue of Architectural Digest, it is perhaps the most exciting place on earth.
It's our Disney World.


A Tree Grows
Stay at a hotel and get a tree?
Well, sort of.
Through March 17, 1995, guests who book at the full rate at the Phoenix Park Hotel in Washington will have a tree planted in their name in the 1,752-acre Phoenix Park in Dublin.
The new trees, which include ash, oak, lime, beech, sycamore and horse chestnut, are part of an effort to restore the park, home to deer and some 60 bird species.
Dignitaries including George Bush and Pope John Paul II have already planted trees in the park.
Guests will receive a certificate signed by the Lord Mayor of Dublin showing the site of their plantings.
Rooms at the Phoenix Park Hotel, 520 North Capitol Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20001. (202) 630-6900, start at $169.


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; Homemade Skate Park
Portland, Ore., had two skateboard parks -- the one that the city built for $41,000 (which closed after two years for lack of insurance) and the good one that a bunch of skaters threw together under a bridge.
Portland's skateboarders built the second one illegally with damaged sacks of concrete on a vacant lot once frequented by drug dealers.
The result (below) is a splotchy maze of moguls and bowls near Burnside Street, a major thoroughfare.
Now four years old, Burnside has impressed the City Council.
"The Council admired the skaters' 'just do it' attitude," explains a spokeswoman.


NOV. 6-12: A Better Harvest; The Number of U.S. Farms Falls Below 2 Million
From Thomas Jefferson to Grant Wood, Americans have thought of their farmers as something special: stolid, valuable, virtuous.
Now they are so few.
Last week the Census Bureau announced that the number of American farms had dipped below 2 million for the first time since 1850, when Millard Fillmore was President.
The shrinkage has been a long-term trend caused mainly by more efficient production and the economic contretemps of the early to mid-1980's that forced many farmers into bankruptcy.
But if the 1,925,300 farms are much fewer than in past years, the farmers operating them are much better at it than they were a scant decade ago when declining land values, huge crop surplus and plunging commodity prices touched off the largest round of foreclosures since the Great Depression.
Lower interest rates, the salutary effects on exports of a declining dollar and an economic recovery in the third world, and bumper crops helped revive many farms .


How It Works: Guide-Dog School for People and Dogs
THE Seeing Eye and Guiding Eyes for the Blind, the most renowned guide-dog schools in the New York area, extensively interview prospective owners.
Guiding Eyes will send a representative to the home of anyone living too far to visit; the Seeing Eye often does, too.
During training, students live on campus, eating in the dining rooms and sleeping in the private or shared bedrooms.
A first-time guide-dog training at Seeing Eye takes 28 days; subsequent trainings take 21 days.
The training at Guiding Eyes lasts 26 days for first-time and veteran dog users.
At the Seeing Eye, the cost of the dog, training, room, board and transportation to Morristown, N.J., from anywhere in the United States is $150.
Training for subsequent dogs costs $50.
Guiding Eyes charges nothing for its dogs and trainings, though students pay for their own transportation.
If a student cannot afford the Seeing Eye's training or transportation to Guiding Eyes, the schools will cover the expenses.
Each school will send out trainers if problems arise.
Both are nonprofit agencies with endowments; the Seeing Eye's is $110 million, Guiding Eyes' $8 million.
Guiding Eyes also provides dogs for and trains blind people who have additional handicaps.


The County's Lure: More for the Money
WHAT induces companies to move from New York City to Westchester?
Is it because of the city's problems?
Tax reasons?
Or is it simply because a company's chief executive lives in Westchester?
Perhaps it is a quality-of-life decision.
Those may be contributing factors, said William V. Cuddy Jr., senior vice president and principal of Rostenberg-Doern Company, a commercial brokerage in Purchase.
But the bottom line, Mr.
Cuddy said, is that space in Westchester is a better buy.


Since 1854, Tea Treasures
PICTURE a discreet wood-paneled facade in the Marais, the most interesting and spiciest part of old Paris.
Should you open the front door and enter Mariage Freres, you can count on warming yourself all the way to your heart.
This is no ordinary tearoom; the Mariage family, which has been trading in tea since 1660, maintains a house of tea that is a treasure chest, even in this city of plenty.
In its front room and store, opened in 1854, shelves are stacked with glowing dark tins and boxes filled with 450 kinds of tea.
The rich mixture of scents has an edge of bergamot.
You pass all manner of tea services from East and West, bolstered with hampers, infusers and strainers.
Then the back room beckons, a creamy yellow space, filled with rattan chairs and vases of exotic greens, where waiters mill around in floppy white linen suits, regardless of the season.
The mood is as discreet as tea itself.
By midafternoon, the chatter of Parisian shoppers, trysting couples and Japanese tourists creates a hum under the soft classical music.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Retail sales, Oct., pct. chg.
0.6
0.5
Industrial production, Oct., pct. chg.
0.0
0.5
Capacity utilization, Oct., percent
84.6
84.9
Wed.
Consumer prices, Oct., pct. chg.
0.2
0.3
Business inventories, Sept., pct. chg.
1.0
0.3
Thur.
Housing starts, Oct., mils., ann. rate
1.53
1.50
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
330
325
Fri.
Trade balance, Sept., billions
-$9.7
-$9.5
This Week's Developments
Tues.
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets
Thur.
Philadelphia Fed Nov. business outlook survey
Fri.
Minutes of Sept. 27 F.O.M.C. meeting released


Ducks Are Unknowns Now in the Know
Roses are sold out on campus, alumni beg for field passes and Penn State may soon want to investigate.
The Oregon Ducks are the hottest team nobody knows, a late-game score the East Coast can live without.
But one more victory and they may be in a national championship game.
If Oregon masters Oregon State next Saturday on the road, the Ducks (8-3) are the Pacific-10 representative in the Rose Bowl and conceivably the final median strip between Penn State and an unbeaten season.
Their secret, however, is no longer safe, especially after today's obliteration of Stanford, 55-21.


Republicans Plan to Guide Foreign Policy by Purse String
In foreign policy, a domain traditionally run by the executive branch, Republican leaders in Congress say they plan to use the power of the purse to rein in President Clinton on several fronts, like cutting foreign aid or restricting funds for peacekeeping.
Setting the tone, Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, who is in line to become chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, outlined an approach distinctly different from Mr.
Clinton's, one displaying far more skepticism toward foreign aid and the United Nations.


Atlantic Center Loses Bradlees, Officials Say
Bradlees, the discount chain store that was meant to be the cornerstone of the 24-acre Atlantic Center development project in Fort Greene, will no longer be involved, said a Brooklyn business association official and others close to the project.
The development, which is scheduled to open late next year next to the Long Island Rail Road terminal at Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues, will provide housing for about 400 families and serve as a major retail center, with 160,000 square feet of store space and a large parking area.


The Boy Who Came to Dinner
THE BOY WHO ATE AROUND Written and illustrated by Henrik Drescher.
Unpaged.
New York:  Hyperion. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne's excellent review of three new books on race and intelligence shows a healthy respect for empirical reality.
It is a fact of nature that people are not created equal in the eyes of I.Q. tests.
Concomitantly, and most fortunately, it is a fact of human nature that we can make all people equal in the eyes of the law.
Ben Franklin, Thomas Jefferson and Sam Adams were not confused on that point, and this is no time to encourage obfuscation.
JOHN HARTUNG  Atlantic Beach, L.I.


Killer From Oklahoma Applauds Cuomo's Defeat, and Waits
Thomas Grasso, the double murderer whose wish to be executed in Oklahoma was blocked by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's insistence that he first serve 20 years to life in New York, has applauded Governor-elect George E. Pataki's victory and said he is looking forward to the death penalty in his home state.
"I just want to go back to Oklahoma to complete my execution sentence," Mr.
Grasso, 32, said in an interview published yesterday by The New York Post.
He has been confined at the state prison at Attica since his return from Oklahoma last October.
"I don't want to spend the rest of my life incarcerated."


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; England's Puzzling Passion
The English love mazes.
Especially the present Marquess of Bath.
Twenty years ago, when he was a mere viscount, he commissioned Greg Bright to design the world's largest hedge maze (above) for his home, Longleat House.
He is now creating the Labyrinth of Longleat, composed of mazes by the world's leading designers.
One, the 18-inch-high Love Maze by Graham Burgess, has been planted and should be ready to walk through in a few years when the roses and boxwood mature.
Two others, a linked Sun Maze and Lunar Labyrinth, have been designed by Randoll Coate, who specializes in symbolic mazes.
Ground-breaking is tentatively set for next year.
The Marquess has not completely cornered the maze market.
Coate worked on a maze for the city of Bath and has recently been approached about a project on a smaller scale.
A collector of historic doll houses has asked him to do a circular maze for a miniature Palladian villa.
The maze will have a diameter of about five inches.


Selling Without A Broker
FOR sale by owner is an age-old concept that tantalizes almost all sellers once they've figured out that it will typically cost $12,000 to hire a broker for a $200,000 home.
In good times it can seem ridiculous amount to pay when homes are being snapped up faster than tickets to a rock concert.


Mark M. Pepper and Nicole D. Slater
Nicole Diane Slater, the daughter of Sandra Bernstein of Franklin Lakes, N.J., and Miles A. Slater of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married last evening to Mark Matthew Pepper, the son of Maggie Weiss of San Francisco and Sanford Pepper of Salt Lake City.
Rabbi Steven Glazer officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Pepper, 26, is a visual display artist in Salt Lake City.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology and from the Fashion Institute of Design and Merchandising.
Her father, a former president of Salomon Brothers International in London, is the president of the Ballast Group, investment bankers in New York.


Wengen Winter
AN Ogre, a Monk and a Virgin -- however unlikely a trio, the three great ascending peaks of central Switzerland stand guard over the snow fields of Wengen and Grindelwald, the chief ski stations of the Bernese Oberland high above the sedate resort of Interlaken.
Wengen, which has only about 1,050 permanent residents, is much the smaller and prettier of the two villages, made all the more pleasant by the absence of cars.
It was there I chose to go for a busman's holiday in the first week of March: after six weeks of working in a children's ski camp, I wanted to ski for myself.
It was here, under the Eiger, the Monch and the Jungfrau, that British gentlemen sportsmen popularized skiing as recreation after World War I. At Wengen, a rack railway built for summer tourists was used for the first time in the winter of 1910 to take skiers up the mountain; previously they had had to walk, or climb.
Hence the origins of the Downhill Only Club -- "unlike other places, we had the railway to bring us back up," explains a longtime member -- founded in 1925 and still a British institution in Wengen, where it shares a clubhouse with the equally British Wengen Curling Club. (The British influence remains strong in Wengen, even though Brits make up only a quarter of the visitors these days.)


Beware the Kudzu Gang and All Its Kind
This is about outlaws.
Not the gun-toting kind, but the kind with roots, leaves and stems.
Invasive species, the professionals call them, and a rich field of study they offer.
By definition they are the sorts of plants that usurp the territory of others, rampaging out of control.
To many gardeners and landscapers, they seem attractive and worthwhile at first, and are introduced to an area on purpose.
But then reality takes over.
Those who live in Florida know this kind of story well.
The melaleuca tree was introduced from Australia because the tree was known to have considerable water-absorption capabilities.
It sounded like the perfect solution to drain some of what were considered nasty wetlands, and melaleuca trees were planted freely.
Floridians never knew what they were getting into.


Business Diary: November 6-11
COMPANIES Sears Goes Home (Having Just Sold the Family House)  In the public eye, Sears, Roebuck sells stuff -- tools, lingerie, you name it; it isn't the place to go for financial services.
And investors didn't know what to make of it.
Invest in the stores, you got Allstate; invest in Allstate, you got washing machines.
Last week Sears simplified matters in an instant, splitting off control of Allstate to shareholders -- thus waking from a grand conglomerate dream of the 80's.
"Sears is home now," one shareholder said.
Well, not exactly.
Earlier last week, washing its hands of a mountain of debt, Sears turned over the 110-story Sears Tower in Chicago to a creditors' trust.
Also (yes, it was a busy week for Sears), Edward Brennan said he planned to retire as chairman when Allstate's gone, probably by mid-1995.
His chosen successor: Arthur Martinez, who in two years did wonders in rescuing Sears stores from terminal stodginess.


UNNATURAL SELECTION
Among the many issues raised by the practice of cloning is the question of who or what will be cloned.
To whom will the gatekeepers of life-after-life grant the privilege of immortality?
Geneti-Pet, a company in Port Townsend, Wash., is not a cloning service.
For $75 plus a $100-a-year storage fee, it will, however, store a vial of your pet's blood in liquid nitrogen so that when replication becomes widely available -- the assumption here is that this will happen during the course of a pet owner's lifetime -- you will have the means to wrest from your adorable little Puffles an eerie Puffles 2.
The process is fairly simple.
You send the company $175, whereupon it mails you a vial.
You take the vial and your pet to your veterinarian to extract one milliliter or so of blood.
You Fed Ex the sample back to Geneti-Pet, which slowly immerses it in the "cryogenic storage unit." Then you wait.
Every three months thereafter, Geneti-Pet sends you a newsletter about advances in the field of cloning.
Although the company is unsure if the replicated pet will retain memory of its former life, it contends that the new pet will be an infant.


BRONX UPDATE
*
WESTCHESTER SQUARE Since June 1993, the $7.8 million reconstruction of Westchester Square has created traffic jams and general havoc in one of the Bronx's busiest shopping and transportation centers.
But workers recently repaved the area's streets, the last of the major work, and are now turning to the final touches -- installing new street and parking signs.
The reconstruction included adding new curbs and wooden benches.
Most of the area's water mains were replaced, and new catch basins and sewers were built. *
CO-OP CITY The Department of City Planning has agreed to turn the Givan Creek Woods, a 10-acre natural area north of Co-op City, into park land.
The Department of Parks and many local residents had long pressed for the area's protection, but a section along Co-op City Boulevard may still be considered for commercial development.
"Maybe they can leave that alone," said Iris Baez, president of Co-op City's board of directors.
"They develop you to death. I'm sick and tired of seeing concrete." The area is home to many flowers, plants, squirrels, birds and rabbits, she said.


Chill Out! The New Hot Sport Is on Ice and Kerrigan Is the Biggest Star
Ice Wars ended tonight. In truth, the ice wars are just beginning.
For television networks and viewers hungry for action in this empty era of no baseball and no hockey, figure skating has become the new hot sport.
It attracts television viewers, even nonsports fans, even in prime time.
It puts paying customers in arenas.
It can supply an endless pool of talent.


Back to Basics in Lyons
WHEN I want authenticity, I go straight to the source.
So if I find my thoughts turning to steaming platters of chicken with red-wine vinegar, mountainous green salads tossed with croutons, eggs and cubes of fresh bacon, and sturdy bottles of fresh Beaujolais, a pilgrimage to Lyons is in order.
Ever since the turn of the century, when many of Lyons's cooks traded the kitchens of bourgeois families for their own closet-sized bistros, Lyonnais cooking has been synonymous with cuisine de bonne femme, meaning a style of home cooking -- by men or women -- that is at once generous, robust, economical and based on the region's wealth of plump poultry, fresh garden vegetables, tangy cheeses and fruity young wines.


Europe in Winter With a Package
APRIL in Paris is wonderful, but January in Paris is not bad either, if you've got a warm pair of gloves and shoes.
And the price is lots better than in the high season.
Here is information on a few of the many European winter packages offered by airlines and tour operators this year.
Almost all have a period around the holidays when the low prices do not apply.
The prices noted do not include United States departure tax or Customs and Immigration fees, foreign departure taxes or any airport facility charges.
Unless noted otherwise, the prices are for each of two people in a room.
All are available from travel agents; 800 numbers are given for ordering brochures or for further information.


In Search of the Man Within the Monster
ONE VAMPIRE TO ANOTHER, Antonio Banderas looks into Brad Pitt's icy-blue eyes and sizes him up: "A vampire with a human soul."
That's not necessarily a compliment in the land of the undead, but it's accurate and goes a long way toward explaining why Neil Jordan's new movie, "Interview With the Vampire," is one of the most horrific, emotional and best films of the year.
Though Tom Cruise gets star billing, this is the haunting tale of Louis (Mr. Pitt), a reluctant vampire who struggles across two centuries to retain some shred of human emotion.
Changing from man to vampire, he learns to sip blood and live in the dark. ("Coffins, unfortunately, are a necessity," he tells the interviewer recording his life story.) But through it all he continues to feel love, guilt, grief; he is a vampire we can identify with.


French Classics
LA COTE BASQUE *** (212) 688-6525; 5 East 55th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  A STONE BOAT  By Andrew Solomon. Faber &amp; Faber, $22.95.


Pacific Rim Ministers Express Optimism on Free Trade
Ministers of 18 Pacific Rim nations, ending two days of meetings here, expressed confidence today that they would agree on a date of 2020 for liberalizing free trade throughout the region.
"We're looking forward to the leaders' achieving a historic breakthrough in this regard," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said at a news briefing.
He was referring to the meeting of government leaders on Tuesday near Jakarta, where the final decisions will be made on whether to establish a deadline.


Manhattan Minute
BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG B.I.D.: On Tuesday, if all goes as planned, 25,000 watts worth of halogen lighting will zip on over Macy's and A &amp; S Plaza.
Cost: $500,000.
Angel: The 34th Street Partnership, a business improvement district.
Trend: Lighting of Bryant Park and Grand Central Terminal was also organized and financed by business improvement districts . . .
GO WEST, YOUNG TRUCKERS: Saying that delivery trucks are causing traffic gridlock by using 74th Street to get from West End Avenue to Broadway, members of the Far West 74th Street Block Association are trying to change the one-way designation from east to west. . . .
MET LIFE, IT PAYS: Saving $4 million in retroactive rent increases, the residents of Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village win a state ruling turning down an application from their landlord, Metropolitan Life, for higher rents.
Met Life said the increase was justified because it installed new windows in the complex, but about 2,000 of the windows imploded. . . .


Team-First Concept Makes Packer Defense Even More Starry
There's a very simple philosophy behind the Packers' defense, which has been hammering opponents into submission for much of the year.
"We treat every play like it's a 911 call," said Sean Jones, the Packers' defensive end who leads the team with eight sacks.
"Every play is an emergency. As soon as the ball snaps, it's a critical matter that you get there."


'What Sort of Dictatorship Is This?'
LENIN A New Biography.
By Dmitri Volkogonov.
Edited and translated by Harold Shukman.
Illustrated. 529 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $30.


A Theater Company Tackles the Issues
NO, the Luna Stage Company is not a woman's theater, says Jane Mandel in answer to those who assume it is.
"But women started it," Ms.
Mandel hastily adds.
And the assumptions may not be unfounded, the Luna Stage Company having produced its first full-scale production last year, "In the Name of the Woman," a theater piece in which four actresses span the centuries playing goddesses and witches and covering a panorama of women's issues, not excluding date rape.
The piece is to be revived in March.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MUSIC  KNOWING WHEN TO STOP  A Memoir. By Ned Rorem. Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Joel Sussman; On the Trail of an Enzyme That Could Lead to Alzheimer's
DR.
JOEL SUSSMAN sits restlessly behind his computer at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton typing furiously.
At last the screen displays a dynamic bending and flexing three-dimensional image of a body enzyme, acetylcholinesterase.
It does not look much different from childhood Tinkertoy projects.
But Dr.
Sussman displays this structure, which was so hard to come by, with infinite zeal.
Months ago it was displayed on the front cover of Science magazine.
Dr.
Sussman is on to something and he knows it.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/ Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Children's Books/ Book Review, Section 7 A 36-page special section.


Smooth Talkers Finish First
TALKING FROM 9 TO 5 How Women's and Men's Conversational Styles Affect Who Gets Heard, Who Gets Credit, and What Gets Done at Work.
By Deborah Tannen. 368 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Welcome to Manila, Mr. Clinton


Chalk Body Outlines: Grisly, Yes, but Chic
WHEN Michael Carr felt compelled several years ago to produce art that would commemorate the escalating number of violent deaths in Washington, one image haunted him.
So he went into an alley near his home in Washington's Northwest quadrant and began painting outlines of bodies in the style he had seen used at the scenes of homicides depicted in movies and on television.
By the end of 1992 he had painted 452 body outlines in acrylic house paint on Naylor Court, provoking the attention of newspaper and television reporters and the chagrin of some neighbors.
"It is a powerful subconscious image," Mr.
Carr said.


You're the Pops
ARTHUR FIEDLER Papa, the Pops and Me.
By Johanna Fiedler.
Illustrated. 268 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $24.95.


Susan L. Arledge, Lee W. Weston
Susan Lee Arledge, a daughter of Joan Spring of Tavernier, Fla., and Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News in New York, was married yesterday to Lee William Weston, the son of Barbara Weston of Carefree, Ariz., and the late Warren Weston.
The Rev.
Heather E. Cook performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Weston, 33, is a former teacher at the North Greenwich Nursery School in Greenwich, Conn.


The New History: Showing Children the Dark Side
NOT so long ago, the Americans who made the history I read all appeared to be old men, dressed in dull clothing and devoted to principles so high I could perceive them only dimly.
They seemed to have lived far away in that adult world where you were not to say anything at all if it was not to be something nice.
By the time I began teaching in the 1980's, American history had been invigorated by the belated inclusion of a wide variety of groups traditionally excluded from the enterprise.
Their presence has altered the discipline forever.
As long as women and blacks, American Indians, Asian-Americans and others were not part of history, then what white men did to them was not part of the great narrative of the nation.
Now that all of our pasts figure in our history, however, tragedy is never too distant and celebration must share its place with reconciliation in the stories we teach.


The 'Third World' Is Dead, but Spirits Linger
NOT more than 60 miles down the highway from the Indonesian hill town of Bogor, where President Clinton will take part this week in an economic summit of Asian-Pacific nations, is a genteel city that once symbolized everything the third world believed in and hoped for when it was young.
The city is Bandung.
There, another generation of world leaders -- Nehru, Nasser, Nkrumah, Sukarno, Zhou Enlai -- met at another summit, the 1955 Afro-Asian Conference, a gathering full of post-colonial promise, with dreams of self-sufficiency, solidarity among newly independent nations and commitment to an anti-superpower international policy that became known as nonalignment.
"Sisters and brothers!" President Sukarno of Indonesia told the delegates.
"How terrifically dynamic is our time!"
The fraternal third world these founders envisioned is dead.
The agenda for Bogor, where the heirs of the Bandung generation plan to talk mostly about economic liberalization, competition for foreign investment and free trade, is its obituary.
The hollowness of the dream of Afro-Asian commonality is never so starkly evident as when Pacific Rim countries get together, a number of them boasting higher living standards than some European nations.
Nehru's India is barely on the horizon of this world; Nkrumah's Africa isn't even in the picture.


OPEN TO SUGGESTION
Whether they work in metal, lace or nylon, designers love playing peekaboo.


Excellence Wasted?
To the Editor:
In the movie "Pulp Fiction" the direction was excellent, the acting likewise, but the content places all that excellence in abeyance  [ "When Fate Is Calling the Tune," Oct. 16 ] .


EDITORS NOTE
EDITORS' NOTE: An article on Aug. 14 about young gang members included photographs of Tamika Young and her friend Cee-lo Perez with recently acquired tattoos.
The Times has now learned that the tattoos were paid for by the photographer, a freelancer.
The subjects were about to get the tattoos on their own, but the gift created an unintended appearance of staged news photography, which would have violated The Times's policy.


TAKING THE CHILDREN
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein  Kenneth Branagh, Robert De Niro, Helena Bonham Carter Directed by Kenneth Branagh R 128 minutes


Aristide Under Pressure to Set an Election Date
Three years of military dictatorship left Haiti with no electoral commission, no reliable voter registration rolls, even a shortage of paper to print ballots.
Nevertheless, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide faces mounting pressure from Haitian law, his American patrons and his supporters to set an early date for elections to fill more than 2,000 national and local posts.


Q and A
The S.S. United States
Q.
If I went down to Newport News, Va., would I be able to see the former luxury liner S.S.
United States lying in port?
I am interested because I went to Europe on the ship in 1955. -- Jan Heck, New York, N.Y.


Penn (20 Straight) Ties a Record and Wins the Ivy Title
Penn 33, Harvard 0
Terrance Stokes rushed for 143 yards and a touchdown and caught 5 passes for 37 more yards as Penn clinched its second consecutive Ivy League title with a 33-0 home victory over Harvard yesterday.


California Regulates Those Who Sell Travel
IN an effort to protect the California consumer, Gov.
Pete Wilson has signed legislation designed to offer a safeguard against potential travel-related scams and bankruptcies.
The law, which revises existing legislation, is widely expected to be used as a national model.
Travel scams cost consumers $12 billion a year, according to Federal Government estimates.


Daria F. Pizzetta, Charles D. Brown
Daria F. Pizzetta, a daughter of Don F. Pizzetta of Gulfport, Miss., and the late Stephanie Pizzetta, and Charles D. Brown, the son of Charles E. Brown of Concord, S.I., and the late Dolores M. Brown, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
James Russell performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Biloxi, Miss.
Ms.
Pizzetta, 34, is keeping her name.
She is an architect and the manager of the interior design department at Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, the architectural firm, in New York.
The bride graduated from Mississippi State University.
She is a stepdaughter of Danette Shaw Pizzetta.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Huber, Pierce in Final  Anke Huber and Mary Pierce posted impressive victories yesterday to reach the final of the $750,000 Virginia Slims of Philadelphia.
Huber shook off a disappointing first set before beating Gabriela Sabatini, 6-7 (11-13), 6-1, 6-4, while Pierce defeated fifth-seeded Natalia Zvereva, 6-3, 6-3.
Huber won the first three games of the second set and took advantage of a tired Sabatini in the third. (AP)


RICHARD FERBER
Richard Ferber sure has "tapped into an enormous need" -- the need of a culture addicted to a quick fix, yet terrified of dependence ("Richard Ferber: When Lullabies Aren't Enough," by David Blum, Oct. 9).
His work may help those suffering from real sleep disorders, but a baby who wakes for comfort must not be considered a "problem facing almost every new parent."  RENA SHEIN Santa Monica, Calif.


Jeannine Iverson, Glenn Strovilas
Jeannine Marie Iverson, a daughter of Gretchen and Jesse Iverson of Norwalk, Conn., was married on Friday to Glenn Charles Strovilas, a son of Jackie and Dr.
Crist Strovilas of Toronto, Ohio.
The Rev.
John Wall performed the ceremony at Old St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
Mrs.
Strovilas, 32, graduated from Iona College.
She is a technical specialist with the Marine Office of America Corporation, an insurance company, in Chicago.
Her father was formerly the vice president and publisher of the American Homestyle Group/Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing.


Dozing on the Shoulders Can Be Deadly
Just before 1 A.M. on a recent morning, 14 big trailer trucks were parked -- all illegally -- on the shoulders of Interstate 78 here.
Eight were pointed westbound, toward Pennsylvania, and six eastbound, toward Newark and New York City, and all 14 were potentially lethal hazards for cars and other trucks whizzing by.
So far this year, six people have been killed when vehicles have rammed into the backs of four rigs parked on the shoulders of either I-78 or I-287.
That pushes a pattern of desolate late-night crashes into a fourth year; from 1991 to 1993, there were 15 similar rear-end crashes on New Jersey's Interstates, and 17 people died in them, state records show.
In every case but one it was not the trucker, but the driver or passengers in the other vehicle who were killed.


On Sunday; An Actress Who Belongs To the Risk
"WHY does the actor not look out of the window first thing in the morning?" asks Rosaleen Linehan, setting up an old joke told by actors about their frequent states of unemployment.
"Because he'd have nothing to do for the rest of the day," she responds, her laughter bell-like across the idleness that's pretty much in the past for her now that she's a world-class actress.
Well, she is, even if she'd be the last to say so after working 35 years at acting, always wondering whether she'd get each job, then whether she was up to each role, and often being surprised along with the watching audiences at her own inventions.
Acting is the life for her, and New York, "so buzzy and so beautiful," she says, is the place to try it once more.


Anita C. Levy, Robert S. Nelson
Anita Caren Levy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton G. Levy of Roslyn, L.I., and Robert Stuart Nelson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Z. Nelson of New York, were married last evening in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
Mrs.
Nelson, 27, is a social worker at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father, a pediatrician in Roslyn, is also a clinical associate professor at the Cornell University Medical College.


Myra Y. Goldfarb, Eric Boe Outwater
Myra Yellin Goldfarb, a freelance writer, was married yesterday in Santa Fe, N.M., to Eric Boe Outwater, the president of Lead Inspection Services, a home inspection company in Winsted, Conn.
Judge Thomas A. Donnelly of the New Mexico Court of Appeals performed the ceremony at the home of Nancy Cole, a friend of the bride.
Mrs.
Outwater, 52, writes art and theater columns for The Morning Call, a newspaper in Allentown, Pa., and is a contributing editor to Arts Alive, a monthly magazine, also in Allentown.
She is a graduate of Smith College.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Norman Yellin of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Judge Yellin.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Climate Change Played a Role in India's Plague; Action by New Delhi
To the Editor:
" 'Emperors of Garbage' " (Op-Ed, Nov. 5) suggests that exotic or disastrous events provide convenient case material to pronounce on what's good or bad for India.
But why should a few claim only they see, smell or care about the problem?
To proceed so would miss the efforts of those working to improve the human condition in India.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne is correct in noting that "it is sometimes difficult to tell good statistics from bad ones." But as executive director of the National Center for Fair and Open Testing, I believe a review of the sources on which arguments are based can help sort out truth from ideologically motivated exaggerations.


DUMBING DOWN
We may build a better society when we stop separating out the gifted.
Why shouldn't the smartest children stimulate high-level discussion in a classroom?
Why shouldn't the brightest kids see slower friends strive to master a concept and be moved by the progress they make?
Perhaps children will learn that knowledge is meaningful only in a compassionate world.
BARBARA O. HOROWITZ Buffalo


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HOLLAR'S ETCHINGS
The first great etchings produced in England were made by a Bohemian from Prague named Wenceslaus Hollar (1607-1677), who had been brought to London by the Earl of Arundel in 1636.
A comprehensive exhibition of his work, the first such display in America, opens at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven on Wednesday, remaining through Jan. 22.
A free symposium is scheduled on Saturday with English and American scholars and experts appearing at the museum, 1080 Chapel Street, from 10:30 to 4:30.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne summarized the three books about intelligence he reviewed on Oct. 16 as arguing that "America is rapidly evolving . . . an intellectually deprived population of men and women whose cognitive abilities will never match the future needs of most employers." I propose just the reverse summary: that this population is "being evolved" because the economy no longer needs it and, to continue Mr.
Browne's summary, that it will therefore be "permanently doomed . . . to welfare dependency, poverty, crime and lives shorn of any hope of realizing the American dream." To help drive this population farther out of the economy, the 1980's conservatives described it as a morally un deserving underclass that did not desire help, and this decade's conservatives now declare it genetically incapable of benefiting from any help, including education.


Wooed and Won, Clinton Finds Open Arms in Manila
Fidel V. Ramos wooed Bill Clinton and won him over.
The Philippine President was not pleased last fall when Mr.
Clinton said he would have to turn down the invitation to attend celebrations in October marking the World War II liberation of the Philippines from Japanese occupation.
He would be out campaigning, Mr.
Clinton said.


Meacham Paid Dues On Way to New Job
Bobby Meacham saw Ken Griffey Sr. several times this past season, and he wasn't sure if that was a good thing or not.
"Every time I saw him," Meacham related, laughing at the scene in his mind, "Griff said, 'Meach, I'm sorry, I should've caught the ball.' Then he would tell the guys, 'He threw me a ball that was running away, a little sinker. The next thing I know Meach is walking by me with his bags packed, going to Double A.' He would tell that story over and over, and he was always apologizing."


Ways to Look at the Past (Or Did It Really Happen?)
THE charges were as familiar as the names.
Last month the National Center for History in the Schools, an affiliation of teachers and administrators, released a volume entitled "National Standards for United States History: Exploring the American Experience," the first of two guidebooks on the teaching of history in grades 5 through 12; the second volume, "World History: Exploring Paths to the Present," was issued last week.
Sponsored by the University of California at Los Angeles, financed by the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Department of Education, advised by distinguished professors across the land, the guides have managed to provoke instant controversy.


Weighing The Results Of the Election
EARLIER this year, Sue W. Kelly of Katonah, a lifelong Republican Party worker, reflected on her 35 years of service to the party and made a major decision.
"I've been getting Republicans elected for decades," she thought.
"Why not me?"
Last week, showing strength throughout a northern Westchester Congressional District that had been represented for two generations by Congressmen named Hamilton Fish, Ms.
Kelly won election to the United States House of Representatives.


Building, No League, for Budig
GENE BUDIG, who became American League president 11 days before the players went on strike, hasn't had much opportunity to make his mark on baseball, but he is still remembered and will continue to be remembered at the University of Kansas.
Ground-breaking ceremonies were scheduled yesterday in Lawrence, Kan., for the construction of the university's largest classroom building, which will be named in Budig's honor.


Satin Salutes for F.I.T.
Celebrating a college's 50th birthday, Bergdorf's and Calvin Klein, Nov. 7.


Literary Symposium Celebrates
IT is a year of round-number anniversaries for many organizations as museums, churches, music schools and other groups celebrate their achievements and meditate on their milestones.
At Westchester Community College, the talk is about the Literary Symposium, which has been attracting crowds for 10 years.
The event, sponsored by the Foundation for Westchester Community College, has drawn a steady stream of literary luminaries to Valhalla for conversation and an appreciation of books.


World News Briefs; Chinese Journalist Is Reportedly Convicted
After failing for lack of evidence to convict a prominent Chinese journalist last April, Beijing's branch of the People's Intermediate Court has tried again and succeeded, family members and rights groups said today.


Technology; Fiat Hopes to Put a Tilt Into Amtrak's Trains
ADVANCED railroad technology pioneered in Europe by the Italian auto maker Fiat may soon make it much faster and more comfortable for travelers in the northeastern United States to get from one big city to another.
Fiat, based here, intends to bid on a $600 million contract to provide tilting trains to Amtrak in the United States.
It developed the system for such trains in the late 1960's and has delivered roughly 70 percent of those now operating worldwide.


Ramon Ramos, No Longer as the Rookie or the Shattered, Angry Man
For more than two months after Ramon Ramos Jr. was critically injured in an auto accident in 1989, the former star center of the Seton Hall basketball team lay in a coma.
For nearly three years after that, Ramos, who suffered extensive brain damage, was trapped in another prison, one born of anger and frustration.
Now, nearly five years later, a different Ramos quietly and contentedly lives his life in Puerto Rico, where he and his love for basketball were born.
The player who dreamed of being a star in the National Basketball Association for the Portland Trail Blazers, has long since countered the fury with hard work and a desire to remake his life.


All-Women's Colleges Back in Vogue
AT a time when educators and psychologists are saying that girls learn better in single-sex classrooms and develop more confidence and self-esteem to carry them into adulthood, two of the county's colleges that have remained women's schools are poised to take advantage of the recent studies.
Both the College of New Rochelle, founded in 1904, and Marymount College in Tarrytown, founded in 1907, are finding that their traditions are again becoming fashionable.
They continue to differ from other former all-women's colleges like Manhattanville and Sarah Lawrence, which have adopted co-education.
Marymount does have a weekend college open to men and women and the College of New Rochelle's program for adults is co-ed, but the undergraduate focus at both colleges remains on women, about 700 at Marymount and about 500 at the College of New Rochelle.


Firefighters Battle Large Blaze in Abandoned Airplane Factory
Long Island firefighters were still working early this morning to control a blaze that started yesterday afternoon at an abandoned airplane factory in East Farmingdale, shooting flames so high into the air that the orange glow could be seen more than five miles away.
No injuries were reported from the fire, which started at about 4 P.M. in the northeast corner of the old Fairchild Republic aircraft factory, a 91-acre complex of cavernous hangars, loading docks and graffiti-covered office buildings east of Route 110.


Sharon A. Becker And Rudy Berk
Sharon Ann Becker, the daughter of William and Donna Becker of Covington, Ky., and Joseph Rudy Berk, a son of Stanley and Marjorie Berk of Margate, N.J., were married yesterday.
Lois Kellerman, a Leader at the Society for Ethical Culture in Brooklyn, performed the ceremony at Alger House in Manhattan.


Needed Role Models
To the Editor:
After too many years of reading the usual claptrap about the likes of Warren Beatty and Annette Bening, how refreshing it is to find the main article in this week's Arts and Leisure section devoted to an openly gay couple in the arts, Jon Robin Baitz and Joe Mantello  [ "Couple of the Moment in New York Theater," Oct. 30 ] !


A Celebrity At Last
REMEMBERING ELIZABETH BISHOP An Oral Biography.
By Gary Fountain and Peter Brazeau.
Illustrated. 408 pp.
Amherst:  University of Massachusetts Press.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  CYCLES OF MISERY FOR BOSNIANS  Bosnian Muslims who supported a defeated separatist leader fled to a camp in Croatia, where they now live on a converted farm under conditions of desperate poverty.  1  CLINTON VISITS PHILIPPINES  President Clinton began his trip to the Pacific economic meeting with talks in the Philippines to reconfirm the country's economic and security ties with the United States.  10


'Relativity' Has Its World Premiere
"I DON'T even know why I'm here." That's Audrey's entrance line when she bursts into her brother Neil's tract house one snowy night.
Now there's a nervy way to start up a play.
And starting up, as in instigate or provoke, is just what the playwright Mark Stein is doing in "Relativity," which is having its world premiere at the George Street Playhouse.


Begging for Crumbs
Be honest.
Isn't stuffing a bird its raison d'etre?
I've heard people say they wouldn't bother with the fat and mess of a goose, if it weren't for what a goose can hold.
I've heard the same thing said about ducks, pheasants and capons.
I've also wondered if modern poultry techniques would have survived given the sacrifices in flavor, if not for the larger, sturdier cavity that science has devised.
Considering the universal popularity of stuffing, and the prevailing tide of nutritional thought, you would think we would abandon the bird altogether and bake as much stuffing as we like, en casserole.
Yet the bird remains, harboring its precious cargo like an egg.
Not out of sentiment, especially, but out of utility, because a properly made stuffing is, at once, a perfume and a moisturizer that improves its host by the mere act of filling space.


'Blood-Curdling' Evidence
Two gunmen walked into a tiny Mexican luncheonette in Bedford Park a year and a half ago and robbed the cashier of $130.
They encountered no resistance, but they shot and killed three people and wounded a fourth.
Even the residents of this crime-weary borough were shocked by the pointless murders in the seven-seat Lena Restaurant.
The slain men -- a cook and dishwasher in the luncheonette and a nephew of the owner -- were all in their early 20's.


DUMBING DOWN
If Henig is opposed to the concept of heterogeneous grouping, I wonder what she would think of the newest New York City Board of Education concept of "bridge classes." A bridge is a class with two grades heterogeneously grouped!
In the fifth-and-sixth-grade bridge class I teach, I have 30 students whose reading scores range from the 90th to the 3d percentile, and whose abilities span at least five grade levels.
This situation exists in classrooms throughout the city.
Can you think of any student who would benefit from being in a class like mine, no matter how hard I try every day?
GERALDINE FELDMAN Merrick, L.I.


Little Guy, Big Job
HOB AND THE GOBLINS By William Mayne.
Illustrated by Norman Messenger. 140 pp.
New York:  Dorling Kindersley. $12.95. (Ages 7 to 10)


Make Way for Allegories
PILGRIM'S PROGRESS By John Bunyan.
Retold by Gary D. Schmidt.
Illustrated by Barry Moser. 76 pp.
Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. $24.99. (Ages 8 and up)


Wall Street; Election News Dims Power Company's Stock
FOR the Long Island Lighting Company, the Cuomo rally has turned into the Pataki crash.
Shares of Lilco fell 7 percent to $16.375 on Wednesday, as investors bailed out on news that Mario Cuomo had lost the election for Governor of New York.
By Friday, Lilco shares closed at $16.
It had only been several weeks before that Lilco shares rallied 6.8 percent on the day after Mr.
Cuomo proposed that New York State buy out the Hicksville, N.Y.-based utility for $2 billion, and assume its $7 billion in debt.
On Oct. 14, the day after Mr.
Cuomo's remarks, Lilco shares closed up $1.125 to $17.625.


Echoes of a Lurid Murder In Fight Over Co-Op Sale
It was a lurid tale of gambling, prostitution, infidelity and murder worthy of a Penny Dreadful, and it happened on the Upper East Side.
When Mark Fein, a wealthy executive who lived with his wife and three children at 1095 Park Avenue, was convicted of killing his bookie three decades ago, it earned headlines around the nation.
Now that episode has been recalled in a legal dispute between Mr.
Fein and his former wife over the recent $1.4 million sale of the nine-room Park Avenue apartment, which they bought in 1960 for about $60,000.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THRILLER  DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART  By Dean Koontz. Knopf, $24.


Britain Is Changing Its Dialing Codes
Britain will officially switch to new telephone codes starting next April 16, although the new ones are already in use with the old ones.
Under the new system, nearly all existing codes will be prefixed by 1.
For example, the code for inner London, (71) from overseas or (071) from within Britain, will become (171) or (0171) respectively; the code for Oxford, at present (865) from overseas, will become (1865) or (01865) from within Britain.


South Africa's Drakensberg
ON a slow Saturday in August my wife, Ann Cooper, and I drove south from Johannesburg, with a cassette of Brad Pitt reading Cormac McCarthy's elegiac cowboy novel "All the Pretty Horses," in the tape player and an easy, elusive feeling in our hearts.
It took a while to pin the feeling down: it was normalcy.
Among the unintended consequences of South Africa's miraculously tidy transition from white oligarchy to novice democracy is that it is now possible to enjoy a weekend, or a full-blown holiday, here without the oppressive sense that your pleasure is a violation, like a casino in a concentration camp.
South Africa is still an unresolved country, but it is no longer a constant morality play, and on this weekend we were bound for the Drakensberg Mountains (the name means Dragon Mountain in Afrikaans), free to enjoy a place of sublime beauty for its own sake.
The closest thing to a political implication in our trip was the small satisfaction of contributing a few dollars to Nelson Mandela's tourism industry.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
The academic fields of inquiry vary very widely, indeed, as to internal agreements on assumptions, methods and interpretations.
Disputes within, let us say, astrophysics and microbiology are hardly as pronounced as those within, for instance, economics and psychology.
In these last, cultural and social preferences do shape intellectual work to a very large degree.
That is a kind of seriousness -- but not the sort, clearly, Mr.
Browne was thinking of.
NORMAN BIRNBAUM  Washington


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; Trysts in Doubt
When the University of Chicago survey of sexual practices came out, one conventional idea was confirmed: men have more sexual partners in a lifetime than women do.
Few news reports zeroed in on another aspect of the survey: the numbers didn't add up.
The survey calculated a median of six partners for men and two for women, an imbalance.
Furthermore, if you counted the actual partners reported, the two sides didn't match, as they should have if the survey was representative.
Since the men reported many more total partners than the women, some partners were clearly missing.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Giuliani administration's proposal for a new contract with the Legal Aid Society misstated a court procedure.
Defendants who are not arraigned within 24 hours of their arrest are released to be arraigned later; their cases are not dismissed.


Changing Roles For a Landmark
To the Editor:
It's hardly a matter requiring a correction, but I was startled by the color photo run with your Posting on Oct. 23 headed "Changing Roles for a Landmark." It was a shot of the renovated Custom House, and it appeared mottled in a way suggesting perhaps brick-and-limestone construction -- which I knew was not the case.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
America shows no signs of ignoring "The Bell Curve" and the questions it raises.
The most ignoble reason is that its theories confirm what Americans already believe: that African-Americans are less intelligent than Americans of other races.
A 1990 study by the National Opinion Research Center found that the majority of whites still believe blacks to be inferior.
Among the answers: 53 percent of nonblack respondents said they thought blacks were less intelligent than whites, 51 percent agreed blacks were less patriotic, 62 percent thought blacks were lazier, and 78 percent said that blacks "prefer to live off welfare." To a lesser degree, Hispanic people and Southern whites were pegged with the same stereotypes.


Did Racial Redistricting Undermine Democrats
As politicians and academics analyze the forces that created this year's Republican tidal wave, another factor is taking its place alongside voter anger and President Clinton's unpopularity: the creation of majority black Congressional districts.
In 1982 Congress amended the Voting Rights Act to require that blacks and other minorities be given an enhanced opportunity to elect one of their own to Congress and to state legislatures.
To do that, Congressional and state legislative maps were redrawn after the 1990 Census, a process in which blacks and Republicans came together in an odd alliance to assure that minorities would constitute a majority in some districts.


Carnival Air's Success
To the Editor:
I was disappointed to read Alison Leigh Cowan's brief article "Shareholders Are Bumped" (Oct. 23).
The suggestion that Ted Arison, founder of Carnival Cruise Lines, took advantage of his position for his own personal gain is incorrect.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BRONX PARK EAST -- The Way They Were: Old Comrades (Re)unite; 'Coopniks' Toast Bronx Memories
Once upon a time, from the 1920's to 1940's, there flourished a proletarian utopia called the Allerton Coops in the East Bronx.
It was built by Eastern European Jewish immigrant trade-unionists, and only those who earned their livings by "the sweat of their brows" could live here.
Bosses -- blood-suckers, in Coopspeak -- were not welcome.


Meeting Cuts
That like rarely takes to like is the implied message of Nancy Caldwell Sorel and Edward Sorel's entertaining FIRST ENCOUNTERS: A Book of Memorable Meetings (Knopf, $24).
Chekhov and Tolstoy clearly didn't hit it off.
Neither, despite appearances, did de Gaulle and Roosevelt, or Hitler and Mussolini -- not to mention Churchill and Stalin, or J. Edgar Hoover and Emma Goldman.
These 63 "first encounters," which have appeared separately in The Atlantic Monthly over the past 12 years, prove how reliably fact can be stranger than fiction.
Isak Dinesen and Marilyn Monroe got along fine.
So did Houdini and Arthur Conan Doyle.
Less compatible were the more celebrated pairings of Chopin and George Sand, Lotte Lenya and Kurt Weill, and Capt.
John Smith and Pocahontas.
But their stories, illustrated in color by Edward Sorel and retold spiritedly and concisely by Nancy Caldwell Sorel (they relate their own first meeting and subsequent marriage in an afterword), all benefit from a light touch.
What is the book's most memorable meeting?
Possibly the one between Fats Waller and Al Capone, who kidnapped the musician for a three-day party.
Equally appealing, though it relies entirely on Welles's authority, is the story of the encounter between William Randolph Hearst and Orson Welles in an elevator in the Fairmont Hotel the day of the San Francisco premiere of "Citizen Kane." Welles introduced himself and invited Hearst to attend, but was met with stony silence.
As Hearst got off at his floor, Welles called after him: "Charles Foster Kane would have accepted." DAVID WALTON


Just in Case You Forgot the 60's Were Over


Seth P. Markowitz, Amy L. Grossman
Amy Lauren Grossman, a daughter of Joan and Kenneth S. Grossman of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Seth Paul Markowitz, the son of Barbara and Hal L. Markowitz of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Ezra M. Finkelstein performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Markowitz, 24, is a graduate of Syracuse University and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at New York University.
Her father is the chief executive and her mother is the product development manager of Brownstone Studio, a mail-order apparel company in New York.


Fresh Brewed Art Nouveau
A FEW minutes' walk from Warsaw's Old Town, and next door to the President's palace, the Cafe Bristol is a handy and inviting place to warm up after some fall or winter sightseeing.
Opened in 1901, the historic Hotel Bristol, which houses the cafe, was built by a construction company partly owned by the composer Ignace Jan Paderewski, and decorated in the Viennese Art Nouveau style by the Austrian designer Otto Wagner.
In 1981, after several decades of decline, the hotel closed; hotel and cafe officially reopened last year, renovated and refurbished in the original style.
In the cafe, a long wooden bar displaying French pastries and open sandwiches stands to one side, with tables looking out onto a handsome church, the Sisters of Wizytek.
The decor is a combination of turn-of-the-century Viennese and Art Deco, with mirrors, tiled floors, chandeliers, marble tables and palm trees.
The service is crisp and pleasant -- rare in Warsaw -- and the food can be as heavy as beef stroganoff or as light as tiramisu.
Soups, salads and croque- monsieur are also on the menu.


He Bought, He'll Sell, But Only to Buy Again
BILLY PEARSON, THE FORMER jockey, quiz-show celebrity and art dealer, is selling his collection of Americana.
At 74, he says he needs the money to buy more art.
In August, Mr.
Pearson shipped his weather vanes, trade signs, fire-engine memorabilia and other offbeat pieces to the gallery of David A. Schorsch, a private dealer on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The 30 items on view in "The Billy Pearson Collection of Folk Art," through Dec. 15, represent most of what remains of the American folk art he began buying in 1939.


Working Order
For many people, blue jeans, ice cream and computers are life-sustaining products.
Those who want to see how they are made can consult a new book, "Watch It Made in the U.S.A.," by Bruce Brumberg and Karen Axelrod (John Muir Publications).
It describes tours of nearly 250 factories throughout the United States, from Robinson Iron in Alexander City, Alabama to Rocky Mountain Snacks in Pine Bluffs, Wyo.
Among those in between are the Levi Strauss blue jeans plants (San Francisco, California and Warsaw, Va.), Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream factory (Waterbury, Vt.) and the Intel computer chip company (Santa Clara, Calif.).
Available at bookstores for $16.95 or to order (800) 888-7504.


Sunshine Is Dizzying In Albania's New Dawn
THERE are gaping potholes on the major thoroughfares here streets named Bajram Curri, Bulevardi Shqiperia and Myslym Shyri.
In an annoying way, they represent a sign of progress: Two years ago there were none.
There were almost no heavy vehicles to cause them and hardly any automobiles at all.
Now Tirana's traffic jams fill the air with blasts of their horns from dawn to well after dark.
Still, horse carts, bicycles, thousands of pedestrians and the occasional cow compete for space on the roads, reminders of the all-too-recent past.


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; The Time of Life
A prime candidate for most useless piece of electronic nonsense to be marketed in 1994 -- the Timisis Lifeclock.
The Zygon International catalogue copy reads: "Enter your name, gender and age. This microcomputer clock then counts down the actual hours, minutes and seconds remaining in your lifetime." Well, actually it counts the hours, minutes and seconds in the life of a statistically average person of your gender and age.
Of course, that's not all.
For a mere $99.95, it also looks like a personal organizer and provides you with 150 "motivational messages," if you have the time to read them.


Swedes Divided On Joining Europe
In a shopping mall in Haninge, a blue-collar suburb south of here, campaign volunteers worked the noonday crowd today, handing out pamphlets and bright blue buttons emblazoned with a single word: "Yes."
"The European train is leaving now, and Sweden has a ticket," read one of the flyers given to passersby.
"Don't throw it away."


New Greenburgh Law On Carbon Monoxide
AS part of a restructuring of an already rigorous building code, the town of Greenburgh recently adopted a provision to require that new buildings, both commercial and residential, install carbon-monoxide detectors.
This measure was prompted in part by the recent death of the tennis star Vitas Gerulaitis and, closer to home, the death last year of a Hartsdale resident .
"We are re-adopting a sprinkler law that has been around since 1982 because the state told us that the law was defective on technicalities," said Paul J. Feiner, Greenburgh Town Supervisor.
"As we were revising a tough sprinkler law, we thought we might as well add this."


Denise Forsythe, Henry J. Adler
Denise Ann Forsythe, the daughter of Anne and Dennis Forsythe of Scottdale, Pa., was married yesterday at St.
Pius X Church in Mount Pleasant, Pa., to Dr.
Henry J. Adler, a son of Caroline and Stephen Adler of Holliswood, Queens.
Rabbi Elliot Burk performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Henry Dinicco, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Adler, 30, graduated from the National Technical Institute for the Deaf in Rochester.
Until recently she was a billing analyst for Argent &amp; Fox, a Washington law firm.
Her mother is an operating-room nurse at the Frick Hospital and Community Health Center in Mount Pleasant.
The bride's father is a house painter in Scottdale.


An Important First Step for New Products
To the Editor:
As the director of marketing research for L'Oreal when it introduced mousse in 1983, I was particularly interested in Harry Gaines's article "Teaching Scientists to Talk Business" (Viewpoints, Oct. 2).
One of the key reasons why our introduction was so successful was that the product was placed with consumers early in the process, before large-scale market research testing.
By utilizing this qualitative research technique, marketing and R.&amp; D. were able to learn about consumers' experiences with the product.
An insightful facilitator was able to then provide input for the product formulation, instructions for usage and product positioning-advertising.
If this small, but critical, first step had been overlooked, we might have risked consumer acceptance of mousse styling products in the United States.


Moss's Lawyer Speaks of Deal
Wisconsin tailback BRENT MOSS might plead guilty to misdemeanor drug possession if prosecutors agree to recommend a lenient sentence, his lawyer said yesterday.
Moss, 22, the most valuable player of the Badgers' Rose Bowl victory last season, was suspended from the team on Thursday after he and a companion were arrested.
The police said Moss had $50 worth of base cocaine when he was arrested during a traffic investigation.
The police said charges against Moss included possession with intent to deliver cocaine.
The maximum penalty is 10 years in prison.


A Concert Calendar With Wide Variety
CHAMBER and orchestral music, folk songs and children's programs are all on today's calendar, starting at 2 P.M., when Claire Barry brings "Yiddish Swing" to the Jewish Cultural Series at the Lehman Center in the Bronx.
The number for more information is (718) 960-8833.
Also coming to the Bronx at 2 today is "Babar the Elephant." Pablo Zinger will conduct the Poulenc score with the Bronx Arts Ensemble, while Joanna Sherman and Michael McGuigan, of the Bond Street Theater Coalition, mime the classic story and lead audience participation at the Riverdale Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. on Arlington Avenue.
For more details, the number to call is (718) 601-7399.


MOMENTUM BUILDS FOR CUTTING BACK WELFARE SYSTEM
After a campaign in which voters rewarded a barrage of anti-welfare attacks, both parties are now calling the issue a top priority, and both are repeating stern promises to make recipients work.
As the smoke clears from the new political landscape, Democrats and Republicans each appear ready to cut benefits, increase work obligations and provide fewer protections for the 14.3 million people who rely on Aid to Families with Dependent Children, the main Federal welfare program.
More than nine million of the recipients are children.


THE NATION: Right Stuff; G.O.P. Unleashes Its New Weapon: Winning Candidates
THE Republican romp in Tuesday's election was a repudiation of President Clinton.
It represented disgust with big government and the way Congress has been operating.
It indicated a shift toward conservatism.
It reflected the anxiety of many voters about their future and that of their children in a rapidly changing economy.
Or so the pundits say.
These may in fact be trends, or they may be fleeting fancies that will evaporate by the next election.
But one underpinning of the sweeping Republican victory that may represent a lasting change in American politics has hardly been noticed: Republicans this year fielded more appealing candidates than Democrats for offices from coast to coast, removing an edge Democrats have banked on for years.


Moving Ahead at Medical Center
IT was mostly good news last week for the beleaguered Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
After several delays and a series of interim contracts, a politically controversial 10-year affiliation agreement between the public hospital and New York Medical College got final approval from the County Board of Legislators.
Also, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced that the Medical Center would likely end the year in the black, despite earlier forecasts of a $7 million deficit.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Cuomo, a Mystery in an Enigma in a Politician, and His Final Race; In an Interview, No Excuses, No Regrets, Some Uncertainty
He lost the election and the job he has held for 12 years.
But Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has retained his equilibrium, his sense of humor and his penchant for self-examination, even when the mirror he holds up reflects rejection and regret.
So it seemed in a 90-minute conversation, the first extensive interview since his defeat, in which Mr.
Cuomo expressed few second thoughts about running for a fourth term and said he fell victim to swirling cross currents of voter discontent.
And yet, for a man who spent so much of his tenure blaming his failings on uncontrollable forces, Mr.
Cuomo did not transfer responsibility for his loss.


Clinton Begins Pacific Visit in Manila
President Clinton began a Pacific tour here this morning with somber stops to honor nearly a century of economic and security ties between the United States and the Philippines, its first colony.
With visits to Corregidor Island and an American military cemetery, Mr.
Clinton is seeking to honor American-Filipino suffering at the outset of World War II and the fighting that finally liberated the Philippines from Japanese control in the final months of the conflict.


Miss McMullan and Mr. Del Priore
K.
Mavourneen McMullan, a daughter of Rose Mary McMullan of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Robert J. McMullan, was married yesterday to Charles J. Del Priore Jr., the son of Valerie and Charles J. Del Priore of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Msgr.
Vincent W. Jeffers performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Church in Greenwich.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
Malcolm W. Browne states that recent research in intelligence and its possible genetic link to race has been "neither fashionable nor safe for the last three decades." Whether or not study of this question has been seen as politically appropriate, in fact considerable research has been conducted during this period; very little of it, however, supports the conclusion that some races are cognitively less able than others.


Seminoles Win the Rematch That Wasn't
In a reverse of 1993's game of the year, the Seminoles used a running attack to defeat Notre Dame, 23-16, today before 72,868 at the Florida Citrus Bowl.
The game had been a sellout since 2,500 general-admission tickets were sold in six minutes in June.
At that time, both two teams still had visions of a national championship and the game would be a rematch of last year's No. 1 versus No. 2 matchup won by the Irish, 31-24.


A.T.M. Shock
To the Editor: Something new in automated teller machines: In Vienna I came upon an A.T.M. that exchanged one currency for another.
I inserted a United States $5 bill and the receipt showed that was worth 57 Austrian schillings -- not bad.
However the machine kept 23 schillings commission, leaving me 34.
I was glad I didn't exchange a larger bill.
ALLAN E. BROWN  Maplewood, N.J.


Sports of The Times; The Heisman Vote's 3-Card Monte
I TUNED into WFAN during a recent drive from State College, Pa., and was intrigued by an intense debate over the issue of awarding the Heisman Trophy.
The host, Bill Daughtry, who can be counted on for a thought-provoking show, said that among college quarterbacks Steve McNair of Alcorn State was the front-runner for the Heisman Trophy.
Hands down.
You'd have thought he called for the dissolution of the union.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; The Resistance Movement
THE OTHER DAY THE COLLAGEN Corporation invited some writers and editors to a presentation by Debbie Then, a social psychologist from Stanford University who gave a talk on women's new attitudes toward "cosmetic procedures," meaning anything from chemical peels to collagen injections to surgery.
We saw a video of attractive (but not flashy) women talking openly and positively about how they'd had work done to please themselves, and how much happier and more confident they felt afterward.
These women didn't look old and they didn't look young; they had the smooth look of affluence.
According to Then's survey, women who elect to have cosmetic procedures are trend-setters.
Heroines of consumerism, they'd been the first to equip themselves with VCR's and cellular phones.
One member of the audience objected to the cost -- $400 for collagen injections that in some cases might have to be redone every four months.
She didn't mention surgery, which could easily run as high as $8,000, none of it covered by health insurance.
Nobody from the Collagen Corporation said anything about trying to bring down the price.
But then no one would ever consider bringing down the price of a Prada backpack, either.
Wasn't that part of the point, that the ageless face signaled membership in the consumer elite?


Whitman's Popularity Helped Lautenberg
THE "time for a change" wave that swept Republicans into office across the country last Tuesday fell flat when it reached the United States Senate race in New Jersey.
And paradoxically, the popularity of the Republican Governor, Christine Todd Whitman, may have been part of the reason.
While angry voters were rejecting Democrats running for Congress and statehouses in the metropolitan area and elsewhere, the Democratic Party in New Jersey was showing signs of stabilizing after last year's defeat of Gov.
Jim Florio by Mrs.
Whitman.


Steely Dan (Half of It, That Is) Strikes Back
FIFTEEN YEARS LATER, WE find out who put the edge into Steely Dan.
It was Walter Becker, who played bass and guitar and left the lead vocals to his songwriting partner, Donald Fagen.
On his first solo album, "11 Tracks of Whack," Becker brings back everything fans cherished about Steely Dan: the desperate characters and elliptical narratives, the jazz harmonies and the ingeniously warped structures.
And it turns out he has exactly the right voice for his own words: a groan that's jaded, long-suffering, cranky and shrewd.
The first words Becker sings are "In case you're wondering, it's alive and well."
Becker is as much an oddball now as Steely Dan was during its million-selling reign in the 1970's.
On seven remarkable albums from 1972 to 1979, Steely Dan perfected stealth pop: songs in which calm tempos and suave production cloaked unlikely musical twists and lyrics about topics like stock-market crashes, Puerto Rican immigration or the golden age of be-bop.
Only Paul Simon, Randy Newman and the best Brazilian songwriters showed the same musical sophistication, while Steely Dan had a terse cynicism all its own: a fascination with sleaze and duplicity that was one part hipster slumming, two parts film noir.


Columbia Savors Victory 23 Years in the Making
Sisyphus had nothing on these guys.
For more than two decades, the Columbia football team pushed its figurative boulder up the hill only to have it roll back over the Lions and all the way down over and over again.
But Columbia finally reached the summit yesterday afternoon at Wien Stadium.
The Lions scored their most points in a dozen years, and then held off a late Cornell rally for a wild 38-33 victory before 8,825.
The game featured 4 lead changes, 998 total yards, 7 Columbia pass plays that gained 20 or more yards, and 6 Cornell plays from scrimmage that accomplished the same thing.


TAKING THE CHILDREN
The War Kevin Costner, Elijah Wood, Mare Winningham, Lexi Randall Directed by Jon Avnet PG-13 127 minutes


Wendy L. Cohen, Jonathan Gottlieb
Wendy Lynn Cohen, the controller of Zeckendorf Realty in New York, is to be married today to Jonathan Adam Gottlieb, a lawyer in the enforcement division of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission in New York.
Rabbi Stephen Kane is to officiate at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 29, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Cohen of East Brunswick, N.J.
Her father is a regional sales manager for Catco Overseas Enterprises, a tile importer in Port Reading, N.J.


Last of the Proudfoots
WATCH WITH ME And Six Other Stories of the Yet-Remembered Ptolemy Proudfoot and His Wife, Miss Minnie, Nee Quinch.
By Wendell Berry. 210 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $21.


The New Chelsea's Many Faces
TWILIGHT cloaked the raw-edged precinct west of the old High Line, the abandoned railroad viaduct that haunts lower 10th Avenue.
Ghostly signs, ever fading on the brick walls of brooding old lofts, attested to businesses long lost: "Spears Furniture Exchange" and "Kiln-Dried Lumber" and "Tower's Warehouses."
By all rights, West 22d Street should have been empty on the evening of Oct. 28.
Instead, there were so many cabs and black sedans that traffic could barely move.
The art crowd had descended in a pincers movement from uptown and downtown on the new Matthew Marks Gallery, which opened with a show by Ellsworth Kelly.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Though Elizabeth Coleman seems to feel that Bennington had been plunged into some sort of intellectual dark age before it was graced with her arrival, it was an electric and magical place during my years there ("Bennington Means Business," by Mark Edmundson, Oct. 23).


Palestinians Arrest 100 Islamic Militants After Bicycle Bombing
Raiding scores of houses and a mosque, the Palestinian police arrested more than 100 Islamic militants today in a crackdown ordered after a suicide bomber killed three Israeli soldiers at a checkpoint near this Jewish settlement.
But even as they spoke of a new, tougher policy against Muslim militants, leaders of the Palestinian self-rule authority said that the Israelis would not have died on Friday if the 19 Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip did not exist.
In particular, they denounced Netzarim, an isolated community near the Mediterranean where platoons of Israeli soldiers stand guard over at most 28 families.


The Sounds Of Silence At Tap Center
Tap dancing evolved from Irish and African dances in the late 1800's and flourished in New York musicals and clubs in the 1920's.
And this uniquely American art form experienced a renaissance in the last two decades, with the comeback of old masters like Honi Coles and a new generation like the Hines Brothers, starring in Broadway shows like "Bubbling Brown Sugar," "Jelly's Last Jam," "Black and Blue" and "My One and Only."


In Green Bay, Jets' Toughest Foe Is One They Can't Tackle
The Jets brushed up on their Green Bay history this week -- the men from the biggest market in the N.F.L. learning something about the smallest.
It has been 15 years since the one and only time the Jets played at Lambeau Field, the real home of the Packers, and the Lombardi tradition.


John A. Volpe, Nixon Supporter And Massachusetts Governor, 85
John Anthony Volpe, a former Governor of Massachusetts, Ambassador to Italy and United States Secretary of Transportation, died on Friday night.
He was 85 and lived in Nahunt, Mass.
The Nahunt police attributed his death to natural causes.


Habitats/Renovating a Classic; Cutting a Few Corners to Keep Costs From Soaring
THE architects riffled through their 2-inch stack of glossy photographs searching for the right "before" shots to illustrate their points about renovating the 1,500-square-foot apartment for less than $75,000, including the architects' fee.
The photographs of the classic six-room prewar apartment at 9 East 96th Street, off Fifth Avenue, show the kind of place real estate ads describe as needing "TLC" or "in estate condition." It wasn't exactly a wreck -- plaster wasn't hanging off the walls -- but it needed work.


RICHARD FERBER
In the parents' support groups I lead, many parents are frustrated at the distance between themselves and their children as they grow older.
Comforting and listening to an infant or toddler at night is one of the first steps to opening the lines of communication that parents will want to last a lifetime.
SHARON C. PETERS Brooklyn


Darryl Shrock and Pamela Mandell
Pamela Lynn Mandell and Darryl Jay Shrock, marketers at American Express Travel Related Services in New York, were married yesterday evening in Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi David Bateman performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Abraham.
Mrs.
Shrock, 27, a graduate of American University, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Mandell of Randolph, N.J.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Dover, N.J.
Her mother, Sandy Mandell, is a marriage and family therapist in Morristown, N.J.


Nets Miss The Point In Another Ugly Loss
No matter how often Coach Butch Beard berated and begged the Nets, no matter how many timeouts he called and no matter how many animated conversations the players had on the court and on the bench, nothing could make their shots fall tonight -- and nothing could prevent the Houston Rockets from trouncing them.
The Nets entered the game with the worst field-goal percentage in the league, and they validated that unenviable position by missing shot after horrid shot.
Derrick Coleman clanged iron on his first 11 attempts and did not hit a field goal until the third quarter was more than half over.
On several possessions in the fourth period, none of the five Nets on the floor seemed excited about the prospect of even attempting a shot.


Rhodes
To the Editor: I just finished reading "Rhodes Sojourn With Plenty of Company" by Susan Spano (Oct. 9), and I would like to add a few things.
Yes, Rhodes is expensive, compared with other parts of Greece, but it is still relatively inexpensive compared with other European destinations.


The Lost Years of a Nobel Laureate
SEVERAL weeks before the 1994 Nobel prize in economics was announced on Oct. 11, two mathematicians -- Harold W. Kuhn and John Forbes Nash Jr. -- visited their old teacher, Albert W. Tucker, now almost 90 and bedridden, at Meadow Lakes, a nursing home near here.
Mr.
Nash hadn't spoken with his mentor in several years.
Their hour-long conversation, from which Mr.
Kuhn excused himself, concerned number theory.
When Mr.
Nash stepped out of the room, Mr.
Kuhn returned to tell Mr.
Tucker a stunning secret: Unbeknownst to Mr.
Nash, the Royal Swedish Academy intended to grant Mr.
Nash a Nobel for work he had done as the old man's student in 1949, work that turned out to have revolutionary implications for economics.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
The Book Review could better serve its readers if, instead of repeating platitudes about J. Philippe Rushton's right to be heard, it were to exercise its responsibility to examine what Mr.
Rushton is saying.
Malcolm W. Browne quotes Rushton apologists to the effect that "as science, there is nothing wrong with Rushton's work in principle." Nothing could be farther from the truth, as even a cursory examination of Mr.
Rushton's publications reveals.
The bulk of his controversial claims are published in journals that do not adhere to the standard scientific procedures of review and criticism by scientific colleagues.
STEVEN GREENE  Princeton, N.J.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the playwright Sam Shepard misstates the opening date for his play "Simpatico" in some copies.
It opens at the Joseph Papp Public Theater tomorrow, not today.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Portrait of the Electorate: Who Voted for Whom in the House
The Republicans made widespread gains on Election Day, capturing control of both houses of Congress for the first time in 40 years and also making advances in governor's offices and in statehouses across the country.


NOV. 6-12: Amid Rumors; Reagan Discloses His Alzheimer's
Alzheimer's disease causes the mental and physical deterioration of an estimated 4 million Americans.
And it tears at the hearts of millions more who must cope with watching a loved one unravel.
Last weekend, former President Ronald Reagan disclosed that he has entered the early stages of the incurable and ultimately fatal disease.
Letters of support from well-wishers poured into Mr.
Reagan's home in California.
But there was little comfort in reports that the 83-year-old Mr.
Reagan, whose talent as a storyteller was legendary, now forgets the punch lines to some of his favorite jokes.


Jeannine Weimar, K. J. Fitzpatrick
Jeannine Ann Weimar, a research assistant at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, is to be married today to Dr.
Kenneth John Fitzpatrick, a resident in urology at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
John C. Mulqueen is to officiate at St.
Frances de Chantal Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, 26, graduated from the Catholic University of America.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Weimar of Brooklyn.
Her father is the chief fiscal officer for the Brooklyn-Queens Roman Catholic Diocesan Television Network.
Her mother is a medical-records specialist at Maimonides.


Poussin Is Revered, but Can He Be Enjoyed?
FOR A MODERN VIEWER, especially one who isn't French, Nicolas Poussin may be the most difficult of all the great artists to appreciate.
Anyone dimly familiar with the history of painting can probably conjure up an image of his "Rape of the Sabines" or "The Massacre of the Innocents." But that image can seem very remote.
Poussin's world was that of the dramatist Pierre Corneille, not ours, and no less distant and abstract.
It is steeped in arcana and the classical past.
It is a world where passion usually takes a back seat to duty and honor.
Poussin was the ultimate painter-philosopher, contemplative and unostentatious in his life and his work.
A laborious and painstaking craftsman, he had none of the visceral swagger that we admire in the work of his 17th-century contemporaries, like Rubens, Bernini, Velazquez and Rembrandt.
All of them are more accessible to us.
We can revere Poussin.
But can we enjoy him?


Private Club For Everyone
FORGET the noisy, 90's cappuccino bars.
In Boston, on a cold night, the place to get warm is the Ritz Bar, where perfect martinis are poured at your table by waiters in tuxedos, as they have been since 1933.
The Ritz Bar, in the Ritz-Carlton Hotel, is a wood-paneled oasis of tranquillity, and old Boston.
The armchairs are upholstered, the fireplace marble, the peanuts served in little silver bowls.
And the glasses are stamped with the Ritz lion logo.


Taking On the Banks, Crusading for the Bronx
A pair of crossed 2-by-4's block the top stairs of a red-brick apartment building in the High Bridge section of the Bronx.
Matthew Lee hops the boards, leaps over the chasm of a missing step and climbs to the roof.
Perched on a hill, the rooftop enjoys a panoramic view of the South Bronx.
Mr.
Lee points to Yankee Stadium, hovering like a great docked spaceship a few blocks away on River Avenue.
Then his finger moves slowly to the north, tracing the ridge of tall apartment buildings along the Grand Concourse, past the the new Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center and toward the horizon.


'If I Were Younger I Would Make Myself Russian': Voltaire's Encounter With the Czars
"WHEN, toward the beginning of our century the czar Peter laid the foundations of Petersburg, or rather of his empire," Voltaire observed in the 18th century, "no one foresaw success." No one, he thought, could have imagined that arts and letters would flourish there, that the Russian empire, "almost unknown to us until then, would be civilized in 50 years," and anyone who predicted it would have been dismissed as a visionary.
Voltaire spoke for the 18th century's amazement at the phenomenon of Russia, its revolutions and transformations, unforeseeable and unimaginable to those who watched from far away.
Our own century has witnessed revolutions in Russia no less astonishing and unpredictable, right up to the most recent years; tremendous events have left every interested observer, even the visionaries, reeling from the pace at which history has outstripped our imaginations.
Petersburg has become St.
Petersburg again.


BENEFITS
Homes for Those Without  MONDAY -- Community Access, which provides housing to homeless people who are mentally ill, will celebrate its 20th anniversary with a dinner-dance and auction from 6 to 10 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Dick Cavett will be the master of ceremonies.
Virgil E. Ecton, the chief operating officer of the United Negro College Fund, and Representative Nydia Velasquez of the Bronx will be honored.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 420-1594.
For Lupus Research  MONDAY -- The actors Terrence Mann of "Beauty and the Beast" and Charlotte d'Amboise of "Damn Yankees" will perform at the Plaza at the 17th annual dinner-dance for research supported by the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Foundation.
The black-tie evening begins with cocktails at 6.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 685-4118.
Stomp at Lincoln Center  MONDAY -- Stomp, the British percussion ensemble; Ben Robinson, an illusionist, and Willie Ninja, a dancer, will be among the performers at a benefit sponsored by the junior commitee of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
The event, beginning at 7 P.M. in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse, includes cocktails, a buffet supper and dancing.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 875-5444.
Models at Wollman Rink  MONDAY -- The models Cindy Crawford and Linda Evangelista will join Marla Maples Trump on the ice at Wollman Rink in Central Park to raise funds for pediatric AIDS research and care.
The evening begins at 8 with cocktails, a buffet supper and skating for the guests.
The skater JoJo Starbuck and the Ice Theater of New York will be among the performers.
An auction will include a tennis racquet signed by Martina Navratilova and used in her last Wimbledon match.
Guests enter the park at 59th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for children age 13 and under, from (212) 780-2180.
Rewarding Municipal Workers  MONDAY -- The One Hundred Year Association of New York, whose members are New York companies and organizations more than 100 years old, will hold a black-tie dinner at the St.
Regis.
John F. McGillicuddy, a former chairman of the Chemical Banking Corporation, will be honored.
The evening, which will raise money for scholarships and awards for outstanding New York City civil service workers, begins with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 922-0791.
For a Greener New York  MONDAY -- Trees New York, which plants and cares for trees in New York City, will benefit from a cocktail party from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. at the Seagram's Town House, 239 East 61st Street.
William R. Chaney, the chairman of Tiffany &amp; Company, is to be honored.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 227-1887.
Gladys Knight, Nancy Wilson  TUESDAY -- The singers Gladys Knight and Nancy Wilson will be joined by the comedian Sinbad at a performance at the Waldorf-Astoria that will benefit the Valley, a multicultural youth program that provides leadership, job training and education and has headquarters at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Bill Cosby is to be the master of ceremonies.
The event begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 832-1937.
An Evening at the Circus  TUESDAY -- A 6:30 P.M. performance of the Big Apple Circus in Damrosch Park will raise money for HELP, which provides temporary housing and services for homeless families.
The actor Charles Grodin will be the honorary ringmaster.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 444-1887.
Cooking for Children  TUESDAY -- Thirty chefs from some of New York's most popular restaurants will prepare dishes to benefit Children's Friends for Life, which provides care, clothing and education to infants and children with H.I.V. or AIDS.
Ivana Trump, one of those to be honored, will be a host of the evening, which will begin at 6 with a champagne reception and a performance by the singer Maureen McGovern.
That will be followed at 7 by the tastings and a silent auction, all at the Architects and Designers Building, 150 East 58th Street.
Tickets, $200, or $125 for the 7 P.M. tasting reception alone, from (212) 370-7180.
An Outreach Project in Queens  TUESDAY -- Brian O'Dywer, the New York City Human Rights Commissioner, will be among those honored at the 13th annual fund-raising dinner-dance for the Outreach Project, a Queens drug and alcohol treatment agency.
Jim Jensen, the WCBS-TV correspondent, will be the host of the evening, which begins at 6 at the Sheraton New York.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 847-9233.
For the Phipps Houses  TUESDAY -- The author E. L. Doctorow will speak at a dinner-dance at the Plaza for the social, educational and recreational programs of the Phipps Community Development Corporation, the low-and moderate-income housing agency.
The event, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., will honor Stanley Brezenoff, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and Kenneth I. Chenault, the president of American Express Travel Related Services.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 353-8200.  'Hometown Heroes'  TUESDAY -- Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and Roz Abrams, a news anchor on WABC-TV, are to be among those honored at a cocktail reception from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Rihga Royal Hotel, 151 West 54th Street.
The event, which includes refreshments, an auction and a raffle, is to benefit St.
Pius V High School, a school for girls in the South Bronx.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 852-7276.
A Comedy Evening  TUESDAY -- Five comedians will perform at 8 P.M. at Caroline's Comedy Club, 1626 Broadway (49th Street), at a benefit for the New York City chapter of the American Diabetes Association.
A champagne and dessert reception is to follow.
Tickets, $100, or $30 for the show alone, from (212) 725-4925, extension 246.
A Holiday Boutique  TUESDAY -- A holiday gift boutique will benefit the community programs of the New York Junior League from 6:30 to 10 P.M. at the league's headquarters, 130 East 80th Street.
The evening will include a fashion show featuring men's and women's items from Barneys New York, and tastings of Scotch whisky.
The boutique is also open Wednesday and Thursday.
Opening-night tickets, $25, from (212) 288-6220, or $30 at the door.
A Christmas Auction  WEDNESDAY -- Carlton Rochell Jr. of Sotheby's will conduct the annual Christmas auction for Volunteers of America, which raises money for a holiday food-voucher program for poor families.
Vacation trips to Miami Beach, a cruise aboard a Mississippi riverboat, weekend hotel stays and restaurant meals will be among the items to be auctioned.
The event, 7 to 9:30 P.M., at Tavern on the Green, includes cocktails and hors d'oeuvres.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 873-2600, extension 115.
An Enterprise Evening  WEDNESDAY -- The Enterprise Foundation, which builds housing for poor families, will hold a fund-raising dinner from 6:30 to 10 at the Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (Jane Street).
The hosts will be Beverly Sills; Andrew Heiskell, the former chairman and chief executive of Time Inc., and Richard Parsons, the president of Time Warner.
Henry Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, is to speak.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 262-9575.
Interfaith Neighbors Auction  WEDNESDAY -- Interfaith Neighbors, a Manhattan center for adolescents, will celebrate its 40th anniversary with an auction in Wallace Hall at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church, Park Avenue at 84th Street.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley is to be the auctioneer.
The items will include original works of art and tickets to Broadway shows and sporting events.
The evening begins with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres at 6.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 472-3567.
The National Book Awards  WEDNESDAY -- The educational outreach programs of the National Book Foundation will benefit from the 44th annual National Book Awards ceremony and dinner at the Plaza.
The black-tie evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30.
The poet Gwendolyn Brooks will receive a medal for distinguished contribution to American letters.
Tickets, $500, (212) 685-0261.
Duets on the West Side  WEDNESDAY -- The Piatigorsky Foundation, which is named for the cellist Gregor Piatigorsky and is dedicated to presenting free classical music performances in America, is to benefit from a concert by Evan Drachman, a cellist who is a grandson of Mr.
Piatigorsky, and Gerald Robbins, a pianist.
The program, which begins at 8 P.M. in a private apartment at 25 Central Park West (61st Street), will be followed by a cocktail reception.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 787-9541.
Tokyo String Quartet at 25  WEDNESDAY -- To celebrate its 25th anniversary, the Tokyo String Quartet is holding an 8 P.M. concert at Avery Fisher Hall to benefit Classical Action: Performing Arts Against AIDS.
The quartet will give other benefit concerts in New York, some at Carnegie Hall, on Jan. 18, Feb. 8, March 1 and May 10.
Tickets are $15, $22.50 and $30.
Reservations and information from (212) 222-4843.
For Those Left Behind  WEDNESDAY -- The ninth annual dinner of the New York Police and Fire Widows' and Children's Benefit Fund, which provides emergency funds to the families of those who have died in the line of duty, begins with a cocktail reception at 6 at the New York Hilton.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to speak and Rusty Staub is to be the master of ceremonies.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 783-6122.
Michael Feinstein to Perform  WEDNESDAY -- The entertainer Michael Feinstein is to perform at the Pierre along with the pianist and composer Burton Lane at a dinner celebrating the 37th anniversary of the Young Adult Institute, an agency that serves children and adults who are retarded or have other disabilities.
The event is to begin at 6:30 with a cocktail reception and an auction.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 563-7474, extension 121.
A Century of Design  WEDNESDAY -- A preview of two exhibitions from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will benefit the Brooklyn Museum.
The shows are titled "Art at the Armory" and "Modernism: 1860-1960, a Century of Style and Design." Iris Cantor, the philanthropist, is the chairwoman of the evening, at which Jens Risom, a Danish designer of furniture and interiors, is to be honored.
There will be a cocktail reception, and a buffet supper will be served.
The exhibition is open to the public from Thursday through next Sunday.
Preview tickets, $125, from (718) 638-5000, extension 327, or at the door..
Honoring a Journalist  THURSDAY -- A. M. Rosenthal, a columnist and former executive editor of The New York Times, will be honored at a dinner at the Marriott Marquis.
The event, which is to begin with a cocktail reception at 6, will benefit the International Campaign for Tibet, a human rights advocacy and monitoring group.
A silent auction will be held, with items that include movie memorabilia contributed by the actors Harrison Ford and Richard Gere.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 898-4157.
Archives of American Art  THURSDAY -- The Archives of American Art, a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution, will honor Agnes Gund, the chairwoman of the Museum of Modern Art, at an evening that is to begin at 6:30 with cocktails and an art exhibition at the Paine Webber Building, 1285 Avenue of the Americas (51st Street).
At 8:15, the festivities move to the University Club, 1 West 54th Street, where dinner will be served.
Transportation to the club will be provided.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 399-5030.
For Homeless Mothers  THURSDAY -- Joyce Dinkins is to present an award to Susan L. Taylor, the editor in chief of Essence magazine, at a cocktail reception at 6 P.M. at the Brooklyn Borough Hall.
The party is to benefit the Rose F. Kennedy Family Center, a Brooklyn residence for young homeless mothers.
A donation of $40 is suggested.
Information: (718) 399-0523.
For Lyme Disease Research  THURSDAY -- A black-tie dinner-dance at the Hyatt Regency in Old Greenwich, Conn., will raise money for research and treatment programs of the American Lyme Disease Foundation.
The festivities begin with a cocktail party at 6:30.
Tickets, $250, from (914) 277-6970.
Honoring Isaac Stern  THURSDAY -- The musician Isaac Stern is to be honored at a black-tie evening at the Waldorf-Astoria for Young Audiences Inc., an organization that takes the performing arts into American public schools.
The event begins with cocktails at 6:15, followed by dinner and performances by the pianist Emanuel Ax and Chee-Yun, a violinist.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 831-8110.
A Fountain in Snug Harbor  THURSDAY -- The Snug Harbor Cultural Center, at 1000 Richmond Terrace in Livingston, S.I., will rededicate the newly refurbished Neptune fountain monument, originally installed in 1892.
The evening begins with cocktails at 7 in a tent on the center's east lawn, followed by dinner and entertainment by the composer Galt MacDermott on piano.
Thomas Hoving, the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is to be the master of ceremonies.
Tickets, $150, from (718) 448-2500.
For Cancer Care  THURSDAY -- A party sponsored by the junior committee of Cancer Care will raise money to support the organization's free cancer counseling services.
At the event, 7 to 11 P.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street), there will be hors d'oeuvres, refreshments and dancing.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 221-3300, extension 468, or $60 at the door.
A Night of Magic  FRIDAY -- The National Tourette Syndrome Association will hold its annual dinner-dance, called "Magique" this year, at Terrace on the Park in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, to benefit research on the neurological disorder for which the association is named.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner with an open bar and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150, from (718) 224-2999.
Bidding for Dates  FRIDAY -- The Polycystic Kidney Foundation will sponsor an auction at which guests are to bid for dates with 30 men and women who have donated their time.
It will be at the Meadowlands Hilton, 2 Harmon Plaza off Meadowlands Parkway in Secaucus, N.J.
The event, which will benefit research, will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by the auction.
Tickets, $20, at the door.
Information: (212) 226-1400, extension 231.
Artists' Showcase for Cancer  FRIDAY -- The second annual fall Designer Crafts on Fifth Avenue exposition will be from 5 to 8 P.M. in the U.I.A. building, 2 East 79th Street.
Nineteen artists will showcase examples of knitting, weaving, ceramics and wood furniture.
Refreshments will be served.
A donation of $3 is suggested and will go to the Craft Emergency Relief Fund and the American Cancer Society.
The craft expo continues on Saturday and next Sunday.
Information: (914) 462-0859.
For Harlem Hospital  SATURDAY -- The Friends of the Harlem Hospital Center will hold their seventh annual dinner-dance at the Grand Hyatt.
The singer Lena Horne is to be the honored guest.
The event begins with cocktails at 7.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 939-2489.
A Superstudio Dinner-Dance  SATURDAY -- New Alternatives for Children, a service agency for disabled and chronically ill children, will hold a dinner-dance for young professionals at Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (West 12th Street), from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M.
A buffet supper will be served and there will be an open bar.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 696-1550, or $85 at the door.  'Whole Earth' Celebration  SATURDAY -- The Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum will hold a party to celebrate the publication of "The Millennium Whole Earth Catalog" (HarperCollins) from 7 to 11 P.M.
Two of the catalogue's editors, Jay Baldwin and Howard Rheingold, will be on hand to sign books.
A cocktail buffet will be served.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 860-6163.
Judaica Sale  SATURDAY -- Emunah, a Zionist women's organization, is holding a special Hanukkah shopping night from 6 to 11 at Westside Judaica, a store at 2412 Broadway (88th Street).
A portion of the proceeds will benefit the organization's child care and education projects in Israel.
Other stores in Brooklyn and Queens and on Long Island plan to participate.
Information and other locations: (212) 564-9045.
Honoring Steven Spielberg  NEXT SUNDAY -- Steven Spielberg is to receive the Elie Wiesel Holocaust Remembrance Award at an Israel Bonds dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Elie Wiesel is to speak, and 100 Holocaust survivors whose names appeared on Schindler's list are to join Mr.
Spielberg on the dais.
A cocktail reception begins at 6, followed by dinner.
Dietary laws will be observed.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 644-2663.
Brooke Astor Accepts  NEXT SUNDAY -- The Tenth Literary Symposium, benefiting the Foundation for Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y., will honor Brooke Astor for her support of libraries and literature.
David Rockefeller will make the presentation.
The writers on the panel will include Anthony D. Marshall, Judith and Milton Viorst, and Hilma and Meg Wollitzer.
The symposium, at the Academic Arts Building of the college, begins at 2:30 P.M., with a reception at 4:30.
Tickets, $40, from (914) 785-6670.
Designer Fashion Sale  NEXT SUNDAY -- A designer fashion sale to benefit the Child Development Center of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services will be held from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Nightingale-Bamford School, 20 East 92d Street.
Furs and accessories will be sold, along with men's and children's clothing and women's clothing by designers including Giorgio Armani, Chanel, Valentino and Turnbull &amp; Asser.
Admission, $5, at the door.
Information: (212) 632-4738.
Beach Party for Children  NEXT SUNDAY -- Kids at Heart, a beach party with sand and boardwalk games, will be held at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street (Houston Street), from 1 to 4 P.M. to benefit the National Council for Adoption.
Meryl Streep, the honorary chairwoman of the benefit, is expected to attend.
Tickets, $250, will admit one adult with one child, from (202) 328-1200.
Beer and Biscuits for Art  NOV. 21 -- A fund-raiser for family programs at the Queens Museum of Art will be held at London Lennies, 63-88 Woodhaven Boulevard, Rego Park, Queens.
The event, beginning at 7:30 P.M., will include a five-course Southern-style beer dinner and the Gully Low Jazz Band.
Tickets, $75, from (718) 894-8084.
Make-a-Wish Auction  NOV. 22 -- The fourth annual celebrity auction to benefit the Make-a-Wish Foundation of Metro New York will be held at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street.
Auction items include clothing autographed by Andre Agassi and Demi Moore, a book signed by Paul McCartney and a walk-on part on the television show "Murphy Brown." Tickets, $50, from (212) 505-9474.


Liftoff
THEY CALL IT AN information highway, but that's like calling a live person a skeleton.
That overused road metaphor may help to explain the invisible technology of the Internet -- how electronic messages are driven from George's home computer along a network of local streets to a web of networks, the Interstate, and back onto local streets to Mary's computer in Moscow (Idaho, Russia or both).
It's an arterial system, but the experience of traveling the net is nothing like a ride in a car.
At one level, it's like having a highly efficient telephone and telegraph service, with both private and party lines.
At another, it's like flying an information spaceship and docking at other computers to copy lists and texts and pictures and computer programs.
And at yet another level, it can feel like an untethered walk in space to visit other travelers -- thrilling, disorienting, unreal.
It's not, yet, an easy trip.


NOV. 6-12: One Shoe Drops; The United States Stops Enforcing Embargo On Weapons to Bosnia
Usually the Pentagon makes news by launching a military operation.
But last week it sent shock waves through NATO by stopping one.
Breaking with its Western European allies, American military forces yesterday stopped enforcing the two-year-old United Nations ban on weapon shipments to the Bosnian Government.


3 Bangkok Hotels Turn To River to Beat Jams
Alarmed by traffic congestion that is among the world's worst, three of Bangkok's leading hotels have banded together to provide a river-taxi service to deliver guests from the international airport to their location along the Chao Phraya River.
The hotels -- the Oriental, the Shangri-La and the Royal Orchid Sheraton -- offer the boat service every day from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. for a one-way fee of $28.
A regular taxi costs about $20.
Guests traveling on the river taxi, the River Express, are met at the airport and taken by bus to a nearby pier, where they board a jet-propelled catamaran capable of seating 40.
Travel time is about one hour, less than half the time it can take by car.
The boats leave every 30 minutes.


With Pataki, What You See Is Just What You Get
Almost everyone on his plane knew that George E. Pataki had worn the same red-orange tie for the last three days of his lurching but successful campaign for governor, and not for luck.
Of course, it had never occurred to him.
"No, no," he said, looking down at his neckwear with some embarrassment.
"I just have similar ties."


Close Quarters
To the Editor:
Regarding your article "The Cone Sisters: Shoppers or Connoisseurs"  [ Oct. 30 ] , the Cone sisters were my grandfather's first cousins.
In the late 1930's I had the opportunity to see Etta Cone's home, where every available inch of wall space was jampacked in what seemed to me a not particularly tasteful manner.


Profile; Utility Competition Is Coming! (He's Ready, of Course)
AS the 45-story stacks of the giant Gibson generating station loomed into view amid the cornfields and woods here in southwestern Indiana, James E. Rogers looked down from the helicopter and said, "Thank God I've got smart people running this."
Mr.
Rogers, at 47, is vice chairman and president of the Cinergy Corporation, a holding company for two Midwest utilities.
But he makes no pretense of being a technical expert, having spent most his career as a lawyer, at one time fighting the utility industry on behalf of consumers.


The Least Angry Man
WE'RE READY FOR YOU, MR.
GRODIN Behind the Scenes at Talk Shows, Movies, and Elsewhere.
By Charles Grodin. 320 pp.
New York: A Lisa Drew Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
The authors of the three books reviewed by Malcolm W. Browne are to be commended on one insight they apparently share: that the growing gap between the higher-I.Q. upper classes and the lower-I.Q.
"underclass" is deplorable.
Beyond that, their brain cells seem to be lacking the serotonin needed to make some important intellectual connections.
If I.Q.'s -- skewed as the tests may be -- can be increased even temporarily by Head Start, not to mention by good nutrition and housing, stable and caring homes, etc., surely there is more to nurture over nature than these scholars admit.


DUMBING DOWN
I can't begin to convey my surprise and exhilaration on reading Henig's description of schools today.
What a relief, in this age of political correctness, to see it told as it is.
H.
M.
SMITH Fanwood, N.J.


Best Illustrated Books of the Year
The illustrations on these pages have been taken from the Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1994.
The Book Review has annually asked a panel of three judges to make a selection from among the several thousand children's books published each year.
The Judges this year were Liz Rosenberg, who teaches creative writing at the State University of New York, Binghampton, and whose books include "Monster Mama"; Randall Enos, a children's service consultant to the Ramapo Catskill library system; and Jacqueline Chwast, an artist whose most recent children's book is "The Perilous Pit." As a matter of note, Jerry Pinkey was a winner once before, Paul O. Zelinsky twice before, Henrik Drescher three times before and Peter Sis four times before.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
As the mother of a first-year student at Bennington, I, too, worry that the college is losing old friends.
But I balance this concern with an appreciation of what is new.
Not that I underestimate the importance of tenure and issues of fairness, but as a parent, I am not displeased that poetry is taught by the poetry editor of a famous literary magazine.
Nor, I confess, would I be horrified if, someday, that teacher had to move over for another -- my son, my daughter?
Does that sound callous?
Perhaps not to those of us who accept that job security depends on the ability to offer current, marketable skills.
CONSTANCE BAILEY New Rochelle, N.Y.


Clashing Styles or Bad Manners?
To the Editor:
Barbara Presley Noble refers to some of Deborah Tannen's ideas as "nonsense on stilts" ("Sex Differences, or Something Else," At Work, Oct. 23), and I've had my suspicions about Dr.
Tannen's ideas for some time.
In an article written by Dr.
Tannen in The New York Times Magazine, she lamented the fact that women were readily classified by their clothing, while men's clothing gave them anonymity.
Excuse me?
I attend many business functions with my husband and believe me it's not hard to tell the players from the drones from the wannabes-without-a-clue.
Many men in academe do look interchangeable, but in the real world, you can tell the players without a scorecard, and their clothing is a major clue.
SHERYL TRIPP KHOURY  Plymouth, Mich., Oct. 23


TRULY GROSS ECONOMIC PRODUCT
I suspect that Nicholas Wade (lucky man) has never been on a diet, since he reports that "affluence makes obesity possible." On the contrary, a healthy diet always costs more.
In most cases, the more sinful the food, the less it costs.
JUDITH S. BRONNER Tequesta, Fla.


Many Factors In Area's Lead In Fire Deaths
Here, more than anywhere else in New York City, people die in fires.
Community Board 12, in southeastern Queens, is not the city leader in fires or arson.
But a variety of factors, from the area's high density to its wood-frame houses, have made the district No. 1 in fire fatalities.
Since 1989, the rate has been more than three times the national average; in the city, only in East Tremont, where 87 people perished in the Happy Land Social Club in 1990, has fire killed more people.


The Executive Computer; Can Apple and I.B.M. Go It Together?
APPLE COMPUTER and I.B.M. have defined the personal computer industry at least once each separately, perhaps twice in Apple's case.
Can they do it again together?
The answer is yes, but not without a lot of qualifiers.
So dominant is the design originated by I.B.M., which is based on a microprocessor from Intel and operating system software from Microsoft, that no new platform is likely to supplant it.
But if they move quickly, and with few missteps, Apple and I.B.M -- two of the three largest PC makers -- can create a viable alternative.
Last week, Apple, I.B.M. and Motorola announced that they would jointly develop a hardware blueprint for computers based on the PowerPC microprocessor they have jointly produced.
The new machine would be a computing chameleon, able to run operating systems like I.B.M.'s OS/2, Apple's Mac OS, and versions of Unix from I.B.M. and Sun Microsystems.
As does Apple's Power Macintosh, the new machine could run Microsoft Windows, but only under "emulation" -- a "let's pretend" software technique that has never been totally satisfying.
Critics were quick to cry "too little, too late," saying that the companies should have reached this agreement three years ago when they began work on the PowerPC chip.
And there was the loud sound of just one shoe falling: where was an agreement by Apple to license Mac OS to I.B.M.?
Trade publications have reported that Apple will disclose licensing plans tomorrow at the Comdex computer convention in Las Vegas, but the company has declined to comment.
The projected delivery date of the hardware design, sometime in 1996, also seemed too far away to matter, leaving Microsoft and Intel to carve up the market in the meantime.
"If this lands in mid-1996, who cares?" asked Kimball Brown, an analyst with Dataquest.
"Why would anyone invest in this merged platform unless Apple licenses the operating system?"
But corporate buyers were more receptive to the proposed machine than were the pundits.
They like the idea of a single computer that could run all the multiple operating systems they live with today on multiple computers, which would reduce confusion and lower technical support costs.
Just knowing such a machine is coming makes buying a Power Macintosh a safer choice today, because there is a migration path.
Also, the oft-projected decline and fall of the Macintosh line of computers -- usually based on the argument that it has attained only a 10 percent share of the market -- would seem a false prophecy.
During the third quarter, for example, Apple's United States shipments of 640,000 Macintosh's made it the leading personal computer for that period, ahead of Compaq at 600,000 and I.B.M. at 500,000, according to the International Data Corporation, a market research organization based in Framingham, Mass.
Personal computers based on Intel or Intel-compatible microprocessors and Microsoft's Windows operating systems (the kind that used to be called I.B.M.-compatible) are going through a transition of their own -- from Windows 3.1 to Windows 95.
This is more than a simple software upgrade; it is a shift from a 16-bit operating system to one that processes data in 32-bit chunks.
That potentially rocky road to Wellville could create an opportunity for alternatives, like a new platform from I.B.M. and Apple.
"The market power of these two companies is greater than the sum of their market shares," said Bob Djurdjevic, president of Annex Research in Phoenix.
"Most people who have criticized this venture have focused on today. This is not about today," he continued.
"This is about the 32-bit environment, which will grow and come to dominate the market by the end of the decade."
For many years already, Apple's Macintosh has been a 32-bit machine running a 32-bit operating system.
I.B.M.'s recently introduced OS/2 Warp is a 32-bit operating system.
But Microsoft is still making the transition to a 32-bit operating system with Windows 95, which will not ship until some time next year.
Windows NT, Microsoft's more advanced operating system introduced last year, is a 32-bit system.
But so far it has achieved only modest market penetration, and only as a "server" system on large networks, not on individual desktops.
Microsoft has sought to smooth the journey to Windows 95 and 32-bit computing by seeing to it that all existing 16-bit software will run on the new system, but it's not likely to be a totally painless trip.
The installed base of Windows applications insures that Windows 95 will have strong sales, but it presents the possibility of compatibility problems.
A version of Windows 95 for the PowerPC chip is not likely to materialize, unless I.B.M., Apple and others achieve unexpected sales volume.
Windows is written in software code that ties it closely to the internal workings of the Intel chip, and to convert it would be a major undertaking.
Windows NT, however, can run on many chips, and a version for the PowerPC is in the works.
One ace up I.B.M.'s sleeve is development of a much publicized but never officially confirmed version of the PowerPC microprocessor that incorporates emulation into the chip itself.
In theory, this hardware emulation would allow machines using the chip to run Windows applications at speeds so close to their "native" performance on Intel boxes that the difference would be moot.
With the added benefit of running Macintosh, OS/2, Unix and Windows NT applications, such a machine would appeal to shops using a mix of hardware.
But the performance of this mystery chip or of the coming joint Apple-I.B.M. computer design had better be good.
"The real challenge they face is having compatibility real enough and fast enough, because the installed base is everything," said a PC buyer for a Big Six accounting firm, who spoke on the condition he not to be identified.
"It better be double the performance" of competing machines, "because it's not like PC makers or Microsoft are gouging on price," he said.
Others say outperforming Microsoft and Intel at their own game is a long shot.
They see the new machine as a Mac clone.
Apple has said it will license its operating system when the hardware specification is complete; in any case one could purchase Mac OS separately and run it on the new machine.
In addition to I.B.M., Apple and Motorola, companies developing or producing PowerPC-based machines include: Bull Systems, Canon, FirePower, Hitachi, Power Computing, 3DO, the Taiwan New PC Consortium and Toshiba.
Many are likely to seek Mac OS licenses when Apple makes them available.
"Where I.B.M. and Apple would have a real advantage is if they would combine their operating systems," said John McKenna, president of Entex Information Systems in Ryebrook, N.Y., which claims to be the largest reseller of PC's to corporate customers.
"Suppose I.B.M. were to throw all its weight behind integrating the Mac operating system."
It would be no large task for I.B.M. to add its own extensions to the Macintosh that would make it an ideal "client" in networked computer systems using I.B.M.'s mainframes and minicomputers.
But for I.B.M. to fully embrace the Macintosh operating system would seem a step back from its commitment to the OS/2 operating system, on which it has already spent hundreds of millions of dollars.
Similarly, for Apple, the prospect of licensing Mac OS to the company it once equated with George Orwell's Big Brother must cause at least a mild shudder.
"The real question," said Seymour Merrin, a consultant to the PC industry who is based in Mountain View, Calif., "is whether any product can be developed by I.B.M. and Apple when their own businesses are the biggest obstacle to anything getting done,"


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Two observations, with respect to Edmundson's article: It is ironic that, in its fiscal make-over, Bennington solicited input from students and professors but made its restructuring decisions by the fiat of its president, Elizabeth Coleman.
Perhaps the moral is, don't ask unless you are prepared to listen.


A Son's Notes
FATHERALONG  A Meditation on Fathers and Sons, Race and Society.
By John Edgar Wideman. 197 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $21.


In the Region/Westchester; New in an Office Park: A Detached Day-Care Center
IT might seem surprising in this age of corporate austerity, with office space going begging, that a new building is going up at the Westchester Corporate Park in Harrison, and right next door to a five-story building that's only 70 percent occupied.
But this project is not intended for the traditional office clientele, but rather for children, aged 8 weeks to 5 years old, who will attend the Eastridge Enrichment Center, the first free-standing day-care center to be built in a Westchester corporate park.


Say 'Oh, Jolly Good!' Or 'Awesome!' or Both
The retro style, mixing earlier decades with the present, was seen on and off the fashion runways in recent weeks.
On the streets of Paris a lace-trimmed coat from the early 1900's (top, second from left) and on Madison Avenue a young couple in new clothes, all in black (top, second from right), recalled the Edwardian period.
A woman on Fifth Avenue (top, far right) wore a 1940 profile hat with a circa 1949 jacket.
Rakishly tilted doll hats of the late 30's (far left) were seen in New York (top) and in Paris (bottom).
And a trumpet-shaped skirt, circa 1950, was mixed (left) with a 40's jacket, feather boa, tilted hat and fur-cuffed boots.
Young men have joined the retro act, too: mixing a 40's tie, a 50's cardigan sweater and a late 50's velour hat decorated with toothpicks (above); reviving the 1950's London banker style with chalk-stripe suit and homburg hat (right), and imitating the stevedore style of the 20's and 30's with suspenders, plaid shirt and tweed trousers, vest and cap (bottom, far right).


A Question Of Safety: A special report.; Troubles at USAir: Coincidence or More?
As USAir Flight 565 reached cruising altitude of 33,000 feet last Feb. 22, the pilots made a chilling discovery -- their DC-9, carrying 62 passengers from Washington to Boston, might not have enough fuel to reach its destination.
Radioing for an emergency landing at New York's La Guardia Airport, the pilots claimed the plane had engine trouble.
Only after the jet had landed safely and the ground crew had discovered the fuel situation did the captain acknowledge that there was no engine problem.
Behind schedule in Washington, workers had neglected to refuel the plane and the pilots had not checked the gauges before takeoff.


Rhonda Norton, Thomas Kean Jr.
Rhonda Lee Norton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Norton of Brecksville, Ohio, was married yesterday to Thomas H. Kean Jr., a son of former Governor Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey and Mrs.
Kean, of Bedminster, N.J.
The Rev.
Brendan Horan performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
Francis Wade, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kean, 26, is an environmental protection specialist in the office of enforcement and compliance assurance of the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington.
She graduated from Allegheny College.
Her father is the chief financial officer and a director of Fabri-Centers of America Inc., a retailer of fabrics, notions and crafts that is based in Hudson, Ohio.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 13, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
2
26
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
3
9
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
22
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
8
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A young girl disappears.
6
7
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
7
3
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
8
20
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
9
11
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) A child's mysterious death.
10*
8
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
11
17
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
12
13
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
13
3
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in 1942.
14
2
THE DEVIL'S OWN, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A 1987 novel about a woman who accepts the advances of a rogue to save nine orphans.
15
2
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
16*
8
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
3
44
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
7
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
5
3
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
6
9
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
7
575
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
11
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
9
1
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Reflections on 44 years of marriage.
10
3
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
11*
24
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
12
43
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
13*
25
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
14*
7
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
15
91
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
6
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
191
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
7
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
4
12
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional character.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Climate Change Played a Role in India's Plague
To the Editor:
Re " 'Emperors of Garbage' " (Op-Ed, Nov. 5): "India's plagues are self-inflicted," reads the subheadline on Inderjit Badhwar's article, which blames Government neglect for India's epidemics.
Social inequities and widespread wastes provide the setting.
But there is another aspect: worldwide climate changes also contributed to the plague.
Last summer India's temperatures reached 124 degrees Fahrenheit, and animal carcasses were scattered across the plains.
Houses, abandoned after the Maharashtra earthquake the year before, became furnaces in blasting heat; stuffed with stored grains, they generated clouds of fleas.
Pneumonic plague was first reported in Beed district of Maharashtra state last August.


The Aging Process Holds Few Fears For This Troupe
EVERYTHING ABOUT JIRI kylian as a choreographer has an original touch.
So it comes as no surprise that creativity runs through all levels of the three-tier organization he directs under the title of Netherlands Dance Theater (N.D.T.).
Like a growing number of troupes, the original Netherlands Dance Theater, now called N.D.T. 1, has a junior ensemble.
In N.D.T. 2, young dancers serve a professional apprenticeship, performing new works and pieces no longer danced by the senior company.
Nonetheless, N.D.T. 3, the group Mr.
Kylian founded for dancers over 40, is the most captivating of all, anything but the geriatric alumni association its very concept might suggest.


POSTINGS: Opposite Madison Square Garden; Sports Store For Midtown
The Sports Authority, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based retailer with more than 100 outlets nationwide and 18 in the tristate area, will open its first New York City store Tuesday in 40,000 square feet in the Hotel Pennsylvania, at Seventh Avenue and 32d Street.
The Sports Authority, a subsidiary of Kmart, chose the location "because they wouldn't move Madison Square Garden for us," said Vince Osborne, a marketing executive at the company.
Mark I. Walker, The Sports Authority's vice president for real estate, said the store was opening at least a year ahead of schedule.
"The opportunity for this location arose and we jumped on it at once," he said.


Analyzing Cuomo
"I think a lot of people spend a lot of time analyzing Mario Cuomo, contemplating his moves, and I think a lot of that cottage industry is unnecessary. He's far more simple than people think he is." GARY G. FRYER, a former Cuomo press secretary


Back of Beyond In Peru
Don Oscar Arce Caceres, our guide, was eager to hack through vertical jungle to verify his observation.
Peter, Tina and I -- and our two mule drivers, Pedro and Segundo -- were less enthusiastic.
On this golden Andean eminence, 12,000 feet above sea level, mystery seemed better than certainty, especially if certainty required uphill climbing.


Churches Lead Dual Lives With Separate Congregations
EVERY Sunday morning at 10 o'clock, members of the Closter Congregational Church gather for their weekly worship service.
Finding a choice pew is easy.
With the entire congregation of 40 people in attendance, there's plenty of room in the 110-seat sanctuary.
The situation is different on Sunday afternoons.
At 1 o'clock, the 60 families of the Gillbot Church of Closter, a Korean congregation, meet to worship under the leadership of their pastor, the Rev.
Min Woong Kim.
The members also meet for Bible study on Wednesday nights and hold youth group meetings at other times in the Congregational Church building.


San Antonio
It is almost always fiesta time in San Antonio, America's 10th-largest city and, by some reckonings, the place where Latin America begins.
But there may be no better time of year to visit than this season, when there is much joyful anticipation of the holidays in the air.
The holidays in San Antonio bring the Fiesta de las Luminarias, when more than 2,500 candles line the city's River Walk and cast a soft, bewitching glow along the San Antonio River.
The luminarias -- candlelighted, sand-filled paper lanterns -- symbolize the lighting of the Holy Family's path, in a tradition dating from the 1500's.


Fearless, Boundless And Ready to Depart
Martina Navratilova has dreamed it, dreaded it, dined on it, decoded it with astrologers and tarot cards; retirement has been fraught with peril and possibility.
And now, immediacy.
The late tennis sage Ted Tinling once pigeonholed Navratilova as a gloriously mortal champion whose on-court attitude "ranged from arrogance to panic with nothing in between." Her attitude toward retirement, which could descend as soon as Tuesday and no later than Sunday, is much the same.


The Medium Is All These TV Books
IT was bound to happen.
Like a ravenous Klingon, television has already devoured much of popular culture.
Music is ruled by MTV.
Hollywood cannot recycle reruns -- "The Fugitive," "The Flintstones" -- fast enough.
And, hip journalists, who in another age might have sprinkled their prose with references to Adonis and Croesus, now evoke Keith Partridge and Thurston Howell 3d.
So it should surprise no one that the last great frontier -- the printed word -- should begin to fall before the mighty cathode-ray tube.
The charge is beginning with seemingly harmless homages that empower readers to relive those golden moments as couch potatoes.
"The Partridge Family" has a book.
So does "The Addams Family," "The Munsters," "Cheers," "Seinfeld," "Mission Impossible," "Get Smart," and "Mister Ed" (of course, of course).
From the "I'm not a doctor, but I play one of TV" department, this week's The New York Times's list of best sellers includes a collection of essays on marriage by Paul Reiser, the star of "Mad About You," and meditations on life by Tim "Home Improvement" Allen.


Four Decades Later, an Atypical Artist Nears a Retrospective
THE paintings and sculpture at Stamford Center for the Arts are, by his own admission, the closest Robert Goodnough has come to a retrospective.
For an artist who has been on the Manhattan scene since 1950, this is remarkable enough; but for one who has shown in galleries as prestigious as Tibor de Nagy and Andre Emmerich, not to mention the Albright-Knox, in Buffalo, it is downright mysterious.
But then there is little that is typical in Mr.
Goodnough's career, which begins with his being included, along with Franz Kline, Larry Rivers, Al Leslie and others, in a 1950 "new talent" show organized by Clement Greenberg and Meyer Schapiro for the Kootz Gallery.
Two years later, the young man (who had attended Syracuse University and served in the Army during World War II) started out with Amedee Ozenfant and Hans Hofmann, had his first solo at Tibor de Nagy, where he remained for 20 years.
Goodnough was to become, among other things, cause for comment in the 1981 autobiography written by John Bernard Myers, poet, entrepreneur and director of the gallery.


This Matchup Is All It's Pumped Up to Be
The Dallas Cowboys enter with a familiar bluster.
They are not only the new kids on the block, the team that talks extra-terrestrial trash and has a galaxy of stars and speed to back it up, but also the team flashing the rings from two consecutive Super Bowls.


State to Defend Dismissed Troopers in Lawsuit
David Harding and Robert Lishansky were dismissed by the New York State Police after they admitted fabricating evidence in more than two dozen criminal cases.
Both are now in prison.
But because of a quirk in the law, the state could spend as much as $100,000 to defend them in a civil suit charging them with faking evidence in a murder investigation.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST VALLAGE -- A Second Avenue Farewell, a Bowery Debut; Fillmore's Next Act: The Wrecking Ball
Say "Fillmore East," and many people think of the golden age of rock.
Under the direction of the impresario Bill Graham, headliners on the stage at 105 Second Avenue included the likes of B. B. King, Jimi Hendrix, the Doors, the Grateful Dead and Otis Redding.
Concerts often lasted till dawn; legend has it that Ike Turner once fired a pearl-handled pistol into the pavement to clear a way through the crowd for Tina and the Ikettes.
But in truth, the Fillmore's reign was brief, from 1968-71.
And it was just one of a number of incarnations for the building -- they included a silent-movie house, a Yiddish theater and gay disco -- that reflect the changing times and neighborhood.
Now it seems on track for demolition, to be replaced by an apartment house, with 20 percent of its units to be subsidized for low- and moderate-income tenants.


It's Not the Only Alien Invader
THREE MORNINGS A WEEK, DANIELLE KITAOKA rises at 3 A.M. and drives the 20 minutes from her home in Kaneohe, on the island of Oahu, to Honolulu International Airport, where she works as an inspector for the Hawaii Department of Agriculture.
She makes a few calls from her office, then swings by the department's dog kennel near the airport to pick up an eager beagle named Columbo.
Her main task for the day begins promptly at 6 with the arrival from Guam of Continental Flight 934.
"I'm on the shift because the other inspector started to burn out," Kitaoka said recently as she stood on the Tarmac at the appointed hour, watching the jetliner pull up to its gate.
A small, freckle-faced woman in her late 20's, Kitaoka did not sound pleased at her assignment.
"I'm not a morning person," she muttered.


Sound Bytes; The Serenity of a Loner
DAN BRICKLIN'S story is an industry legend.
At the Harvard Business School in 1979, he imagined a concept for computing complex cash and balance-sheet projections.
Mr.
Bricklin decided to build his electronic spreadsheet and, with his colleague Robert Frankston, created Visicalc, the forerunner of products like Lotus 1-2-3 and Microsoft's Excel.
Unfortunately, a series of business problems left Mr.
Bricklin watching as others, like Mitchell Kapor and Bill Gates, made billions.
He has spent the last 15 years writing award-winning software tools, but none has had the impact of the electronic spreadsheet.
His latest product, Dan Bricklin's Overall Viewer, a visual way to display information in Windows-based software, was released this month.


How the Voters In the Suburbs Boosted Pataki
VOTERS in the New York City suburbs played a pivotal role in George E. Pataki's victory last week, sending him to the Executive Mansion with a margin of victory that far exceeded his statewide performance.
Interviews with 379 voters leaving polling places in the seven counties immediately north of New York City and on Long Island indicated that 60 percent voted for Mr.
Pataki compared with 38 percent for Mario M. Cuomo, whose 12 years in Albany came to an abrupt end.
The race statewide was much closer.
With 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Pataki, a State Senator from Putnam County and former Mayor of Peekskill, had 48 percent of the vote.
Mr.
Cuomo, a longtime Queens resident, had 45 percent.


Eileen R. Ast, Andrew M. Jaffe
Eileen Roper Ast, a senior vice president and the director of public relations at Bozell Worldwide, the New York advertising agency, is to be married today to Andrew Mark Jaffe, a vice president and the executive editor of the Adweek Magazines company in New York.
The Rev.
Frank Hall is to perform the ceremony at the Unitarian Church in Westport, Conn.
Ms.
Ast will keep her name.
She graduated from Spring Hill College.
She is a daughter of the late Margaret and Henry M. Johnston.


Leadership, Equality and Violence on Bishops' Agenda
In their first meeting since Pope John Paul II "definitively" ruled out the possibility of female ordination, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops are convening in Washington this week for discussions on promoting church leadership and equality for women.
Similar issues will confront the members of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops in debates on the use of inclusive -- or gender neutral -- language in certain parts of the liturgy, an area in which past efforts have been stymied by the Vatican and by conservative clerics in the United States


Many Rivers to Cross
THE GLORY FIELD By Walter Dean Myers. 375 pp.
New York: Scholastic. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Man Dies in Subway In Fall From Train
A man walking between the cars of a No. 1 subway in upper Manhattan fell onto the tracks yesterday morning and was killed when he was run over by the train, the police said.
The body of the man, Wilson Nunez, 25, of the Bronx, lay about 50 feet north of the 116th Street subway station for several hours as other trains passed, before a conductor on another train noticed it, investigators said.
They said that the body, which was lying near the southbound local track, had been decapitated.


SUNDAY, November 13. 1994; It's God, Gas and Go At Virginia Church
It's a place of worship.
It's a gas station.
It's Arlington Temple United Methodist Church.
Newcomers to Rosslyn, Va., a suburb of Washington, often gawk at the odd structure.
But locals breezily refer to it as "Our Lady of Exxon."
The Rev.
Jack Sawyer, the church's pastor, doesn't mind at all.
"People can call us whatever they want," he says.
"We're happy to have them here. We're happy with Exxon too."


Ethics Panel Opens Inquiry Into Activities Of Gingrich
In an eight-page letter, the House Ethics Committee has asked Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican expected to be the next Speaker of the House, to explain the connections between a Republican political action committee he runs and a college course he taught.
The course, which Mr.
Gingrich taught at the Kennesaw State College in Marietta, Ga., last year, examined contemporary political issues through a conservative lens.


David H. Pritchard and Mindy L. Fox
Mindy Laura Fox, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Fox of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to David Hamilton Pritchard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Pritchard of Edgartown, Mass.
Judge Sally I. Cook of the Manchester County Probate Court performed the ceremony at the Equinox Hotel in the village of Manchester, Vt.
The bride, 28, graduated from Brown University.
She is a marketing coordinator at Lehrer McGovern Bovis, a construction management firm in New York.
Her father is a founding partner of Kohn Pedersen Fox Architects in New York.
Her mother is a psychoanalyst in Greenwich, Conn.


Two Women Who Break A Tradition
Samuel Phillips founded a boarding school for boys here in 1778.
Three years later, his uncle, Dr.
John Phillips, founded one in Exeter, N.H., on the other side of the border.
In the 200 years since, the two academies bearing the Phillips name have enjoyed a friendly rivalry that has endured, becoming a beloved tradition.
Tradition is a big deal here.
The schools, which are not officially affiliated, share a seal originally cut by Paul Revere; a motto, Finis Origine Pendet, which means "the end depends upon the beginning," and an annual football game, where they contest their rivalry with pigskin and shoulder pads.
And at the game every year, in the name of good sportsmanship, the leaders of the two schools walk onto the field at halftime for a handshake.


That Was Then, Y'All, This Is Now
For "Gone With The Wind" purists, Scarlett and Rhett wil always be Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable.
But when the eight-hour mini-series "Scarlet" begins tonight at 9 on CBS, finding Joanne Whalley-Kilmer and Timothy Dalton (large photo, center) in the lead roles may be the least of the purists' concerns.
What's amazing is how much the world, especially the Old South, seems to have changed between the time "Gone With The Wind"" ends (with the death of Melanie Hamilton Wilkes) and its sequel, "Scarlett," begins (with Melanie's funeral, persumably just a few days later).


13 Musicians From County Appearing at Kennedy Center
THIRTEEN music students ranging in age from 8 to 17 will be on their way to Washington this week to take part in a national arts festival at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
The group, selected in a nationwide competition sponsored by the National Guild of Community Schools of the Arts, includes eight youngsters from the Westchester Conservatory of Music in White Plains and five from the Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale.
A concert next Saturday from 2 to 4 P.M. will feature performances by the National Guild Youth Symphony, the Jazz Band and the Festival Youth Choir.
Four instrumentalists from the conservatory -- Adam Hollander, oboist, and Christopher Tai, Noah Gedrich and Roger Peng, violinists -- and two from Hoff-Barthelson -- Katrin Stamatis, violinist, and Christoph Gillet, french horn player -- will play in the orchestra, which will be led by Lukas Foss.
The violinist Elmar Oliveira will be the featured soloist.
The Festival Youth Choir will be led by Henry Leck.


TAKING THE CHILDREN
Double Dragon  Robert Patrick, Mark Dacascos, Scott Wolf Directed by James Yukich PG-13 99 minutes


The Knicks Finally Fall, With a Thud
The Knicks' first loss of the season was a decisive one.
They never threatened in the fourth quarter.
They were thoroughly outplayed by the San Antonio Spurs.
And for the Knicks, it was an ominous beginning to a challenging four-game trip.
Led by David Robinson's 35-point, 13-rebound performance, the Spurs rolled to a 101-82 victory tonight at the Alamodome, ending New York's season-opening three-game winning streak.


Settling Matters in Oklahoma
According to a published report, university officials are trying to negotiate a settlement with Oklahoma Coach GARY GIBBS so he will resign before the new school president, DAVID BOREN, takes office on Thursday.
The Tulsa World wrote in its Saturday editions that sources close to Boren want Gibbs gone before his administration begins so that the former United States Senator's first major action isn't a firing.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
The Latest KFC in the Bronx Is Part of a Citywide Push
A new KFC, known to most people as Kentucky Fried Chicken, will be opening next week in the Bronx, at 375 East 149th Street, off Third Avenue, in the business district known as the Hub.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine last Sunday, with an article about Russian fashion, misidentified a designer.
The picture showed Nona Melikova -- not Tatyana Parfyonova, who is St.
Petersburg's leading designer.


Car Rental Companies Raise Their Rates
The Hertz Corporation recently raised its rates, leading to a scramble by other major rental-car companies to follow suit.
A Hertz spokesman said the 8 to 10 percent increase was overdue, reflecting higher car prices.
The rental increases are $3 to $5 in daily rates, $2 in weekend rates and $10 to $20 in weekly rates.
National Car Rental also raised most of its rates, initially 8 to 12 percent, followed at the end of last month by another 2 percent wherever competition allowed.


NOV. 6-12: Color of Cash; Black Company Buys Denny's Franchises
For years, thousands of black customers dining at Denny's restaurants have complained of stark bigotry, including being made to pay for their meals in advance or wait longer than white patrons or being refused service altogether.
Such incidents formed the basis of two Federal suits, representing more than 4,300 people, and Denny's agreed to settled them last May for $54 million.
While Denny's, owned by Flagstar Companies of Spartanburg, S.C., has denied any corporate policy of prejudice, it is struggling to shed its racist stigma.


Citywide Resultss in Races for State Senate and Assembly


Songs Of Venice
Musical evening for Save Venice Inc., at the St. Regis, Nov. 7.


Samaritan Van Halts Good Deeds
THE Texaco Good Samaritan Van, which had been aiding stranded motorists on county roads since 1988, ceased operation early this month because of the lack of a sponsor.
But supporters are signing petitions in hopes that the Governor's office will assist in finding a new sponsor.
The white Ford van is owned and operated by Samaritania Inc. of Franklin, Mass.
The $120,000 yearly operating cost is paid by a sponsor, which is allowed to put its name on the van's side.
CVS, the drugstore chain, was the original sponsor in 1987, but Texaco took over a year later.
For six hours a day during rush hours, the van provided free help to needy motorists along Interstate 287 and nearby roads.


Silk Stocking Race Didn't Fit Mold
In a year when Republican challengers toppled Democratic Congressional incumbents across the nation, Charles Millard seemed like a strong prospect to win back Manhattan's fabled "Silk Stocking" District for the G.O.P.
His Democratic opponent, Carolyn B. Maloney, appeared vulnerable as a freshman who had squeaked into office by 2 percentage points in 1992.
Their contest fast became the city's hardest-fought Congressional battle this year, and easily the most expensive, with nearly $2 million in campaign spending.
Pundits and consultants rated it a tossup.


TRULY GROSS ECONOMIC PRODUCT
A recent report on why Americans continue to gain weight blames the automobile and television, but mostly the auto.
Most television watching is done at night, when people are not doing much anyway.
Cars are used during the prime activity hours, when our ancestors would have been hunting and gathering food.
Our bodies were designed to walk.
EUGENE R. GOBBY Boston


Clashing Styles or Bad Manners?
To the Editor:
Barbara Presley Noble's commentary on Deborah Tannen's latest book dismisses the idea that there are important differences between the way in which women and men communicate.
In Ms.
Noble's analysis, any gender-based differences in communication style are "trivial" and may be attributed to "bad manners." A more productive approach to analyzing Dr.
Tannen's work would have included a discussion about what these differences mean for managing in today's changing and uncertain environment.


Alomar Has Knee Surgery
Cleveland Indians catcher SANDY ALOMAR underwent successful arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on Friday and is expected to return to full activity in about a month, the team said.


From Page to Screen With Critter and Elf
Purchasers of a CD-ROM from Living Books are supplied with a paper copy of the original "dead" book along with the CD-ROM adaptation.
I bet that most children never get around to opening the real book.
The computer version delivers not only the illustrations and complete text, in multiple languages (want Japanese? No problem), but also a captivating soundtrack and a host of interactive distractions.
GRANDMA AND ME, by Mercer Mayer (for Macintosh and Windows; Living Books, $39.95 suggested; ages 2 to 5) was the first in the series and remains the standard-bearer of the Living Books line.
The protagonist is Mr.
Mayer's well-known Little Critter, an unflaggingly cute little fellow whose bloodlines apparently descend from chipmunk and woodchuck.
In this episode, Critter's sprightly Grandma accompanies him on a beach outing.
The story harbors very little conflict -- save a tussle with a crab -- but much charm.
The viewer can choose to have the story read aloud, much as it might have been before electronic media, or watch it unfold in a more free-form style.
As each virtual page appears on the screen, a voice reads the brief text (each word lights up as it is sounded), and then the real fun begins.
The screen becomes a playground; almost every character and object on the screen is now a "hot button" for an amusing animated sequence; touch the sand castle, for instance, and a little phalanx of bugs marches out over a drawbridge.
It's all you can ask for in computer entertainment, really -- a reading lesson dressed up as an interactive cartoon.


Cashing Checks
To the Editor: In September, on my first trip to Germany, I changed American Express traveler's checks into German marks at three banks with appalling results.
In Bonn, I was charged a 16 percent service charge, in Rudesheim, 19 percent, and in Speyer, 26 percent.
I asked the manager to return my traveler's checks and I would give back the money.
He refused, saying that the transaction had already been made.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
I found Mark Edmundson's article on the changes at Bennington fair and objective.
But he neglected to mention the dilemma facing recent Bennington graduates: How do we support our beloved school (which may not survive without our financial help) without feeling that we are betraying the teachers -- our friends -- who were so rudely and unnecessarily dismissed?
I find no easy answer.
DANIEL E. SAMS LEHMAN Bennington, Vt.


PRO FOOTBALL: TV Sports; Want to See Cowboys And 49ers? Start the Car.
Today, we are a city in tears.
We shall not see the Dallas-San Francisco game on broadcast television.
At 1 P.M., New York-area viewers will watch the Arizona-Giants game on Fox (Channel 5), followed at 4 by the Jets-Green Bay game on NBC (Channel 4).
The Super Bowl, at least of Week 11, will only be a highlight special. 'Tis the shame of America.
The pity of football.
In fact, only about 80 percent of the country's viewers can flick on their remotes today at 4 P.M. to watch the Cowboys (8-1) play the 49ers (7-2).


Discontent Proves Mild In the State
CONNECTICUT voters expressed considerably less anger last Tuesday than did their counterparts nationally, surveys of voters leaving the polls suggest, but enough of the discontented rallied behind John G. Rowland in a four-way race to elect the state's first Republican Governor in 24 years.
Mr.
Rowland also succeeded in his second attempt at the Governor's office, however, because his supporters -- predominantly white residents of wealthy suburbs and working-class towns -- turned out in large numbers, while many of the state's most disaffected residents -- minorities in the cities -- stayed home.
As a result, the 36.2 percent of the vote that gave Mr.
Rowland his victory represents a narrow slice of Connecticut both demographically and geographically: 97 percent white, and heavily drawn from the two Congressional districts encompassing the southwestern part of the state.


The best, the brightest and 'The Bell Curve.'
To the Editor:
The decline in average I.Q. scores would be most upsetting if one did not recall the large number of individuals with above-average I.Q.'s who made incredibly stupid decisions over recent decades in banking, insurance and politics.
WILLIAM R. HERMAN  Wilmington, N.C.


DUMBING DOWN
Henig must believe, along with Vince Lombardi, that winning isn't everything, it's the only thing.
She seems to think it's fine for parents to greet each other socially by exchanging information on their children's test scores.
It saddens me to think that many of our future leaders may be receiving a similar education in values.
NANCY TUMPOSKY Montclair, N.J.


Fresh Herbs Add a Hint of the Exotic to Desserts
MINT is losing its monopoly.
Other fresh green herbs that have long been associated with savory dishes, not sweets, have begun showing up on dessert plates in restaurants.
Chefs have found that some fresh herbs, notably rosemary, tarragon and basil, can provide a lovely, if unexpected, whiff of fragrance and flavor.
Home cooks can easily follow suit.
Why not garnish that apple tart with a sprig of tarragon, crush some rosemary into the lemon sorbet or add basil to an orange custard?


Fiddling With Psyches
To the Editor:
In her article "Cover Your Eyes, Quick"  [ Oct. 30 ] , Betsy Sharkey and the people she quotes implicitly accept the fact that depicting gratuitous, graphic violence is O.K.
Widespread cultural despair must explain why no one questions whether such displays of sadism and murder are appropriate or necessary to entertainment, only to what degree they may be pushed upon the viewer.


Compaq Storms the PC Heights From its Factory Floor
A YEAR ago, Eckhard Pfeiffer caused a stir in the personal computer industry when he predicted that the Compaq Computer Corporation would be No.1 by 1996.
At the time, Compaq was ranked third, behind I.B.M. and Apple.
Rivals and analysts chided the Compaq president, calling his remarks arrogant, even foolhardy, given the notoriously volatile nature of the personal computer business.


A Mannered Duchess, Buzzing at the Whitney
UPTOWN -- On Nov. 9, the Duchess of York was quietly holed up in a room at the back of F. A. O. Schwarz, signing 200 copies of her "Budgie the Little Helicopter" books.
Outside, a crowd of parents and children had flooded the toy store for its "Light Up a Life" benefit for New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Among the entertainers waiting to perform were the Flying Karamazov Brothers, four American jester-princes with hippie roots and perpetually raised eyebrows who will be opening on Broadway later this month.
In white tie and tails, with their hair tied back, they amused themselves while waiting for the Duchess to make her appearance, doing some verbal juggling with her reputation.


AnneBeth Litt And Todd Gordon
Dr.
AnneBeth Litt, the daughter of Lois and Jay T. Litt of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Todd Gordon, the son of Barbara and Miles Gordon of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Rulnick officiated at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.


Science Fiction
"Nan-" or "nano-": a prefix derived from the Latin word for dwarf.
Used by scientists to denote the very, very small, as in "nanosecond," a billionth of a second.
Used by science fiction writers in combination with the suffix "-tech" to refer to tiny machines that function on a molecular or even atomic scale.
QUEEN CITY JAZZ (Tor/Tom Doherty, $23.95), by Kathleen Ann Goonan, is a dizzying novel that takes full advantage of the creative potential of nanotech.
Imagine a technology capable of transforming matter on the most intimate level, a technology that finds it no more difficult to rewire a human brain from the inside than to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.
Literally.


Bitter Tone of the '94 Campaign Elicits Worry on Public Debate
Campaigns are the conversation of democracy, and the one that just concluded was angry, deeply personal, powerfully ideological and exceedingly negative -- sometimes all at once.
Now that the shouting is over, many scholars and political professionals say that it was also a conversation that carried the country somewhere, a rough debate about the country's direction that ended with a stunningly loud judgment from the voters.


Marcia S. Rand, Richard Olarsch
Marcia Suzanne Rand, the daughter of Earl J. Rand of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Naomi R. Rand, was married last evening to Dr.
Richard Gary Olarsch, a son of Linda and Dr.
Edwin Olarsch of Neponsit, Queens.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman officiated at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.


Denise R. Parietti, James L. Marketos
Denise Rose Parietti, an independent video producer in Washington, is to be married there today to James Lee Marketos, a partner in the Washington office of Lane &amp; Mittendorf, a New York law firm.
The Rev.
John T. Tavlarides, the dean of St.
Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral, is to perform the ceremony there.
The bride, 37, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the daughter of Louise Oppenheim of Port St.
Lucie, Fla., and the late Raymond C. Parietti.
Her father was a contractor in Huntington, L.I.


Mattel Doll Account Goes to Deutsch
Mattel Inc. of El Segundo, Calif., has assigned Deutsch Inc. in New York responsibilities for its Cabbage Patch Kids brand of dolls.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek has estimated them at $20 million.


D. H. Lawrence Seen In One Intense Lens
The Story of a Marriage  By Brenda Maddox  Illustrated. 620 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
Brenda Maddox's idea of viewing D. H. Lawrence's stormy life through the prism of his marriage to Baroness Frieda von Richthofen Weekley makes good sense, at least on the face of it.
After all, so many memoirs and studies have been written about fragments of Lawrence's life -- his youth, his writings, his travels, his relations with one or another individual -- that he demands to be captured "between two covers," as Ms.
Maddox puts it.


CHRONICLE
MICHELLE ENGLER and her husband, GOV.
JOHN ENGLER of Michigan, turned their attention away from politics yesterday to the births of their triplet daughters, The Associated Press reported.
"It's the most special thing anyone could go through," Mr.
Engler, a Republican, told reporters in Ann Arbor, his eyes full of tears.


Blocked Path Costs Seton Hall Runner
Bryan Spoonire, a senior at Seton Hall, will learn Monday whether his appeal will be upheld by the National Collegiate Athletic Association so he can run in the Division I cross-country championships Nov. 21 in Fayetteville, Ark.
Spoonire and three other leading runners took a wrong turn late in the men's IC4A 10,000-meter race here Saturday.
The incident was caused by spectators blocking the correct path.
Spoonire, who had beaten Saturday's winner, Villanova's Louie Quinitana (30 minutes 12 seconds), two weeks ago on this same Franklin Park course during the Big East championships, eventually finished in 33d place, too far back to qualify for the N.C.A.A.'s.


For New York City's OTB, A Sure Bet Ends Up a Loser
When New York City went into the bookmaking business in 1971, its officials envisioned that their monopoly franchise would ultimately yield annual profits of $200 million.
As it turns out, their projection was off -- by just a little more than $200 million.
Over the last two years the Offtrack Betting Corporation has become "the only bookie operation in the world to lose money," as Rudolph W. Giuliani liked to point out during the 1993 mayoral campaign.
Since then, OTB's operating deficit has quintupled, reaching $5.3 million for the fiscal year that ended in June.


Hameroff Expands To Florida
Hameroff/Milenthal/Spence in Columbus, Ohio, has expanded its operations to Florida by acquiring McFarland &amp; Drier in Miami.
Terms were not disclosed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Bankers Trust says it has suspended from their normal responsibilities several executives involved in selling to corporations the complex financial agreements known as derivatives.  [ Page D1. ]


Clinton, on Asia Trip, Faces a Rougher Road
As President Clinton began meetings here with Asian and Pacific leaders including China's President, Administration officials said today that he would offer reassurances that the setbacks suffered by the Democrats in last Tuesday's elections would not disrupt American policy in the region.
Mr.
Clinton's advisers said he nevertheless expected to be questioned, and perhaps tested, on the new limits to his power.
Now that his party has lost control of the House and Senate, some said the President would appear weaker to his counterparts than in any meeting with foreign leaders since he took office 22 months ago.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
2 Operas Make Contrast Of the Pastoral and Shrieks  Fashion Institute of Technology
The American Chamber Opera Company could not have dreamed up a more startling contrast than the two operas it chose for its recent double bill.
The second, Lee Hoiby's "This Is the Rill Speaking," is pastoral Americana in the tradition of Sherwood Anderson or Edgar Lee Masters.
The memories of six players occupying various generations intercut and overlap, and Mr.
Hoiby's gracious songfulness smooths their way.


No Bench Warmers Here


A Comeback With Energy To Spare
Few bands are as exhausting to watch as the Proclaimers, who performed on Thursday night at Tramps.
Playing one rousing song after another, belting choruses until they were red in the face and pounding on their instruments to accentuate every backbeat, the twins Craig and Charlie Reid put on a performance that was as much a sporting event as a music concert.
With a four-member backing band, the Scottish brothers conjured up the ghosts of 1950's doo-wop, soul and rhythm-and-blues but substituted muscle and adrenaline for emotion and ache.
The Proclaimers might have been over and done with after they released two well-received albums in the 1980's, but when a four-year-old song of theirs, "I'm Gonna Be (500 Miles)," was revived for the film "Benny and Joon" last year, these latter-day Everly Brothers returned.
Their most recent album, "Hit the Highway" (Chrysalis/ERG), crammed with songs about love, religion and family, certainly justifies their comeback.


An Official Says Industry Can Police Policy-Buying
Brian D. Pardo, president of the National Viatical Association and Life Partners Inc., both of Waco, Tex., has long argued that the industry can police itself and does not need outside regulators.
"We allow sick people to sell their cars and homes without regulation," he said in a recent interview.


Plays That Cast an Irreverent Eye Over Two Revered Playwrights
The worlds portrayed in the plays of Tennessee Williams and Sam Shepard may be enlightening places to visit, but who on earth would want to live there?
Christopher Durang, who has devoted most of his work to talking back to a hostile and arbitrary universe, has taken up his satirist's pen to enter the hostile and arbitrary terrain created by these titanic American playwrights in "Durang Durang," an evening of short plays.
He responds as he has always responded to the presence of something grave and inherently tragic: he laughs, a trifle nervously, perhaps, but very loudly.
The odds are that you will, too.


The Battle Over Artificial Snow
Whooshing downhill across blankets of snow on the Rocky Mountain slopes, skiers and snow-boarders are exulting once again in the thrilling joy rides and magnificent vistas of a sport that prides itself on being harmoniously in step with the rhythms of nature.
But sometimes, it turns out, nature falls out of step, failing to drop enough snow to meet the early demand for skiers.
So technology steps in.
The fluffy blankets on the trails at the Loveland resort here, for example, were largely produced by snow guns using water pumped from nearby streams.


Bump And Grin: German Wins Title
The 1994 Formula One season, dogged by tragedy and controversy, ended yesterday in a most fitting manner: an anticlimax.
Michael Schumacher, whose domination of Formula One was clouded by penalties and suspensions that barred him from one-fourth of the 16-race season, still clinched the title yesterday in the final race, the Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide.
Schumacher, 25, is the first German world champion since the creation of the modern Formula One auto racing series in 1950.


In Prague, a New Daily for English Speakers
The first English-language daily newspaper in Eastern Europe since the collapse of Communism is to be introduced on Monday by a young American publisher who has made a name here with a daily fax publication.
The eight-page paper, called The Bohemia Daily Standard, is intended for the growing number of business travelers and resident English-speaking business executives and diplomats in Prague.


Irish Premier Says Threat to Coalition Impedes Peace Initiative
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds said today that a threat by the Labor Party to break up his coalition Government would impede efforts toward peace in Northern Ireland.
Labor Party members threatened on Friday to pull out after Mr.
Reynolds promoted his attorney general to President of the High Court, the second-highest judicial post in the country.
Labor ministers walked out of the Cabinet meeting, protesting that they had not been consulted on the appointment, and it was pushed through after they left.


What's in Style For the G.O.P.? Running Shoes
So, Mr. Big Shot Republican. You just won control of the Senate. Where do you go next?
Des Moines.


Six Regional Teams Bound For Playoffs All Over Map
Six teams from the metropolitan area will play in playoff games on Saturday, and one of them, the United States Merchant Marine Academy, will start the trek toward a possible national championship.
For the first time, the Mariners (7-2) of Kings Point, L.I., were included in the 16-team field for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III tournament.
In the first round, they will play Plymouth State, the undefeated New England titan, at Plymouth, N.H.


Bosnian Army Fights to Hold Areas Taken From Serbs
Fighting continued today in northwestern Bosnia as Muslim-led Government forces battled to maintain their hold on territory captured from Bosnian Serb forces and endured artillery attacks from Serbs in Croatia.
United Nations military officials said Bosnian Army troops defending the Bihac pocket had repulsed two attempts by Bosnian Serb forces.
And the Sarajevo radio reported tonight that the southern edge of the enclave had been pounded with artillery based in a Serb-held area of Croatia that is under the supervision of United Nations peacekeepers.


Disney Mulls Big Florida Expansion
The Walt Disney Company is close to approving the investment of as much as $2 billion to expand Disney World, its theme park in Orlando, Fla., a person close to the company said yesterday.
In considering the expansion, Disney is trying to address two problems: a general slide in attendance at Disney World in the last few years and increasing competition from another Orlando theme park, Universal Studios/Florida, owned by MCA .
MCA is planning to add 4,000 hotel rooms at Universal Studios.


Clinton Meets China's President During Trade Talks in Indonesia


Siberia's Oil Keeps Spilling
In Alaska, an oil spill like the one that happened in the Russian Arctic this summer and fall would be called an unmitigated disaster, unleashing a national media frenzy.
In Russia, the reaction could hardly have been more different.
It wasn't a sudden spill.
An old pipeline operated by the state oil company apparently wore out, developing leaks along its 32-mile length.
Estimates of the magnitude vary wildly, from 4 million to 80 million gallons. (The Exxon Valdez spill was 11 million gallons.) But whatever the cause and the size, an immediate, full-scale response is imperative.


Editorial Notebook; Lessons of the Plague
The plague outbreak that struck India this year caused more panic than was warranted.
The sudden appearance of this ancient scourge sent hundreds of thousands of residents fleeing from the industrial city of Surat, igniting fears that they would spread the contagion to the jam-packed slums of India's major cities.
Apprehensive nations cut off air travel and trade with India; tourists and conference groups canceled trips.
But when a World Health Organization team completed a 10-day inspection recently, the picture seemed far less frightening.
The plague was limited to two outbreaks in areas far from the usual tourist haunts and business venues.
Not a single case of transmission was confirmed elsewhere in the vast country.
Indeed, the epidemic burned out as fast as it began, leaving it hard to escape the feeling that if the plague scare was not exactly a false alarm, it was surely an excessive alarm.


Prank Ends in Arrest of 2 Rutgers Students
As fraternity pranks go, this one lacked daring, but it nonetheless landed two Rutgers students in jail.
Late Saturday night, Michael Papa, 18, of Farmingdale, L.I., and Michael Ziemak, 19, of Jersey City, both students at Rutgers University, stole the hat off the head of a doorman at the Trump Towers apartment complex on Fifth Avenue, the police said.
The men then raced through midtown.
The prank was apparently part of pledge activities for the Alpha Chi Rho fraternity, the police said.


A Comeback With Energy To Spare
Few bands are as exhausting to watch as the Proclaimers, who performed on Thursday night at Tramps.
Playing one rousing song after another, belting choruses until they were red in the face and pounding on their instruments to accentuate every backbeat, the twins Craig and Charlie Reid put on a performance that was as much a sporting event as a music concert.
With a four-member backing band, the Scottish brothers conjured up the ghosts of 1950's doo-wop, soul and rhythm-and-blues but substituted muscle and adrenaline for emotion and ache.
The Proclaimers might have been over and done with after they released two well-received albums in the 1980's, but when a four-year-old song of theirs, "I'm Gonna Be (500 Miles)," was revived for the film "Benny and Joon" last year, these latter-day Everly Brothers returned.
Their most recent album, "Hit the Highway" (Chrysalis/ERG), crammed with songs about love, religion and family, certainly justifies their comeback.


At 633 License Suspensions, The Top Scofflaw Is Arrested
He called himself Bobby Leonard or Harvey Linen, Leroy Linden or something else, and he used various addresses, real and unreal, the police said.
But the officers who nabbed him in the Bronx Saturday night called him New York City's top scofflaw -- a phantom motorist whose license has been suspended 633 times since 1990, once every two or three days, on average.
More than a year after the Police Department created a list of 100 most wanted drivers with the worst suspension records, and a task force to hunt them down, the No. 1 suspect, Leroy Linen, 41, was in custody yesterday, facing a felony charge as the Jesse James of Scofflaws.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None


Niners Press the Issue and Finally Get the Best of Cowboys
Sure looked like Dallas, the champs.
Four-hundred and eight total yards.
An average of 5.5 yards gained per play.
Nearly a four-minute lead in possession time.
A 74-to-56 advantage in plays.


For Hasidim, Rebbe Continues to Inspire
To the Editor:
It was surprising to read in your Nov. 8 article about Lubavitcher Hasidim that we are beginning to realize that "we have nobody to turn to, but ourselves." This does not reflect the mood of Lubavitcher Hasidim throughout the world, who live with the Rebbe and get constant inspiration from him.


DANCE
A Mingling of Styles Creates Special Effects  Theater of the Riverside Church
Blending dance forms is a popular but difficult choreographic task.
Takashi Watanabe managed it, however, in a performance by his handsome and accomplished Dance Company Dinyos on Friday night.


Dorothy Dehner Memorial
A memorial tribute to the sculptor Dorothy Dehner is to take place tonight at 7:30 in the Gallery of the Art Students League, 215 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Mildred Constantine, James Marston Fitch, Joan Marter and David C. Levy are the scheduled speakers.
Miss Dehner died on Sept. 22 at age 92.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Askew's Career High Helps Seattle Win  Vincent Askew scored 9 of his career-high 20 points in the fourth quarter yesterday as the Seattle SuperSonics defeated the Los Angeles Clippers, 115-90, in Tacoma, Wash.
The Sonics went on a 19-5 run in a 6 1/2-minute span of the third and fourth quarters, extending a 76-67 lead to 95-72 with 7 minutes 21 seconds left in the game.
Sarunas Marciulionis and Detlef Schrempf had 5 points apiece during that spurt.


Haytaian, Philosophical on Senate Loss, Looks Ahead to a Tough Year in Assembly
Chuck Haytaian can enjoy television again: "It's the first time in a while I can watch without seeing a nasty commercial about myself," he says.
Mr.
Haytaian will also return to his regular public job on Monday when he presides over a session of the New Jersey State Assembly after several months of waging an active, but ultimately unsuccessful, campaign for the United States Senate.
He had weekend invitations to dinners in New York and to a gala hosted by Donald T. DiFrancesco, the New Jersey Senate President, but he decided to kick back, put his feet up and relax.


When Bad Things Happen To Bad Teams
Twenty minutes after the Giants had lost on a bizarre, late play to the Arizona Cardinals, Michael Strahan sat motionless at his locker.
His teammates had undressed, but the Giant defensive end just sat there, staring, his equipment still strapped on.
He was stunned.
The coach was stunned.
The team was stunned.
Few players had the words to describe how they felt.
After taking a 9-0 lead over an Arizona team whose offense is so bad and predictable it looked like something out of "Jurassic Park," the Giants finally thought they would win one.


Gunning for Wife, Man Kills Sister-in-Law and Himself
After what neighbors said was an escalating nightmare of violence and desperation, a man searching for his estranged wife in Queens Saturday night killed his sister-in-law, wounded his brother-in-law and then killed himself, the police said.
The man's wife was not at the house and was not injured.


For Assembly and Senate, Slim Changes
This was a banner election for the downtrodden Republicans in the New York Assembly, their best showing since 1968.
Yet the six new seats amounted to a few crumpled dollar bills against the vast currency of the Democrats, who have controlled the body for 20 years and still hold nearly a two-to-one margin.
Nor did much happen to alter the balance of power in the New York Senate, where Republicans have been in control, except for a quirk in 1965, since Herbert H. Lehman occupied the Executive Mansion in 1938.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Admission by Omission: Giants Don't Have a Quarterback They Trust
KENT GRAHAM got a standing ovation at the end of the first quarter, and then depressing reality set in.
He wasn't Phil Simms either.
He was more Dave Brown, with Simms's blond hair.


Election Has Altered Regulatory Landscape
In addition to denying the Clinton Administration the power to set a legislative agenda for the 104th Congress, it is now becoming clear that last week's elections will make it more difficult for the White House to assert its social and political priorities by issuing new regulations.
Before the election, the Administration had hoped to accomplish through regulation some of the things that the 103d Congress had refused to do through legislation, like tightening environmental restrictions on mining.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about a surge in the Chiron Corporation's stock price misstated the stock's trading activity on Thursday in some copies.
Chiron's shares closed unchanged Thursday at $59.75; they did not rise $4.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Monday about proposed mergers in Italian banking referred incorrectly to the financial condition of one bank.
Banco di Napoli is not threatened by bankruptcy and was not bailed out by other Italian banks at the behest of the central bank.


Harlem Dreams Are Revived For Trade Center and Hotel
Nearly given up for dead after more than five years of delays, the long-awaited plan to build an international trade center and hotel on West 125th Street in Harlem appears to be back on track.
On Thursday, the state's Urban Development Corporation is expected to approve a revised plan for a 22-story complex at 125th Street and Malcolm X Boulevard (formerly Lenox Avenue).
The U.D.C.'s approval would clear the way for the next phases of development: the selection of a construction management company, the choosing of an operator for the hotel and the signing of tenants for the office space.


China Pressing to Join Trade Club
With its huge internal market and steep growth in exports to the United States, China's effort to become a founding member of a new world trading system could prove to be one of the significant trade events of this time.
As regional leaders gather in Jakarta, Indonesia, for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, the United States and China are entering the final phase of long and heated negotiations over the terms for Beijing's entry into the World Trade Organization, the new international trade body that is to succeed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in January.


Microsoft Seen Disclosing On-Line Network Plan
The Microsoft Corporation, seeking to extend its domination beyond the software industry into the realm of interactive services, is expected to outline its plans today for an ambitious on-line information service called the Microsoft Network.
Analysts say the network, which has been known by its code name, Marvel, could become a leader in the $13 billion on-line services industry almost as soon as it goes on line in the middle of next year.


Once Again, Jets Are Shot Down on 4th Down
It ended for the Jets on the Packers' goal line today, Rob Moore slipping on old-fashioned grass in this old-fashioned stadium as Boomer Esiason's pass skidded off the fingers of one hand.
In this season of redefining themselves, the Jets were just that short of tying, if not defeating, the Packers, who ended up with a toughly contested 17-10 victory.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Askew's Career High Helps Seattle Win  Vincent Askew scored 9 of his career-high 20 points in the fourth quarter yesterday as the Seattle SuperSonics defeated the Los Angeles Clippers, 115-90, in Tacoma, Wash.
The Sonics went on a 19-5 run in a 6 1/2-minute span of the third and fourth quarters, extending a 76-67 lead to 95-72 with 7 minutes 21 seconds left in the game.
Sarunas Marciulionis and Detlef Schrempf had 5 points apiece during that spurt.


CBS Is Betting on 'Scarlett' To Get Back in Ratings Hunt
Considering what it has invested and what it has riding on the outcome, CBS surely does give a damn, and then some, about what happens to Scarlett O'Hara on television this week.
The network's eight-hour mini-series "Scarlett," which began a four-night run last night, is the most expensive program CBS will broadcast this year.


An Air Attack by Killer B's: Blake and Bledsoe
Bengals 34, Oilers 31
Jeff Blake may pass for more yards and win bigger games, but none will be more theatrical.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; In the Mist, Opportunity Slips Past the Jets One More Times
IT was all there for the Jets, as it so often has been.
But in the end there was no there there.
As the Jets were being introduced, the Dolphins had lost to the Bears in Miami, 17-14.
All along their sideline, the Jets knew that if they won, their record would be 6-4, only one game behind the Dolphins in the American Conference East.
And the Jets knew that if they won, they would be assured of being no worse than even with the Buffalo Bills, who play in Pittsburgh tonight.


Treasury Bill Auction Today
The schedule of Treasury financings this week includes only today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, traders said, the rate for the outstanding three-month bill was 5.22 percent, and for the six-month bill, 5.64 percent.


Whirling Dervishes Spin a Mystical Link Between Earthly and Divine Love
For the whirling dervishes of Konya, Turkey, ecstasy derives from discipline.
They performed a sema, the Sufi ritual of spiritual rebirth, before a sold-out house on Friday night at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
It was a spectacle: six men dressed in white with tall camel-hair hats, with arms outstretched and long skirts twirling, accompanied by music that slowly gathered momentum, from stately extended melodies to more vigorous, more rhythmic tunes.
The white costumes represent death shrouds; the hats, tombstones.
In the mystical Islam that was taught by Jalal ad-Din Rumi, sometimes known as Mevlana Jalaluddin Rumi (1207-1273), the spinning dancers are a link between earthly existence and rapturous divine love.
There was no chaos, no abandon in their ecstasy.
As they whirled, the dervishes proceeded in a circle around the stage, comparable to orbiting planets, while their dancing master strolled among them.
They never lost direction, collided or showed dizziness when they stopped for ceremonial bows.
Yet unlike twirling ballet dancers, they moved their heads along with their bodies.


Korea-Japan Tension Is Centuries Old
To the Editor:
"South Korea to Lift Curbs on Business Ties to North" (front page, Nov. 8) states that although South Korean companies have expressed fears that Japanese competitors might beat them in setting up factories in North Korea, the Japanese "are expected to go slow, partly because of a history of poor relations between Japan and Korea resulting from World War II."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Askew's Career High Helps Seattle Win  Vincent Askew scored 9 of his career-high 20 points in the fourth quarter yesterday as the Seattle SuperSonics defeated the Los Angeles Clippers, 115-90, in Tacoma, Wash.
The Sonics went on a 19-5 run in a 6 1/2-minute span of the third and fourth quarters, extending a 76-67 lead to 95-72 with 7 minutes 21 seconds left in the game.
Sarunas Marciulionis and Detlef Schrempf had 5 points apiece during that spurt.


INSIDE
U.S. Challenge to Iraq
American officials tried to maintain support for sanctions against Iraq, contending that it has spent $1 billion on palaces and presidential retreats since the gulf war.
Page A3.
Regulatory Push Blunted
Before Election Day the Administration had planned to issue regulations to achieve some goals, but now officials say the new balance of power may block that.
Page B8.
Europe's Right-Wing Tilt
European voters are giving increasing support to conservative, anti-immigration populists, raising fears of a resurgence of fascism.
Page A8.
Move Over, Mickey
The Walt Disney Company is said to be close to investing as much as $2 billion to add an Animal Kingdom to Disney World.
Page D1.


The Contract's Brutal Arithmetic
Republicans have pledged to vote within 100 days of taking control of the House on a "Contract With America," a package of 10 bills that offers government reforms, tax cuts and deficit reduction.
Newt Gingrich, the likely next Speaker, has vowed to honor the pledge promptly.
Voting on the contract will be easy.
Paying for the package will not.
The social and economic costs could be staggering.
Mr.
Gingrich could find himself undermining the Republican governors who now run every large state except Florida.
His contract threatens programs that big-state governors need for large pockets of disadvantaged residents.


Executives Suspended By Bank
The Bankers Trust Company says it has suspended from their normal responsibilities several executives involved in selling to corporations the complex financial agreements known as derivatives.
A bank spokesman, Douglas Kidd, said the suspensions came after "a thorough review of its leveraged derivatives business." Mr.
Kidd said the bank would not disclose how many executives were suspended or who they were.


Haitians Also Deserve Unarmed Police Force
To the Editor:
As one involved in Haiti and its culture since the mid-1950's, I agree with Kern Delince's contention that Haiti's army should be abolished (Op-Ed, Nov. 8).
The Costa Rican model is an excellent one.
I might go one step further: create a gunless civilian constabulary.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S. PROPOSAL ON CHINA
The United States is prepared to propose forgiving China for past violations of an international missile accord, to resolve a sticky issue, although some fear that might set a bad precedent.
A1


Gay Politicians Cite Gains Amid Losses
Although they lost several major allies and face a far more conservative and hostile Congress, lesbian and gay political leaders say that last week's election was not a repudiation by voters of the gay rights movement.
"People are in mourning, as they well should be," said Sheila James Kuehl, speaking here at a three-day conference sponsored by the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and that ended today.
"Yet we defeated two anti-gay initiatives, and 24 lesbian or gay officials were re-elected or newly elected."


Abroad at Home; Eye Of Newt
With victory, would Newt Gingrich move from street fighter to statesman?
It took only a few days to learn the answer: No.
As prospective Speaker of the House, he quickly wrote a letter to the present Speaker, Tom Foley, warning Democrats not to hide or destroy any official documents.
Of course he did not think the famously honorable Mr.
Foley was going to purloin documents.
It was just a way to plant the idea of a Democratic conspiracy: a way to continue his war on the opposition.


U.S. OFFERS CHINA DEAL TO RESOLVE A MISSILE DISPUTE
The United States has offered to forgive China's violations of an international missile accord and waive possible sanctions if China admits the violations, senior Administration officials said today.
If China accepts the offer it would help resolve one of the most difficult issues between the countries.
But the plan would effectively reward China for simply telling the truth about any violations and could encourage other countries to flout the accord.


Reed Holds And Waits For 2 Aces To Pay Off
Willis Reed the player had this uncanny knack of imposing his will on important games during his 10-year career in the National Basketball Association.
Willis Reed the general manager has this uncanny knack of imposing his will on personnel matters.
Different arenas require different measures, he knows.
But before the Nets plunged to a 1-6 start in a lackluster loss to the Houston Rockets on Saturday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Reed was willing to admit -- on a short-term basis, anyhow -- that his off-season acquisitions may take awhile to achieve fruition.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Asarco Inc., New York, 9.5 million shares, 6.65 million in U.S. and Canada.
CS First Boston.


World Economies


Dogs, Cats And What?


Step Aside Spot, Ferrets Are Ready to Be Top Dog
Patty Krywos dutifully passed out leaflets, brochures and pamphlets to the stream of people who passed by her convention booth hungry for information on a subject of immense importance to them: pet ferrets.
"There are a lot of people who think ferrets and their owners are weird," acknowledged Ms.
Krywos, who owns one herself.
"But that's ignorance. That's why I give a lot of my time to educate the public about the facts on ferrets."


China's Trade Status
The United States and China are entering the final phase of bitter negotiations over the terms for admitting China to the new World Trade Organization.
Page D1.


Exploring the Links Between Depression, Writers and Suicide
When the poet Anne Sexton learned of Sylvia Plath's suicide in 1963, she was horrified.
"That death was mine," she said.
Eleven years later, wrapped in a fur coat that once belonged to her mother, she sat in her car with the engine running in a closed garage and ended her life.
Literary artists have always been drawn to death as a subject, but a disproportionate number of them have also courted it in their personal lives.
In a daylong conference at the 92d Street Y on Friday, several scholars and writers explored the links between depression, creativity and suicide, primarily in the life and work of Sexton, Plath and Ernest Hemingway.
The conference,


Take Six in Search of a Communal Feeling
Take Six tried so hard to make something special happen at the Beacon Theater on Saturday night that it was hard not to feel some sympathy when nothing came of its work.
The band, a pop-gospel group with supercharged harmonies that borrow from jazz vocal music to doo-wop to quartet gospel music, did its best to create the sort of mood that gets a house rocking, but it failed.
The group tried sing-alongs.
Its leader, Mark Kibble, tried to preach.
With choreography, astoundingly tight vocal arrangements and costumes that looked like something out of a J. Crew catalogue, the singers tried to present a communal image, a band hard at work pleasing its constituency.


CHRONICLE
A.
M.
ROSENTHAL, the former executive editor of The New York Times and a columnist for the newspaper, will receive the Light of Truth Award from the International Campaign for Tibet for his efforts to expose the plight of the Tibetan people.
Mr.
Rosenthal is recuperating from cardiac surgery, so his son ANDREW ROSENTHAL, the newspaper's Washington editor, will accept the award on Thursday at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan.
SENATOR DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, Democrat of New York, is to speak at the dinner, which will be sponsored by nine organizations involved in refugee affairs.


Improved Schools at a Profit: Is a Private Effort Working?
Yet another tour group was moving through Sarah M. Roach Elementary School, one of nine schools here managed by Education Alternatives, the nation's biggest for-profit company running public schools.
Once again, it was 8-year-old Tamira Griffin's turn to perform.
Shy but determined, Tamira stood in her classroom, surrounded by visiting school superintendents from Pennsylvania, and described what she and her third-grade classmates were studying.
"I like school," she concluded.


Memorial Service
A memorial service for Peter Bonanni, a longtime advertising and publishing executive, is scheduled for 1 P.M. today at St.
Peter's Sanctuary at the Citicorp Center, 619 Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
Mr.
Bonanni, who died of cancer on Nov. 3 at the age of 62, was the publisher of Golf Magazine.
He previously held sales and executive positions at Charter Publishing, CBS Publications and the Simmons Market Research Bureau.


CHRONICLE
The lady is a fossil, and that's why she will be the guest of honor, if only in absentia, at a black-tie dinner tonight at the Metropolitan Club.
The Institute of Human Origins, which usually honors a living scientist at its annual benefit in New York, is celebrating the 20th anniversary of the discovery of Lucy, the skeleton of one of the oldest human forebears.
Though pieces of considerably older hominid fossils have been found since then, Lucy remains the "most complete ancestor we have," DR.
DONALD C. JOHANSON, one of the scientists who found her in Ethiopia in 1974, said the other day.


Pataki Plans Major Overhaul To Shift Direction in Albany
Governor-elect George E. Pataki will begin a sweeping overhaul of New York's state government this week, seeking to impose his Republican vision on a sprawling bureaucracy guided by Democratic policies and partisans for the last 20 years.
The effort will start with the appointment of commissioners and directors to run some 40 state agencies.
The first is expected to be a state budget director, who will be faced with a shortfall of as much as $4 billion in the next fiscal year.


METRO DIGEST
A SURE BET TURNS OUT TO BE A LOSER
When New York City went into the bookmaking business in 1971, its officials envisioned that their monopoly franchise would ultimately yield annual profits of $200 million.
As it turns out, their projection was off -- by just a little more than $200 million.
Like race tracks and other off-track betting operations, the Offtrack Betting Corporation has been losing customers to casinos and state lottery games.
But it has its own peculiar set of longstanding problems: unappealing betting parlors, antiquated technology, political patronage, inept management and an inefficient work force.
A1.


Essay; Transfer Of Power
Bill Clinton remains President of the United States for foreign affairs, but the center of power in domestic affairs -- both in voting strength and intellectual energy -- has shifted from the White House to the putative Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich.
Our first elected half-term President has only himself, his wife and their political advisers to blame for this unprecedented power division.
When Representative Gingrich sought to nationalize local elections by submitting a platform of clear, conservative promises, Mr.
Clinton foolishly agreed to escalate the mid-term elections into a stark choice between Reaganism and Clintonism.


People
*
Gary Topolewski, managing partner for creative at Bozell Detroit, Southfield, Mich., was promoted to the new position of executive creative director.


Hope Sprouts in the Ruins of an Angolan Town
Storms of bombs and bullets have left the graceful Portuguese facades along Avenida Joaquim Kapango looking as though they were made of pastel-colored Swiss cheese.
In the blasted concrete apartment warrens of the central business district refugees lurk around stairwell campfires, and courtyard gardens have been dug up for graveyards.


Now Myanmar Must Choose
Myanmar's ruling junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, is one of the world's most brutal, least legitimate regimes.
It seized power in what used to be known as Burma by massacring democracy demonstrators in the streets of Rangoon six years ago.
Since then it has ignored elections, cooperated with drug lords and waged a relentless war against democratic political leaders, university students, Buddhist religious activists and the ethnic minorities who make up more than a third of Myanmar's population.
This grim dictatorship is now being courted by countries eager for new economic opportunities in the world's hottest boom region.
These include many of Myanmar's Southeast Asian neighbors and much of the European Union.
To the east, Thailand makes refugees fleeing the Slorc's repression feel unwelcome.
To the north, China provides military aid, consumer goods and diplomatic support.
The U.S. stands almost alone in principled opposition to the Slorc, denying it anti-narcotics aid and development assistance, blocking loans from international banks and criticizing it in international forums.


Men's Health Magazine Gains Muscle
In 1986, with virtually everyone saying they were crazy to start a health magazine for men, the people at Rodale Press put out 200,000 test copies of a sprightly new magazine called Men's Health.
It quickly went on to become one of the great circulation success stories of recent years.
By 1991, Men's Health was guaranteeing advertisers a circulation of 350,000.
By 1992 the guarantee had risen to half a million, with actual sales exceeding the guarantee by 25 percent.
For the first six months of this year, the magazine's circulation was 1.2 million.


For a Competitive Edge, Study in Europe
To the Editor:
"International Opportunities: Far-Flung Studies" (Education Life section, Nov. 6) discusses study abroad for adults.
I would like to add to your list of suggestions, specifically for those interested in postgraduate studies in international business or a Master of Business Administration degree.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Waived Lloyd Daniels, guard.


From Stealth Candidate To a Stealth Governor?
NEVER has in-your-face New York, with its history of brawling, demanding politics, seen anything like George E. Pataki's campaign for governor.
He managed to run a stealth candidacy, standing for little other than the death penalty, lower taxes, welfare reform and not being Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
And he won.
The question for him and New York now is can he govern, standing for so little?
The Republican Governor-elect might well be asking himself these days, as that stunned Robert Redford character did in "The Candidate," the 1972 film, "What do we do now?"


Knicks Need Offense, Not Another Jump Shot
Instead of analyzing their first loss, the Knicks were more concerned with how they would respond to it.
New York was so thoroughly beaten in Saturday night's 101-82 defeat by the San Antonio Spurs that it made little sense to dwell on the performance.
The Knicks were outplayed from start to finish, with David Robinson (35 points, 13 rebounds) dominating his matchup with Patrick Ewing as well as the game.


BP May Cut 1 of 5 U.S. Jobs
The BP Oil Company said yesterday that it would eliminate or farm out as many as 1,000 jobs, one-fifth of its work force.
The Cleveland-based company, an American unit of British Petroleum P.L.C., said the planned job cuts resulted from a seven-month study of the support services -- like information technology, human resources and procurement -- that it provided to its refineries and gas stations.


For a Competitive Edge, Study in Europe; Cultural Ambassadors
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 5 Prague Journal about Czech disaffection with United States emigres:


DANCE
A Bacchanalia That Errs On the Side of Decorum  Performance Space 122
In "The Bacchae," one of the most disturbing of all ancient Greek tragedies, Euripides presents a catastrophic conflict between Dionysus, the god who can inspire both ecstasy and madness, and Pentheus, the proud king who scorns him.


The Catastrophe Went as Planned


Cowboys Say a Loss Is Just a Loss
Steve Young kissed the Candlestick Park sod; the Dallas Cowboys kissed off the entire game.
Troy Aikman needs an ice bucket for his thumb and the rest of the Cowboys need driving lessons, but the defending Super Bowl champions are convinced no one will remember today's 21-14 defeat in January.


Patents
SCIENTISTS who helped the Navy create the sophisticated submarine-tracking computer system celebrated in "The Hunt for Red October" now want to deploy similar technology to listen for trouble spots in jet engines, nuclear reactor coolant pumps and electricity-generating steam turbines.
Early detection of hairline cracks, for example, would enable technicians to replace crucial parts long before lives are endangered or there is expensive damage.
"The Navy has used very advanced digital processing on its submarines for decades," said Walter C. Hernandez, vice president for technology at the Monitoring Technology Corporation.
"But this kind of technology is only now being applied to normal civilian machinery."


He Shot the Ball Into the Air. Reeves Caught It. Touchdown!
The play is called Rocket Right Sally All Hook.
Sally describes the pass protection.
All Hook is what the four receivers are supposed to do.
When the Arizona Cardinals called that play in the dying minutes against the Giants today, Steve Beuerlein, the Cardinals' quarterback, was "more or less" trying to throw the ball away.


Name Changes For 2 Agencies
An advertising agency and a public relations agency have announced name changes.


Market Place; Two views of the future for New Plan Realty Trust.
THESE are not the best of times for real estate investment trusts, known as REIT's.
Many publicly owned companies in this interest-rate-sensitive industry have suffered from this year's advances in interest rates and their prices have been steadily pushed lower.
Although it has been affected by this trend, New Plan Realty Trust, one of the oldest and largest REIT's, is listed by many analysts as a strong candidate for appreciation.
Among the reasons cited are its diversified portfolio, a strong balance sheet with relatively little debt and a record of more than 15 years of dividend increases.


Countdown for Navratilova
The $3.5 million Virginia Slims Championships, the year-ending -- and in Martina Navratilova's case, career-ending -- event that features the top 16 players for 1994, gets under way this afternoon at Madison Square Garden.
Starting at 5:30 P.M., eighth-seeded Kimiko Date faces Sabine Hack.
Following in the featured match, second-ranked Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, will go against Julie Halard of France.
Sanchez Vicario, champion of this year's French and United States Opens, has won her last four tournaments and is just 42 ranking points behind top-ranked Steffi Graf.
Because of a painful lower-back condition, the German has not competed since the Open, but she intends to play at the Garden.


To Black Audience in Brooklyn, Mayor Promotes Austerity Plan
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani took his message of fiscal austerity to a Bedford-Stuyvesant church yesterday, telling worshipers that his administration's budget cuts would produce some pain for New Yorkers, but were crucial to the survival of the city.
"We all understand that we have to come to terms with the city's very serious budget problems," Mr.
Giuliani told the congregation at the Cornerstone Baptist Church.
"That's the reason I am restructuring the city government. I don't want our city or its people now or in the future to be diminished, so we have to live within our means. My priorities are the same ones that I believe that you have."


Remembering Fallen Comrades as Britain Honors Its War Dead


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A European Conductor Finds a Common Denominator  Carnegie Hall
Preceded by some splendid recordings, Philippe Herreweghe presented himself to American audiences on Thursday night.
His musicians and singers were La Chapelle Royale, the Collegium Vocale of Ghent and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
Much of this Belgian conductor's business has been conducted on period instruments, using singing styles appropriate to much earlier music than this program's, but here it was Weill ("Vom Tod im Wald"), Stravinsky (the Mass) and Faure (the Requiem).


Rights Protests Undercut Indonesia's Standing at Asia-Pacific Forum
Disturbances in East Timor today and a two-day-old sit-in at the United States Embassy here have moved Indonesia's human rights record into the spotlight at a meeting of leaders of the Asia-Pacific region.
President Suharto has been hoping to call attention to Indonesia's economic progress and enhance its international standing as host of the meeting, at which the leaders of 18 nations are expected to issue a declaration setting them on the path toward free trade by the year 2020.
But the presence of world leaders and hundreds of journalists has increased the risk that the Indonesian Government would receive unwanted attention for its suppression of labor movements, its censorship of the press, and its invasion and annexation of East Timor, a former Portuguese colony.


JAZZ
A Composer Whose Music Asks The Audience to Come to It  Miller Theater
Muhal Richard Abrams, the well-respected composer and pianist who moves through the classical, new- music and jazz worlds, rarely finds a middle ground between dry, academic compositions and his sometimes thrilling jazz work.
On Thursday night, in front of a small audience, Mr.
Abrams and his band performed a long piece, "The Prism," which avoided almost completely any of music's roots in functionalism.
There were few melodies, few well-articulated rhythms and long sections where the timbres of a piece, desiccated and harsh, limited its emotional range.


Pre-Death Cash: A Business Grows
Buying life insurance policies from terminally ill people to provide them cash before they die, once seen as a ghoulish business not for the faint of heart, is emerging from the shadows.
As the young industry grows large, insurance companies and big banks are attracted to this obscure corner of the business world previously dominated by free-wheeling brokers and small entrepreneurs operating largely free from scrutiny.
State regulators are paying more attention, to the dismay of some pioneers in the business, but to the approval of the new big corporate interests.


Police Add Law Degrees To Their Badges and Guns
When Thomas L. Kirk of the West Virginia State Police tried law school 14 years ago, he was an anomaly.
No patrolman had ever asked for leave for such training, and the department did not know what to do with one who did.
But no longer.
Colonel Kirk, who after one false start obtained his law degree in 1990, now works with two other officer-lawyers in the department's legal affairs unit, and he has recently been contacted by four other troopers who want to earn law degrees.


Nintendo Counts on a New 'Virtual' Game
Seeking to revitalize a slowing video game market, the Nintendo Company will announce on Monday a low-priced "virtual reality" game system that it will begin selling in the United States and Japan in April.
The system, known as Virtual Boy, uses a display technology pioneered by Reflection Technology Inc., a small, privately owned company in Waltham, Mass.
To play a Virtual Boy game a user must look directly into two miniature displays to view stereoscopic images created by arrays of red-light-emitting diodes, or LED's.


In This Believe It or Not, Santana Is a Champion
After being crowned the new super welterweight champion on Saturday night, Luis Santana of the Dominican Republic was whisked out of the ring on a stretcher.
For the boxing world -- where paragliders intrude on fights and a 45-year-old is the heavyweight champion -- it was just one more hard-to-believe development.
Santana, a 34-year-old Dominican, is not an elite fighter.
But he captured the World Boxing Council and International Boxing Federation titles from Terry Norris, 27, after Norris was disqualified for hitting Santana in the back of the head.


Abortion Clinic Case Revives a Legal Dilemma
In his trial for fatally shooting a doctor and his volunteer escort outside a Pensacola, Fla., abortion clinic, Paul J. Hill waged one last protest: he chose to represent himself, then refused to offer any witnesses or evidence on his own behalf.
In refusing to speak up, Mr.
Hill made it easier for the 12 jurors hearing his case to convict him and to recommend that he die in Florida's electric chair.
In that sense, legal experts say, his case raised disturbing questions.
If the death penalty is imposed, how fair is it to execute someone condemned on half the evidence?
Is the state of Florida simply carrying out the wishes of a defendant who wants to die?


Korea-Japan Tension Is Centuries Old; Oe the Dissenter
To the Editor:
When Oe Kenzaburo won the Nobel Prize in Literature, the Japanese daily Asahi Shimbun suggested that the choice of an author known for gritty, politically charged portrayals of post-World War II life might be a sign that the West had moved beyond a view of Japan based on Orientalist stereotypes.
Sadly, your Nov. 6 article about Mr.
Oe's refusal to accept the Imperial Order of Culture from the Emperor offers good reason to believe this is not true.


Miscellany
*
DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, and Media Marketing Assessment, Westport, Conn., have formed a joint venture to offer Gold Finder, a service to develop advertising and marketing programs to improve the sales of neglected and poorly performing brand-name products. *
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages rose four-tenths of 1 percent in October, to 18,164, from October 1993.
For the first 10 months of 1994, total pages rose 4.4 percent, to 144,499, from the corresponding period a year ago.


From Israel to Jordan: So Near and Yet So Far


Accounts
*
Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Hong Kong, to handle its Fanta line of soft drinks in Asia and Australia, previously handled by McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York.
The D.M.B.&amp; B. Americas agency handles Fanta in Latin America; Lowe Howard-Spink, London, handles it in Europe. *
Kellogg Co., Battle Creek, Mich., to Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, a longtime Kellogg agency, to handle three products being introduced next year: Kellogg's Temptations, a gourmet-style corn cereal in almond and pecan flavors; Rice Krispies Treats bars, ready-to-eat versions of the cereal snack, and Pop-Tarts Minis, bite-sized versions of Pop-Tarts.
Billings have not been determined.


G.O.P. Victory Leaves Some Israelis Worried
After the Republican sweep in the United States midterm elections last week, two words have entered Israel's political vocabulary with unsettling effect: Jesse Helms.
In the Israeli Government there is concern, and among the opposition delight, that the Republican victory dims chances that the United States will agree now to send forces to the Golan Heights, a presumed essential component of an eventual peace treaty between Israel and Syria.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption yesterday about a rent dispute at a Manhattan apartment building, the Belnord, misspelled the surname of a tenant.
He is Thomas Vitullo-Martin, not Bitullo-Martin.


We Must Do More to Heal Rwanda's Children
To the Editor:
"Ndera Journal: Minds in Retreat From the Madness of Rwanda" (news article, Nov. 7) calls attention to what too often is a forgotten consequence of war and disaster -- the severe psychological trauma suffered by the survivors and the importance of psychological healing for them.
I would like to underscore the importance, however, of focusing specifically on the ordeal of the children of Rwanda and its implications.


The Mayor's Wife Ignites a Furor in Yonkers; Lynn Zaleski Arrives on the Public Stage With Ample Fire and Brimstone
The way Lynn Zaleski sees it, the Yonkers city government can be divided into two camps: one captained by her husband, the Mayor, a good man trying to rescue the city from its corrupt past, and the other led by a majority of the City Council, intent on destroying him.
Last July, at a public budget hearing broadcast on cable television here, Mrs.
Zaleski decided to tell the people of the state's fourth-largest city exactly how she felt.
Standing at a lectern in the audience, she unleashed a furious attack on several Council members.
She told them they spoke with "forked tongues," she read to them from the Psalms of David ("they have opened wicked and treacherous mouths against me") and she berated them for "bringing the city to ruin."


Legacy of Violence: Indian Officials Face Vengeance for the Killing of Sikhs
The number of police commandos mounting a round-the-clock watch on the home here of a senior official of the governing Congress Party has increased sharply in recent weeks.
Anybody wearing the turban that is the traditional headwear of the Sikhs has been especially closely watched.
The official under guard, H. K. L. Bhagat, has held no Government post in years.
At 73, he is at an age when many of his former colleagues in Indira Gandhi's Government live in quiet retirement.
But because of events that occurred 10 years ago, when Mrs.
Gandhi was assassinated by Sikh bodyguards and mobs of her supporters reacted by killing Sikhs in Delhi and other cities, Mr.
Bhagat is believed to be in great danger.


Let's Abolish New York's Obsolete State Senate
To the Editor:
"After the Election, Fix Albany" (editorial, Nov. 7), urging major reform of the New York State legislative process may have missed the surest way to have the greatest effect on that almost universally desired goal: abolish the State Senate.


We Must Do More to Heal Rwanda's Children; U.N. Forces on Call
To the Editor:
Re "Rwanda Faces New War Unless International Force Is Sent, U.N. Aides Say" (news article, Nov. 6): Based on past history, if the Security Council decides to send such a force it will take months before it arrives on the scene.


Dividend Meetings


Motor Vehicle Theft
After peaking around 1990, reported motor vehicle thefts in New York City and the region have fallen considerably.
Preliminary 1994 figures show a further decline: car thefts were down 15 percent in the city and 13 percent in New York State in the first six months of 1994 from the first six months of 1993.
Law-enforcement officials credit increased enforcement efforts, the proliferation of alarms and other anti-theft devices, and the growing use of identification numbers on cars and parts as reasons for the drop in auto theft.
Bridgeport and Newark have even higher rates of car theft per 100,000 residents than New York City, though reported theft in each of those cities declined more than 20 percent in 1993 from 1992.


An Indirect Route Brings a Charge In the Death of a Milk Deliveryman
In four decades of delivering milk, butter and eggs to small markets throughout Brooklyn, Gerald Goldberg built his business through connections, talking to customers, gaining people's trust and learning of opportunities.
It was not unlike the way the investigators, working under a new Police Department policy, found the man who they say is Mr.
Goldberg's killer.
On Saturday night, acting on a tip from a suspect in an unrelated robbery, the police arrested Kenneth Curry, 28, and charged him with the murder of Mr.
Goldberg.


Fearing a Conspiracy, Some Heed a Call to Arms
On a raw, damp weekend morning near this town at the top of Lake Michigan, some 100 members of a group calling itself the Michigan Militia have convened amid the scrub pine to practice military techniques many long ago forgot.
Although the training is unsophisticated and the breathing ragged for the middle-aged self-styled warriors, the purpose of the assault maneuvers and target practice is deadly serious, they say.
The Michigan Militia is preparing to defend itself against the United States Government.
In the six months since it was formed here in Emmet County, the organization has started chapters, or "brigades," throughout Michigan, said Ray Southwell, the group's information officer.


3 Bands That Help Redefine the Conventions of Their Form
Short, fast, loud and catchy: the basics of pop-rock haven't changed in decades, but they are constantly being reaccessorized.
For the 1990's, the popular trappings include a buffer of guitars -- often distorted or discordant -- and lyrics that fracture or ignore the romantic verities of older pop.
Mere melody can seem too sweet, not tough enough; fierce guitars and booming drums eliminate any wimpiness.
On Saturday night at Roseland, Sugar, Velocity Girl and Magnapop were a triple bill of kindred bands, shielding tender feelings in muscular, noisy rock, skipping lead-guitar solos to get to the next riff or accusation.
Bob Mould, who leads Sugar, helped invent the style with Husker Du in the 1980's.
After an interlude as a solo performer, using gentler arrangements, he returned to the power-trio lineup with Sugar.
The set was a pleasurable post-punk barrage: one three-minute song leading immediately to the next, with breaks only for tuning every half a dozen songs.


No Headline
"We are preparing to defend our freedom. The way things are going, I think bullets might be as valuable as gold and silver one day soon." -- RAY SOUTHWELL, a member of the Michigan Militia.  [ A14:5. ]


New Kid on Block Bumps Shoulders With an Idol
When Reggie White recorded 21 sacks during the 1987 season -- a number that still stands as a National Football Conference record -- James Brown was a two-way lineman for the football team at Philadelphia's Mastbaum High School, a teen-ager who watched White and the Eagles religiously.
And though Brown dreamed that he, too, would play in the National Football League someday, it must have been hard for him to imagine what he faced this afternoon at Lambeau Field.
Lining up at right tackle for the Jets for what was his fourth career start, Brown found himself face to face with White in what was a crucial game for both the Packers and the Jets.


An Indirect Route Brings a Charge In the Death of a Milk Deliveryman
In four decades of delivering milk, butter and eggs to small markets throughout Brooklyn, Gerald Goldberg built his business through connections, talking to customers, gaining people's trust and learning of opportunities.
It was not unlike the way the investigators, working under a new Police Department policy, found the man who they say is Mr.
Goldberg's killer.
On Saturday night, acting on a tip from a suspect in an unrelated robbery, the police arrested Kenneth Curry, 28, and charged him with the murder of Mr.
Goldberg.


Albert Symphony Has a Posthumous Premiere
At his death in an auto accident in 1992, the composer Stephen Albert was working on a theory of what he called harmonic fields in music.
Presumably the idea was that much music that did not literally use traditional tonal harmony created its tensions and resolutions with large, vaguer areas of harmonic force.
Albert may have written his Second Symphony as an example.
It was commissioned by the New York Philharmonic and received its premiere during the weekend's series of subscription concerts conducted by Hugh Wolff.
Albert completed a short score before his death, indicating about half the instrumentation; a colleague, Sebastian Currier, felt very little else was required and orchestrated the piece based on his knowledge of Albert's style.
Much of Albert's previous music was inspired by literary texts, including his Pulitzer Prize-winning "Riverrun" (1984).
The Second Symphony, though, is a piece of absolute, abstract music.
Its three movements last about a half-hour, during which there are identifiable key regions.
The third -- a familiar interval in tonal music -- gives the work much of its coloration.
There are even, here and there, tonal melodies that echo late Romanticism.
The work is full of allusions to earlier styles, including both Mahler (in the sarcastic-sounding second movement) and Copland (in the elegiac passages of the last).
The label neo-Romantic was often applied to Albert; this piece deserves to be called his Neo-Romantic Symphony.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Sleepy, shuffling Fred the Baker is gaining new visibility, beyond his trademark doughnuts.
MILLIONS of people know his face, but relatively few know his name.
But when you ask Michael Vale -- "Fred the Baker" on the Dunkin' Donuts television commercials -- about it, he says that he does not object one bit.
"I created the character, and I created the name," Mr.
Vale said.
"I've been doing it for about 14 years. I can't go anywhere without getting recognized."


Winnipeg Journal; On Canada's Prairie, Kinfolk Rush to Help Ukraine
Leonid D. Kuchma, the President of Ukraine, wasn't just being polite when, on a visit last month to this prairie city half a world away from Kiev, he said he "really felt at home."
One out of six people here is of Ukrainian descent.
Even though the community goes back more than 100 years to the first waves of agricultural immigration to help populate the prairies, Ukrainian identity still thrives through newspapers, magazines, schools, churches, clubs, choruses, dance groups and professional associations.
There are even credit unions that preserve a Ukrainian identity.


Peter Wilenski; Former Ambassador, 55
Peter Wilenski, a former ambassador to the United Nations from Australia who proposed reforms for the administration of the United Nations, died on Nov. 3 at his home in Sydney.
He was 55 years old.
The cause was lymphatic cancer, which had been under treatment for several years, according to a statement from the Australian Mission to the United Nations.


As Iraqis Scrimp, Their President Lives Lavishly, U.S. Says
American officials trying to maintain support for economic sanctions against Iraq said today that since the end of the Persian Gulf war, Saddam Hussein has spent what may be as much as $1 billion on palaces and presidential retreats around the country.
At a time when many Iraqis are destitute, Iraq has not only repaired the damage allied bombings did to Government palaces during the 1991 war, but is also expanding them and building new ones, according to American intelligence reports.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Finding Common Passions In Romanticism and the Modern 92d Street Y
Christian Tetzlaff, a German violinist, and Leif Ove Andsnes, a Norwegian pianist, have left favorable impressions when they have performed here as soloists.
And in a joint recital on Wednesday evening, they showed that they have much in common.
Both are technically impeccable and come to the mainstream repertory with fresh insights.
And neither is averse to taking interpretive risks to field-test their ideas.


Lintas Executive Goes to Earle Palmer
Steve Norcia, a former top executive at Lintas New York, has been named to the new position of managing partner at Earle Palmer Brown and will head the agency's New York office, which has 40 to 45 employees and billings estimated at $50 million.
Mr.
Norcia, 53, assumes responsibilities previously held by Linda J. Srere, who joined Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising in New York as executive vice president and business development director.
She was one of several executives at Earle Palmer's New York office to leave in recent months.


Bridge
Newspaper columns collected in book form tend to be dull reading, but there are exceptions.
One of them is "Get Smarter at Bridge" by Phillip Alder, a highly entertaining offering by North America's youngest bridge columnist.
Some of his deals show the author's addiction to P. G. Wodehouse and the television show "Get Smart." Most of them are introduced in a quiz format, and he includes a brief introduction to duplicate play and modern bidding methods.
The book can be ordered by writing to him at P.O.
Box 169, Roslyn Heights, L.I. 11577-0169, and the cost is $14.95 including mailing.


Of Rankings, Survival And the Quack Attack
This was not a weekend to discover a sharper focus in this passionate college football season.
This was a weekend to appreciate resourcefulness.
Even as teams began to clinch bowl positions, or come within a step of championships, the questions persist.
On Survival Saturday, all anyone wanted to do was minimize the damage and get to the next week.
"I know what kind of team this is," said Bobby Engram, the Penn State receiver who became an essential part of the 96-yard, game-winning drive that allowed the Nittany Lions to clinch a Rose Bowl spot with a 35-31 victory here against Illinois.
Penn State's ability to win despite a 21-point first quarter deficit, the largest overcome in a victory during Joe Paterno's 29 seasons as coach, was one of several difficult escapes that allowed highly ranked teams to remain significant factors.


In Europe, the Right Also Rises
Jorg Haider, an athletic-looking and charismatic 44-year-old, is the new European right personified, one of the rising conservative populists who may be the wave of the future or a troubling throwback to the fascist past.
What is certain is that he and others like him have an undeniable fascination for voters who, as in America, seem fed up with politics as usual and want government off their backs.


Press
JOURNALISTS sometimes promise to keep the identities of their sources secret.
Occasionally, a reporter even goes to jail to keep a pledge of confidentiality.
But what would happen to those solemn promises of secrecy if reporters' credit-card, airline and rental car bills -- even their private telephone records -- could be opened for inspection?


It Seems The Force Is With Chargers
All year long everyone has suspected that the San Diego Chargers had a guardian angel sitting on their shoulder pads.
Now, they know for sure.
It was certified here on a rainy afternoon at Arrowhead Stadium, where the Chargers had not won a game since 1989.
San Diego managed a 14-13 victory in a game where the Chargers committed three first-half turnovers, trailed by 13-0 at the half, couldn't muster a decent passing or rushing attack, and witnessed Joe Montana, the master of the last-minute comeback, run out of time at the San Diego 30.


DANCE
Moody Dances On a Misty Stage  Kaye Playhouse
Val Suarez, the director of Extended Dance, likes to stretch his company's talents by presenting jazz and modern-dance works by many choreographers.


Mexican Chief Urges Talks on Freer Flow of Migrants
With Mexican anger still building over the approval of a California ballot initiative to cut social services to undocumented immigrants, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has said Mexico and the United States will have to discuss a freer flow of migrant workers just as they negotiate free trade.
Little more than two weeks before his six-year term is to end, Mr.
Salinas argued that some sort of bilateral agreement on a greater legal flow of Mexican migrant workers northward is the only way that the problem might be controlled.


Far-Flung Jam Session: Medium Is the Massage
The distance between the maker of music and the music itself has always existed.
It takes a certain amount of traveling for a finger, a foot or a set of lungs to produce a sound.
Pianos have complicated levers that must be negotiated one by one; air must pass through tubes and valves to give a trumpet life.
So the Electronic Cafe International at the Kitchen late Saturday night was nothing new; it simply upped the distance ante by many times.
In this three-city hook-up along the information highway, the Kitchen on West 19th Street, the Electronic Cafe in Santa Monica, Calif., and Studio X in Santa Fe, N.M., created sight and sound that whipped back and forth across this country's various rocks, rills and purple majesties.


CHRONICLE
What better way to promote a pet cause than on a national television series?
When PHYLLIS CERF WAGNER sits down to watch "The Cosby Mysteries" tomorrow evening on NBC, she will see a fund-raising project she devised for Central Park -- the Central Park Conservancy's Adopt-a-Bench program -- woven into the plot.


Physicists Strive To Create Atoms Of Antihydrogen From Antimatter
ANTIMATTER: the super fuel for driving spacecraft to the stars, the wonder annihilator that could make hydrogen bombs seem like firecrackers, the antistuff of antigalaxies inhabited by antipeople . . ..
In the 66 years since the British physicist Paul A. M. Dirac theorized the existence of antimatter, the wilder notions about this fascinating but elusive substance have remained closer to fiction than to physics.
Nevertheless, the creation of antimatter in high-energy laboratories has become routine, bringing exciting new possibilities within reach.


POP
A Mingling of the Arts By 2 Groups From Mexico  Hostos Community College
"We wanted to play an uncompromising, challenging kind of music that would make people think and criticize and become dissatisfied with what we thought were the hollow products of the music industry," Chris Cutler wrote about his progressive rock band Henry Cow in the 1984 book "File Under Popular." Although Mr.
Cutler's polemics have become dated, his intentions were noble.
This was the case when two groups from Mexico City, Banda Elastica, an avant-garde fusion band, and Asalto Diario, which brings together dance, theater and acrobatics, performed on Friday night.
Like Mr.
Cutler, the two groups cut their own path through the arts, mix their media and, of course, write manifestoes.


Woman Says Jar Contained Crack
Federal food and drug officials and the police yesterday were investigating a report by a Washington Heights woman who said she found 32 vials of crack cocaine in a sealed jar of Hellmann's mayonnaise bought at a local supermarket on Sunday.
No product recall was ordered, and there were no indications that other jars were tainted.
By last night, after questioning the woman and examining the plant where the mayonnaise was packed and the store where it was sold, officials were unable to say if they were dealing with a product safety issue, or with a strange but isolated case.


POP
Many Voices in Harmony, Or a Musical Babel?  S.O.B.'s
Imagine watching a movie in which the director is on screen ordering the actors around.
That was the feeling when watching a mixed bag of musicians perform music by Kip Hanrahan during the first of two sets on Sunday night.
Beer bottle in hand, Mr.
Hanrahan threaded his way through his large ensemble all evening, whispering advice to the bassist and vocalist Fernando Saunders as he tried to sing, and muddling the violinist Billy Bang with instructions for a solo.
Mr.
Hanrahan wasn't conducting; he was producing, overseeing and rearranging.
Most of the time he succeeded in greasing the wheels of his performing machine.


Corrections
A brief front-page report on Saturday, summarizing an article about Congressional Republicans' reactions to victory, referred imprecisely to automobiles used by Representative Newt Gingrich.
The Cadillac in which he rode had been provided by a group he was addressing; he did not trade in his own car.
Mr.
Gingrich's comments are reported today on page B8.


No Headline
"We in the church stand with the unborn and the undocumented, the poor and the vulnerable, the hungry and the homeless in defense of human rights and human life. Our advocacy does not fit ideological or partisan categories, for our witness is not politically correct, but unfailingly consistent." -- WILLIAM H. KEELER, Archbishop of Baltimore.  [ A24:1. ]


25 Minutes of Terror in San Francisco
About eight days ago, a 37-year-old drifter named Victor Boutwell told a relative, "You're gonna be surprised at what I'm going to do." The relative thought Mr.
Boutwell was contemplating suicide.
Instead, he surfaced on Sunday with a small arsenal of weapons, spraying semiautomatic gunfire for 25 terrifying minutes at passers-by and the police on the fringes of the wealthy Pacific Heights section of San Francisco.
Ten officers returned his fire, and one of them, 38-year-old James Guelff, was fatally shot before Mr.
Boutwell, a man who spent the last six years living out of the back of his van, was himself shot to death.


DF&amp;R Restaurants
Shares of DF&amp;R Restaurants, which operates Harrigan's and Don Pablo's, fell sharply yesterday for a second day.
The company said on Friday that second-quarter profits would be below estimates.


Rhone Unit Focuses on Gene Drugs
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. said yesterday that it had started a new division that would concentrate on the discovery, development and commercialization of drugs based on gene and cell therapies.
The new unit, called RPR Gencell, has already agreed to collaborate with 14 other companies and academic institutions in research and development.


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Money Corrupts Politics, Absolutely
To the Editor:
"We're to Blame," says Ronald A. Heifetz, director of the leadership education project at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government, for the sorry state of today's politics (Op-Ed, Nov. 8).


By Design; Oriental Inspiration
"Orientalism," the Metropolitan Museum's Costume Institute exhibition opening next month, couldn't be more timely.
A flavor of China is showing up in many collections.
Jean-Paul Gaultier showed mandarin-inspired clothing for fall, and Richard Tyler and Todd Oldham used Chinese-patterned spring fabrics.
Saks Fifth Avenue has some of the Gaultier styles with dragon and animal motifs, gold embroidery and frog closures.
A jacket, a long robe and a dress range from $1,287 to $1,929.
The store also has a mandarin-collared side-buttoned blouse in gold silk Jacquard by Dana Buchman ($162) and Chinese-style slippers in velvet by Anne Klein and Calvin Klein ($220 to $225).


Political Depression Hits Brunch Belt
What did you think of the election?
Like Dorothy on the Yellow Brick Road, New Yorkers on the Upper West Side of Manhattan responded to the question posed to them on the sidewalk by figuratively tapping their heels together and whispering, there's no place like home.
The Upper West Side is the heart of liberal New York, which makes it the heart of the heart of liberal America, a kind of urban college town, the East Coast version of Berkeley, Calif., or Madison, Wis.
True to form, a week ago, Assembly Districts 67 and 69, which more or less define the area, not only returned their Democratic incumbents, Scott M. Stringer and Edward C. Sullivan, to the State Assembly with some 80 percent of the vote, but they voted for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo by more than 6 to 1.
Of course, Mr.
Cuomo lost, along with many others of his ideological ilk across the country.


A Shawmut-Barclays Deal
The Shawmut National Corporation plans to buy Barclays Business Credit, the United States asset-based lending operation of Barclays Bank P.L.C.
When the acquisition is completed, Shawmut will pay a premium of $290 million more than the net asset value of Barclays Business Credit, which was $213.7 million at the end of 1993.
The companies expect to close the deal before April.


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Revived Stereotype of Hollywood Jews Abounds in Ironies
To the Editor:
Re "Stereotype of Jews Is Revived" (Arts pages, Nov. 7):


49ers' Hanks Still Has Work to Do
The running joke back at the Hanks home in Dallas was this: No, you didn't have to get a job, go to work, until you were, oh, 14 years old.
"Everybody worked," Merton Hanks said of his family, his childhood.
"Everybody contributed."


Health Care and Hospital Chains; Small Institutions Choose Survival Over Independence
For 40 years, the volunteers of the women's auxiliary of the Schoharie County Memorial Hospital ran the hospital coffee shop.
They divided themselves into 30 chapters named for gemstones -- Sapphire for the Methodist Church women, Crystal for teachers, Diamond for the wives of doctors and lawyers.
Together, they kept the restaurant open six days a week, ran bake sales and antique shows in their spare time and raised hundreds of thousands of dollars to support the town's 70-bed pride and joy.
"I made an awful lot of egg salad sandwiches in my day," said Vesta Hauser, a Sapphire and at one point the Auxiliary's president.


Rising Dollar Helps Dow Post Gain of 28.26
One day ahead of an important meeting of Federal Reserve policy makers, the stock market rallied yesterday, buoyed by a rising dollar that also lifted bond prices.
But the factors supporting the dollar, like the vote in Sweden to join the European Union, may be short term and thus stock and bond prices could fall later in the week, analysts say.


Ice Stars Keep On Melting Hearts of Their Viewers
Figure skating is heating up again.
Hot on the toe loops of CBS's two-part "Ice Wars" live figure-skating exhibition comes NBC's "The Gold Championship," a live, two-hour show Saturday night from Edmonton, Alberta.
Rather than CBS's team competition, NBC's is an individual event offering $1 million in prize money ($200,000 for first place, $160,000 for second place and $140,000 for third place).


Nassau's Proposed Budget Freezes '95 Property Taxes
Less than two years after Nassau County was forced to borrow $65 million to close a budget gap, the County Executive today proposed a budget for 1995 that would freeze taxes for homeowners and cut taxes for some businesses.
The County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, attributed the good news to a surge in sales tax revenue resulting from the region's economic turnaround.


International Family Entertainment Inc.(FAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


To Remember Seed Caches, Bird Grows New Brain Cells
EVERY fall, when the trees of North America's forests shake themselves into bare brown bones, and the sky grows gray and surly, and the meadows offer little but brambles and shriveled berries, the little black-capped chickadee rises brilliantly to the challenges of a callous world.
The insects it has feasted on throughout the spring and summer are all dead, which means the bird must start foraging over a much wider terrain for fast-vanishing seeds and nuts.
And, it must join forces with huge flocks of other hungry chickadees, far more birds than it had to tolerate during the balmy breeding season.


Earthquakes as Just a Fact of Life
Looking for another reason not to live in Los Angeles?
It's available tonight on "Nova." The horror-movie title, "Killer Quake!," tells the story.
Beginning with the Jan. 17 earthquake in the San Fernando Valley that demolished much of the city's Northridge neighborhood, the program finds more, and worse, to come.
"We don't know when it's going to happen," says one of tonight's geologists.
"We don't know where it's going to happen. We do know it will happen."


Trying New Ways to Save Decaying Parks
City and community leaders gathered in 1986 to break ground on the Underhill Playground in Prospect Heights in Brooklyn.
A brass band played, children sang and Mayor Edward I. Koch proclaimed, "One million dollars is a lot of money and we'll be getting a lot of playground for our money."
Seven years after its completion, the playground is a wreck.
Rubber swings were shredded by pit bulls being trained by neighborhood boys.
Metal swings and slides were stolen.
A spiraling plastic slide, the only remaining piece of play equipment, has a big hunk ripped out.
There is broken glass, swirling graffiti, crack vials and, these days, few children.


Mercer Int'l.(MERCS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flood of Rwanda Refugees Is Destroying Ecological Treasure
AT first light, the lines of humanity are already snaking across the fields of tall grass and stumps, heading into the forests of Virunga National Park.
Throughout the day people straggle back out, their bounty balanced on their heads -- here a child with a bundle of sticks, there a man with a thick log, women struggling under remarkably heavy loads.
They are refugees, among the nearly one million who fled into this part of Zaire last summer to escape the civil war in Rwanda.
In spite of regulations adopted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that camps should be situated away from national parks and forests, more than 90 percent of the refugees live within walking distance of the park.
And every day an estimated 30,000 adults and children forage in the park with their machetes, emerging with loads averaging 40 pounds, said Craig Sanders, an environmental consultant here for the refugee agency.


Future Now Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALEXANDER &amp; ALEXANDER SERVICES INC., New York, an insurance brokerage and risk management consulting service, has announced a fourth-quarter pretax gain of about $20 million from the sale of its U.S. personal insurance lines business to Chubb Personal Lines Insurance Brokerage Inc., a division of Chubb Corp., Warren, N.J.


Raise Share Price, Kerkorian Tells Chrysler
With one tart letter to the Chrysler Corporation's board, Kirk Kerkorian, the largest investor in the company, made $100 million in paper profits today.
Mr.
Kerkorian said he planned to increase his 9 percent stake in Chrysler, the No. 3 United States auto maker, and would put pressure on the board to quickly raise the share price.


Filene's Basement Corp.(BSMT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


S.E.C. Is Reviewing Nasdaq Market
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced this evening that it had begun a review of the Nasdaq stock market's general compliance with Federal regulations.
The review, according to an S.E.C. official who insisted on anonymity, is aimed in particular at determining whether Nasdaq market makers quoted prices to buy and sell shares and then backed away from actually doing deals at these prices.
Such moves are banned by regulations issued by the S.E.C. and by the National Association of Securities Dealers Inc., which owns and operates the Nasdaq.


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.(AAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Revived Stereotype of Hollywood Jews Abounds in Ironies; Anecdote in Question
To the Editor:
Re "Stereotype of Jews Is Revived" (Arts pages, Nov. 7):


Peter Wilenski, Former U.N. Delegate, 55
Peter Wilenski, a former representative at the United Nations from Australia, died on Nov. 3 at his home in Sydney.
He was 55 years old.
The cause was lymphatic cancer, according to a statement from the Australian Mission to the United Nations.


Lucy S. Morgan, 93, Adviser to W.H.O.
Dr.
Lucy Shields Morgan, a groundbreaking educator in public health and an adviser to the World Health Organization, died on Friday at the Deerfield Episcopal Retirement Center in Asheville, N.C.
She was 93.
She had suffered a long illness, said the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she had been professor emeritus of health education since 1966.


Corrections
An article yesterday about an arrest in the slaying of Gerald Goldberg, a deliveryman in Brooklyn, referred incorrectly to the victim's business.
He delivered eggs and a variety of dairy products to local stores, but he did not deliver milk.


Woman Says Jar Contained Crack
Federal food and drug officials and the police yesterday were investigating a report by a Washington Heights woman who said she found 32 vials of crack cocaine in a sealed jar of Hellmann's mayonnaise bought at a local supermarket on Sunday.
No product recall was ordered, and there were no indications that other jars were tainted.
By last night, after questioning the woman and examining the plant where the mayonnaise was packed and the store where it was sold, officials were unable to say if they were dealing with a product safety issue, or with a strange but isolated case.


Top Admiral Striving to Preserve Size of Fleet
As the rivalry among the military services escalates, the Navy's top admiral is mounting a campaign against plans to shrink the fleet.
This effort takes place against the backdrop of growing anxiety within the Pentagon over declining military spending, but it also comes at a time when the Republicans' sweeping election victories have given some military officials hope that a number of cutbacks may be reversed.


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column of The Living Section last Wednesday about the formation of a catering company by Daniel Boulud and Jean-Christophe Le Picart referred incorrectly to Mr.
Le Picart's previous catering concern, Tentation.
It is still in business, under the name Tentation, Potel &amp; Chabot, owned by Potel &amp; Chabot, a Parisian catering company.


Creating a Republican Wave, Then Riding It In
Until last week, he was best known as the husband of Susan Molinari, the Republican Representative from Staten Island.
But now Bill Paxon has an independent claim to fame.
As chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, he was one of the chief architects of the political coup that put Republicans in charge of the House of Representatives.
With boundless energy and enthusiasm, Mr.
Paxon, a 40-year-old Representative from the Buffalo suburbs, recruited Republican candidates for the House, raised money for them, trained them and campaigned for them all over the country.


Back on Track at Seton Hall
Bryan Spoonire, the Seton Hall senior who made a costly wrong turn during Saturday's IC4A 10,000-meter cross-country race at Franklin Park in Boston, was notified yesterday that he will be allowed to compete in the Division I championships in Fayetteville, Ark., next week after all.
Spoonire, who finished 33d after retracing his steps, had appealed to the National Collegiate Athletic Association, arguing that he had departed from the course only because a crowd was blocking his way.


CHRONICLE
From the religious frescoes of the Italian Renaissance to product logos and restaurant design might seem a huge artistic leap, but the graphic designer MILTON GLASER has made it a round trip.
Tonight, Mr.
Glaser, 65, returns to his artistic roots with the opening at Cooper Union of a show of his watercolors and drawings modeled after the works of Piero della Francesca, the Renaissance painter.
Mr.
Glaser was commissioned by the Italian Government to do the collection, which has been on view in Italy, to celebrate the 500th anniversary of della Francesca's birth.
That anniversary was two years ago.


Sea Containers Ltd.(SCRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What It Will Take to Make Russia Capitalist
To the Editor:
Re "Where Soviets Strutted, Capitalism Sets Up Shop" (Moscow Journal, Nov. 8):


Laying Odds on America's Soul
The most colorful character in Sam Shepard's elegiac new play "Simpatico" is a former bigwig in the California horse-racing world who has been forced through scandal to relocate and start life over under an assumed name.
The man, once known as Simms (James Gammon), now calls himself Ames and holds down a low-echelon job with the Kentucky Racing Commission.
A gruff, raspy-voiced throwback to 1940's detective movies, he works in a grimy office whose most distinguishing feature is a leather chair decorated with the horns of a steer.
Visited by Vinnie (Fred Ward), a self-styled private eye who helped arrange his downfall 15 years earlier, Simms seems hardly to remember his previous life or the man who disgraced him.
Waxing nostalgic, Simms laments the disappearance of movies like "Double Indemnity" and "The Maltese Falcon" because, he says, they were "pictures with a plot you could sink your teeth into."


Subway Work In Flushing Is Restored
Using its power over transit construction funds as leverage, the Giuliani administration persuaded transit officials yesterday to go ahead with rebuilding a busy subway station in Flushing, Queens, even as they planned to put off similar work at 15 other stations.
The city Budget Director, Abraham M. Lackman, announced yesterday that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would restore about $250 million in capital funds he had planned to cut from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's current five-year building plan.


Trident NGL Holdings Inc.(NGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


You'd Hardly Know Cuba's Open for Business
To the Editor:
This week, public television's Nightly Business Report offered a special series on foreign investment in Cuba.
I hope our own business community tuned in and watched with close interest.


For Musical Appreciation, Sexes Go Their Own Ways
Look around most concert halls during any evening or matinee performance, and you might notice more women than men listening for the strains of Mozart or Rachmaninoff.
But after the curtain falls and the lights go up, saunter over to the classical section of the nearest record store to see the flip side of this gender-tuned natural selection.
There you will more likely find men thumbing through the current batch of music magazines or buying yet another version of the Bach B-minor Mass.
While the appeal of classical music is hardly limited to one sex, an unofficial roundup of research by record companies, poll-takers, concert halls and academics suggests that men and women seem to enjoy their music in very different ways.
Among those who call themselves lovers of classical music, women are more likely to attend live performances, while men outnumber women when it comes to buying music.


For Pataki, the Adirondacks Before the Deluge
So where does the Governor-elect unwind after 13 months of subsisting on cold pizza, giving the same speech four times a day and stuffing his 6-foot-5 frame into four-seater planes?
A tropical paradise?
Some posh European resort?
Not Governor-elect George E. Pataki.


ADT Ltd. (ADT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonds Surge On Advances By the Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday on a strong dollar and gains in the futures market after an initial opening dip.
Traders were waiting for the meeting of the Federal Reserve's policy-making committee today, with some adjusting of positions ahead of what many in the market expect will be the sixth increase in short-term interest rates by the Fed this year.
The cash market, which was closed on Friday in observance of Veterans Day, opened for trading yesterday and immediately followed the downward pattern of the futures market on Friday.
But as the dollar turned higher against other foreign currencies, particularly the German mark and Japanese yen, bond prices began to make some solid gains.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
4.99
3.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.22
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.64
3.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.91
7.98
5.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.07
8.14
6.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.96
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.24
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Clinton Promotes U.S.-North Korea Nuclear Agreement
In wide-ranging meetings with Asian and Pacific leaders, President Clinton sought on Monday to promote support for Washington's nuclear accord with North Korea and train the spotlight on America's more prominent role in the Asia-Pacific region.
But senior Administration officials acknowledged that the United States faces extraordinarily complicated negotiations with Japan, South Korea and other participants in carrying out the nuclear accord during the next decade, and even Mr.
Clinton said that making it a reality would be difficult.


A Disillusioned State Gives Up on Democrats
Sometimes it is the little things that lead to big changes.
Ask John Greeter, a lifelong Democrat who runs a building supply business in this town of 1,100 perched atop the mist-shrouded Cumberland Plateau and near the steep grade into the Sequatchie Valley that truckers, with air-braking and gear-grinding dread, call Monster Mountain.


Chess
In winning the United States Championship in Key West, Fla., in late October, Boris Gulko performed in close accord with every grandmaster's daydreams.
The 47-year-old former Soviet champion, who lives in Fair Lawn, N.J., won with captivating combinations, trenchant tactics, precise positional play and excellently executed endgames.
And when, in a rare case, he got himself into a dangerous situation, he cleverly crawled away unscathed.
It's no wonder that he was the only undefeated player and won with a lead of 1 1/2 points over the star-studded field.


Clinton Defends Halting Arms Embargo Enforcement
President Clinton today offered his first public defense of his decision to order the American military to stop enforcing the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government, a step that has alarmed American allies.
Mr.
Clinton said Congress had left him no choice but to end United States military effort that had been set up to try to prevent weapons shipments from reaching the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.
He insisted that the move did not represent a violation of the international embargo, but acknowledged that the top deputies who have accompanied him to Asia have had to devote considerable time to a campaign to soothe European tempers.


Dwindling Salmon Spur West to Save Rivers
HOOK-JAWED, wild and still magnificent after its taxing and hazardous struggle up the Rogue River from the ocean 125 miles away, the big coho salmon was beginning to don his scarlet mating colors, just as his kind has done every November for thousands upon thousands of years.
But far fewer fish than made the trip just a few years ago are being recorded these days by the video camera trained constantly on a narrow underwater passage through which all migrating salmon must pass to get around Gold Ray Dam.
Lately, annual runs of wild coho on the Rogue as they head for their natal waters on tributaries upstream have been about 80 percent below average.
Federal officials are expected to announce soon whether they will declare the coho an endangered species throughout much of the Pacific Northwest.
Fisheries biologists say, in fact, that most strains of Pacific salmon -- as valued a totem in this region as the bald eagle is in the nation at large -- are in deep trouble as a result of overfishing at sea, natural climatic factors and destruction of freshwater habitat where the big fish spawn and where their progeny grow large enough to return to the ocean.


Proposed Budget Stirs Protest at Hearings
Dozens of college students, administrators and education advocates bitterly protested proposed budget cuts yesterday that they said would hurt education in New York City, as the City Council opened its public hearings on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to close a $1.1 billion budget gap.
Yesterday's hearings, which focused on how the Giuliani administration's second round of budget cuts would affect education, drew more than 60 people from a broad spectrum of academia and beyond who denounced the administration's budget plan as short-sighted.


CHRONICLE
ALESSANDRA MUSSOLINI, the granddaughter of Benito Mussolini, the Italian dictator, is expecting a child in July.
"I just found out and I'm very, very happy about it," she told The Associated Press in Rome yesterday.


Physicists Strive To Create Atoms Of Antihydrogen From Antimatter
ANTIMATTER: the super fuel for driving spacecraft to the stars, the wonder annihilator that could make hydrogen bombs seem like firecrackers, the antistuff of antigalaxies inhabited by antipeople . . ..
In the 66 years since the British physicist Paul A. M. Dirac theorized the existence of antimatter, the wilder notions about this fascinating but elusive substance have remained closer to fiction than to physics.
Nevertheless, the creation of antimatter in high-energy laboratories has become routine, bringing exciting new possibilities within reach.


Jules Masserman, 89, Leader Of Psychiatric Group, Is Dead
Dr.
Jules H. Masserman, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who was a former president of the American Psychiatric Association and a former member of the Northwestern University medical school faculty, died on Nov. 6 at his home in Chicago.
He was 89.
He had been suffering from lung ailments in recent months, said his wife, Christine.


For the Big Dog, Big Time Means Big Pressure
They are Boy Scout troop leaders and advisers and they have come from all over the state of Wisconsin to discuss the future of their organization.
For the moment, though, there are more pressing things taking place on the gym floor one story below.
Faces pressed against the glass, eyes straining downward, they are watching a tall, lanky young man challenge a player more than 10 years his senior to a simple game of H-O-R-S-E.
Legs crossed, back to the net, one hand on his neck, the ball in his right hand, the young man easily makes the basket from just inside the three-point line.
The spectators grin.


Bishops' Leader Warns Against 'Punitive' Welfare Cuts
Even as Representative Newt Gingrich, the incoming Speaker of the House, is proposing to drastically scale back welfare payments and have charities and orphanages assume greater responsibility for the poor, the head of the nation's Roman Catholic Bishops conference warned today against "punitive welfare provisions" that would harm families and children.
Archbishop William H. Keeler of Baltimore, the president of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, did not refer to Mr.
Gingrich by name, saying instead that the bishops' opposition to such policies was not partisan, but in keeping with the church's teaching on "the dignity of life."


Coleman Gets Spotted On After-Hours Scene
Derrick Coleman stayed after practice today to work on his shooting and it immediately evolved into the saucy development of the day at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Coleman's action, and the reaction to his decision, reveal a wealth of information about the All-Star forward and the Nets -- most of it critical.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a pop review of a performance by the Proclaimers at Tramps misidentified the performer shown.
He was Craig Reid; his twin brother, Charlie, also performed.


Proposed Budget Stirs Protest at Hearings
Dozens of college students, administrators and education advocates bitterly protested proposed budget cuts yesterday that they said would hurt education in New York City, as the City Council opened its public hearings on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to close a $1.1 billion budget gap.
Yesterday's hearings, which focused on how the Giuliani administration's second round of budget cuts would affect education, drew more than 60 people from a broad spectrum of academia and beyond who denounced the administration's budget plan as short-sighted.


Hatch Falls From Plane On Takeoff
A cockpit emergency hatch flew off of an American Eagle commuter plane yesterday, seconds after takeoff from Kennedy International Airport, injuring no one but frightening 13 passengers and three crew members.
The aircraft, a twin-engine turboprop with 36 seats, was bound for Albany when it took off at 9:02 A.M. from runway 4-left at Kennedy.
When the hatch fell to the ground, the plane immediately landed on a parallel runway, said Peter Yerkes, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport.


William A. Higinbotham, 84; Helped Build First Atomic Bomb
William A. Higinbotham, a physicist who developed electronic components for the first atomic bomb and then became a leading advocate of controlling nuclear weapons, died on Thursday at his home in Gainesville, Ga.
He was 84.
The cause was emphysema, his family said.


Sybase To Acquire Powersoft
Sybase Inc., a leader in software for managing corporate data bases, said today that it planned to acquire the Powersoft Corporation in a stock swap valued at more than $940 million.
The deal, which would create the world's seventh-largest software company, would also be the industry's second-largest acquisition to date.
Only the Microsoft Corporation's recently announced purchase of the personal-finance software company Intuit Inc. in a stock swap worth $1.5 billion would be larger.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd. (AIP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bosnia's Cynical, Senseless War Is Over
To the Editor:
Despite gains against the Serbs by the Bosnian Government, the war in Bosnia and Croatia is largely over at this point.
Although the Serbs didn't get all the lands they wanted, they won the war.
They got more territory than the Croats or Bosnians and killed more people (if those are criteria for victory).


EXPANSION OF A BRITISH INTERACTIVE TV TRIAL IS PLANNED
The Oracle Corporation and BT, formerly British Telecommunications P.L.C., plan to expand their British interactive television services trial to 2,500 homes in the middle of 1995.
Previously, the service has been delivered to the homes of BT employees.
The system will offer consumers living in Colchester and Ipswich, England, movies-on-demand, home shopping and other services.
The service uses a set-top controller based on an Apple Macintosh computer.


Fed Move to Raise Rates Expected Today
Despite the likelihood of unusually strong public criticism, the Federal Reserve appears poised to raise short-term interest rates on Tuesday for the sixth time this year.
An eclectic chorus of critics, ranging from manufacturers to labor unionists, has begun to assail the central bank for going too far, saying it should wait to determine the effect of its previous rate increases.


Fairchild Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


How Ever Did You Do It, Mr. Ives?
Of Charles Ives, the greatest and strangest of American composers, so much is still unknown.
There are basic, unresolved questions about the editing of his manuscripts, the chronology of his output, the validity of his recollections.
And a more essential mystery shrouds his process of creation.
At an Ives-centered festival presented by the Brooklyn Philharmonic last weekend, a member of the audience asked, "How did you do it?" The question was directed at the composer John Adams, who had orchestrated several Ives songs, but one wanted to ask it of Ives himself.
How, from a chaos of secondhand material, does great music arise?
The weekend's events at the Brooklyn Academy of Music offered many fascinating insights into Ives, although it also created some new confusions.
The theme was "American Transcendentalists," tracing the powerful connection between Ives and the school of 19th-century idealist philosophy centered in Concord, Mass.
There was a rich spread of Ives works: "Three Places in New England," "The Unanswered Question," various songs and shorter pieces and, naturally, the "Concord" Sonata.
In and among them, the actor Donald Moffat read aloud selections from Emerson and Thoreau.


INSIDE
Shootout in San Francisco
A drifter who was foiled in a carjacking Sunday used two assault rifles and three handguns to engage 10 police officers in a firefight in the streets of San Francisco.
Page A20.
Iraq Sanctions Retained
The United Nations kept sanctions against Iraq, despite its recognition of Kuwait, in response to troop movements and reports of lavish spending by Iraq's leader.
Page A6.
This Bird Brain Grows
When fall comes and the black-capped chickadee needs to sharpen its thinking, it grows new brain cells.
Science Times, page C1.
A Giant Step for Solar Power
Enron, pursuing an elusive dream of solar power, plans to build a $150 plant in Nevada to produce energy at competitive rates.
Page D1.


Memorex Telex N.V. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Cyberspace Atlas: America Online
AMERICA ONLINE, the second stop on our virtual tour of cyberspace, is the most ambitious and aggressive of the popular online information services.
It is impressive and infuriating in nearly equal measures.
Point: America Online Inc. of Vienna, Va., has been advertising itself for some time as "America's most popular Internet service provider," when technically it had about as much to do with providing Internet services as does my Aunt Tootie.


Furr's/Bishop's Inc.(CHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Tenacity Solves an Ugly Bankruptcy
When people talk about Integrated Resources, the nationwide real estate syndication firm that filed for bankruptcy almost five years ago, only a few observations will not draw a big argument.
One is that the company has gone through one of the ugliest bankruptcy cases they have ever experienced.
Integrated Resources owed its existence almost entirely to the sales prowess of Drexel Burnham Lambert's junk-bond star, Michael Milken.
When both Drexel and Integrated collapsed on the same day in February 1990, Integrated's infuriated creditors included some of the nation's biggest banks, whose lawyers were soon presiding over a Gordian knot of litigation.


Jets Must Earn Stars Without the Stripes
In their 35th year, the Jets may have figured it out: Don't leave something as important as the outcome of a football game up to someone in a striped shirt.
Jim Sweeney, a veteran center, demanded of an official, "Why can't we get a break?" when the Jets failed to get an interference call at the goal line in their final offensive play Sunday in the 17-10 loss to the Green Bay Packers.


Odd Attack of Esthetics Strikes a Village of Castles
THE house that Frank Lloyd Wright designed blends in with the trees, no doubt as he intended.
Other houses in Great Neck Estates are not quite as quiet.
Most houses here are as big and grand as you'd expect from a place with "Estates" in the name.
There are mansions with storied pasts, like the one F. Scott Fitzgerald reputedly used as inspiration for the setting of "The Great Gatsby." There are huge Tudors and ranches and contemporaries, with towering evergreens in their front yards and winding paths to their front doors.
There are pillars and guest cottages and cars in the driveways that say "We've Arrived."


Liuski International Inc.(LSKI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Political Briefs; This Term in Senate To Be Last for Simon
Senator Paul Simon, a liberal Democrat from Illinois who once sought his party's nomination for the Presidency, said today that he would not seek re-election when his term expires in 1996.
"I have an obligation to the people of Illinois, to the Senate and to myself to leave the Senate while I am still eager to serve, not after I tire," Mr.
Simon, who will turn 66 later this month, said at a news conference in Chicago.


Court Backs College Plan In Louisiana
In what might be the end of a 20-year legal battle over segregation in Louisiana's colleges and universities, a Federal judge today approved a plan that officials said would lessen racial imbalances in the state's higher education system.
Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards of Louisiana and other officials hailed the agreement, saying it was a historic conclusion to a long and bitter fight.
But civil-rights organizations, including the N.A.A.C.P., said that it merely preserved the status quo.


Sports of The Times; Beard Gets A Lesson In the Nets
ONE night last week in Landover, Md., one Alfred (Butch) Beard blew his top, which was unusual only in that Mr.
Beard is a man of normally gentle mien.
The circumstances make a point that goes to the heart of the matter.
Mr.
Beard, of course, is the rookie coach of what for want of a better term is called a basketball team.
It is the New Jersey Nets basketball team, which explains why even someone like Mr.
Beard might find occasion to go bananas.
The Nets had lost handily to the Bullets -- they now have lost five of their first six games -- but they had lost in a fashion that Mr.
Beard found odious.


Solar Power, for Earthly Prices
The nation's largest natural gas company is betting $150 million that it can succeed where the Government has so far failed: producing solar power at rates competitive with those of energy generated from oil, gas and coal.
The Enron Corporation plans to build a plant in the southern Nevada desert that would be the largest operation in the country making electricity directly from sunlight, producing enough to power a city of 100,000 people.
It is expected to begin operating in late 1996.


Busch Tells Longtime Shop: This Bud's for You No More
It's last call for one of the longest relationships in advertising.
Anheuser-Busch Inc. startled Madison Avenue yesterday by unexpectedly dismissing the St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, which has served as the sole agency for its flagship Budweiser beer brand since 1915.
Effective in 90 days, the creative responsibilities on the estimated $125 million account of Budweiser, America's best-selling beer, will be consolidated at the Chicago office of DDB Needham Worldwide, which handles the light, dry and ice-brewed versions of the brand.


Sampras Faces Challenge in First Round of ATP
If this is the sort of draw one gets for being No. 1, perhaps Pete Sampras should set his sights a little lower.
When the round-robin portion of the ATP Championships begins on Tuesday on the quick surface inside the Festhalle, Sampras will have to serve and volley his way through a group that includes three of the tour's the most accomplished indoor players: Boris Becker, Goran Ivanisevic and Stefan Edberg.
The top two men in each group advance to Saturday's semifinals in this $3 million event.


Yeltsin Tells His Military Chiefs They're Doing a Bad Job
Speaking today to a conference of top military commanders, President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed unhappiness with their work, urged greater military readiness and said he expected new frictions with the United States under a Congress controlled by the Republican Party.
The Russian Government should establish closer ties to the Republicans, Mr.
Yeltsin said, "to balance our relations."


Credibility of Carjacking Witness Is Debated
Lawyers for a Bronx premedical student accused of murder in a carjacking in January tried today to support his account that the murder was committed by a drug dealer named Dino.
They called two witnesses who said they saw a tall, nattily dressed man on the day of the crime who could have been the shadowy figure.
But the credibility of the more crucial of those witnesses, Michael Clausell of South Ozone Park, Queens, was attacked by the prosecutor during cross-examination.
The prosecutor showed that while Mr.
Clausell could precisely remember a mundane scene at a mall -- a tall black man getting out of a Lexus and greeting two white teen-agers standing next to a Jeep -- he could not remember the name of his last employer, the jobs he had held for years at a time, or that he had twice pleaded guilty to charges of selling drugs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  PACIFIC TRADE AGREEMENT  As the summit meeting of east Asian and Pacific nations began in Indonesia, they neared an agreement to try to remove all barriers to free trade by the year 2020.
A1


Primark Corp.(PMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tropical Storm Wreaks Havoc on Haiti, Killing at Least 75
Torrential rains that battered Haiti last weekend left at least 75 people dead, radio reports and officials said today.
Roads and bridges were destroyed, neighborhoods flooded and houses swept away.
Parts of the capital, Port-au-Prince, and the southern towns of Jacmel and Les Cayes were particularly hard hit.


Market Place; TV assets help Belo shine in dull times for newspaper stocks.
YOU don't hear much buzz these days at the A. H. Belo Corporation, the newspaper and broadcasting company in Dallas, about the latest multimedia gizmo or the information superhighway.
Being a couple of hours' flying time away from both coasts seems to help.
Instead, executives at the company are reveling in their good fortune, as the bidding frenzy for television stations and a wave of political advertising have helped push Belo's stock this month to its highest price, $55.125.
And there still may be more where that came from.


Fairchild Corp.(FA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Henry A. Brachtl, Securities Lawyer, 50
Henry A. Brachtl, a Manhattan securities lawyer and a former assistant United States Attorney, died on Monday at his home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
He was 50.
The cause of death was cancer, his wife, Martis, said.


Canadian Fracmaster reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sides Break Bread; No Answers on Table
As the bitter National Hockey League lockout lurches through its seventh week, the canceled games are replaced by personal dinner meetings, big boardroom sessions and telephone conference calls.
Sharing dinner and conversation last night in Toronto were Gary Bettman, commissioner of the National Hockey League, and Bob Goodenow, executive director of the N.H.L.
Players Association.


The Mess at Youth Services
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has created a special task force to examine allegations of mismanagement at New York City's Department of Youth Services.
It will incorporate an investigation already started by the city's Department of Investigation.
A separate City Council investigation also continues.
These probes are aimed at determining what went wrong at the agency, which has been in disarray for months, and how it can be fixed.
The agency's $72.6 million budget covers grants to about 800 nonprofit groups that provide after-school, counseling and job training programs to youths.
In an effort to give some newer organizations a chance, the Dinkins administration last year deliberately tried to de-emphasize experience as a criteria for awarding contracts.
The Giuliani administration went further and virtually eliminated experience as a factor.
When new contracts were announced for the new budget year, 140 veteran youth-service groups abruptly lost city funding.
They were replaced by 99 new groups, most with no track record.


Interest Rate Illogic
To the Editor:
Once more we're seeing the Federal Reserve Board preparing to raise interest rates in the name of fighting inflation, which is cooling down the economy.


Amid Turmoil, Legal Aid Names New Top Executive
With its future darkened both by deep budget cuts and a possible loss in status as the city's chief legal representative of the poor, the Legal Aid Society announced yesterday the appointment of a new top administrator, the first change in that position in nearly 20 years.
Daniel L. Greenberg, 49, director of the clinical education program at Harvard Law School, will assume the role of executive director and attorney in chief, the post held since 1975 by Archibald R. Murray.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Announced they will not renew the contracts of Tom House, minor league pitching instructor, Toby Harrah, minor league batting instructor, Marty Stajduhar, major league physical therapist, Stan Cliburn, manager of Tulsa of the Texas League; Tommy Thompson, manager of Port Charlotte of the Florida State League, and Walt Williams, manager of Charleston of the South Atlantic League.
Dismissed minor league coaches Randy Whisler, Marvin White, Darrin Garner, Allan Anderson, George Threadgill, and Lyle Yates.


Political Briefs; An Interim Chairwoman For Democratic Party
President Clinton today named Debra DeLee to fill in as chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee until he selects a more prominent replacement who would be voted on by the party in January.


Goody Guys Inc.(GGUY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Asia-Pacific Countries Near Agreement on Trade
Eighteen nations of the Asia and Pacific region were on the verge of a sweeping agreement to stimulate economic growth by seeking the removal of barriers to trade by 2020, senior officials said on Monday night.
As part of the overall goal of "free and open trade" in one of the fastest growing economic regions in the world, the officials said, the United States, Japan and other developed nations are expected to accept an earlier goal for ending their trade barriers, probably by 2010.
The United States had previously resisted the earlier date.


Steelers Battering Has Bills Reeling


Q&amp;A
Frogs and Toads
Q.  What is the difference between a frog and a toad?


OfficeMax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 22


The Sanchez Express Halted By Halard
When the match was finally over and the upset had fully registered in the victor's mind, Julie Halard, a Parisian pixie ranked 22d in the world, sat down and stared down at her racquet as if she could not fathom what it had just done for her.
Meanwhile, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, clearly taken aback by Halard's impassioned 6-2, 1-6, 7-6 (7-2) victory, quickly zipped her racquet into its case as if she could not believe what it had done to her at this first-round encounter at the Virginia Slims Championships in Madison Square Garden.


Making China Trade Fairly
China desperately wants to qualify as a founding member of the World Trade Organization.
President Clinton obstinately stands in the way -- which is exactly where he belongs.
The W.T.O., according to the trade accord signed by more than 100 countries in April, will be created early next year to oversee international trade.
Membership would solidify China's emerging presence in international markets and guarantee that countries would not discriminate against its exports.
The United States agrees that China -- which is among the world's 10 largest exporters -- belongs in the World Trade Organization.
But the Clinton Administration rightly insists that China agree to adopt the same rules of fair trade that apply to other large countries in the W.T.O.


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


An Early Christmas Gift for Charity


Patterns
Swimsuits Mom Never Knew
Anne Klein has no interest in insulating its customers from the shock of the new.
Just when people were starting to adjust to the notion of the Anne Klein customer as the Delorean-cruising vixen of the most recent advertising campaign, the house has added another slashing-edge designer to the group of surgeons remaking Anne.


Goalie Is Charged
The English Football Association yesterday charged the former Liverpool goalkeeper BRUCE GROBBELAAR with accepting bribes to fix matches.
An association chief executive, GRAHAM KELLY, said Grobbelaar would not be banned and could continue playing pending a hearing into the allegations.
Kelly said a disciplinary commission of the association will be set up to hear the charges against the Southampton goalkeeper, who has 14 days to answer them.


Ross Stores Inc.(ROST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


David Salomon, A Decorator, Is Dead at 45
David Salomon, one of the leading decorators of his generation, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 45.
The cause was an AIDS-related heart attack, according to John S. Knott Jr., a friend.


Times Names Book Editor
Charles McGrath, deputy editor of The New Yorker, has been named editor of The New York Times Book Review.
His appointment, effective in March, was announced yesterday by Joseph Lelyveld, executive editor of The Times.
Mr. McGrath will succeed Rebecca Pepper Sinkler, who is retiring.


Role Shifts For Central Bankers
For the world's central bankers, the stage these days may be smaller, but their role has become bigger.
In the 1980's, when Paul A. Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Karl Otto Pohl of the Bundesbank in Germany stepped onto the world stage, central bankers starred in the drive to curb global inflation, sharing top billing with the finance ministers of the seven largest industrial nations in moving currency rates up and down to cope with trade imbalances.


Hindsight Offers Little Safety
After the Giants lost to the Arizona Cardinals, Coach Dan Reeves was in the shower thinking the game over.
As coaches do, Reeves pondered what might have been.
And the thing that continued to stick in his gut today was not a call he made, but one he didn't make.
Leading by 9-3 late in the fourth quarter, the Giants ended up punting on their second-to-last possession.
They kicked from the 6 and the Cardinals took over at their 46.
They went on to score and win the game, 10-6.


Martin to Go Pro
Pitt running back CURTIS MARTIN said yesterday that he would pass up a final year of eligibility and turn pro.
Martin rushed for 1,132 yards last season and was leading the nation in rushing after a 251-yard game against Texas but badly sprained an ankle against Ohio University on Sept. 10 and hasn't played since. (AP)


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A 'Porgy and Bess' Direct From the Source  Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts
For the Charleston Opera, Gershwin's "Porgy and Bess" is something of a local epic.
DuBose Heyward, who transformed his novel "Porgy" into a libretto for Gershwin, lived there, and the work takes place in the city and its environs.
The company's staging has been touring since March, and it arrived in Brooklyn on Saturday evening.


How Ever Did You Do It, Mr. Ives?
Of Charles Ives, the greatest and strangest of American composers, so much is still unknown.
There are basic, unresolved questions about the editing of his manuscripts, the chronology of his output, the validity of his recollections.
And a more essential mystery shrouds his process of creation.
At an Ives-centered festival presented by the Brooklyn Philharmonic last weekend, a member of the audience asked, "How did you do it?" The question was directed at the composer John Adams, who had orchestrated several Ives songs, but one wanted to ask it of Ives himself.
How, from a chaos of secondhand material, does great music arise?
The weekend's events at the Brooklyn Academy of Music offered many fascinating insights into Ives, although it also created some new confusions.
The theme was "American Transcendentalists," tracing the powerful connection between Ives and the school of 19th-century idealist philosophy centered in Concord, Mass.
There was a rich spread of Ives works: "Three Places in New England," "The Unanswered Question," various songs and shorter pieces and, naturally, the "Concord" Sonata.
In and among them, the actor Donald Moffat read aloud selections from Emerson and Thoreau.


Gathering Their Thoughts


Ford in Negotiations for Pact On Electric Car Conversions
Like the look of a new Taurus or Windstar, but maybe not what comes out of the tailpipe?
Then Ford will sell you one without a tailpipe -- or muffler, catalytic converter, engine, fuel pump or gas tank, for that matter.
But only if you qualify.
The Ford Motor Company plans to announce today that it is negotiating with U.S.
Electricar Inc., a company in Santa Rosa, Calif., that currently converts Geo Prizms and Chevrolet S-10 pickups to electric power.


Cairo Journal; Novelist's Unwitting Role: Sword Against Militants
Naguib Mahfouz, a Nobel Prize-winning author, has been dragged from his hospital bed into a debate about religion, freedom of expression and the interpretation of a novel he wrote that was banned in Egypt for 35 years.
The ailing 82-year-old author, a critic of the Mubarak Government as well as of the Islamic movement vying for power in Egypt, was stabbed in the neck by an Islamic militant outside his home on Oct. 14.


Court Reopens Demotion Case At City College
The United States Supreme Court today gave City College of New York a second chance to show that its demotion of the outspoken chairman of its black studies department did not violate the Constitution.
In a two-sentence order, issued without an opinion, the Justices vacated a ruling last April by the Federal appeals court in Manhattan that the college had violated Prof.
Leonard Jeffries's First Amendment right to free speech when it refused in 1992 to reappoint him to the departmental position he had held for 20 years.


Was There or Wasn't There a Pneumonic Plague Epidemic?
In September, Indian Government officials set off an international public health emergency by reporting an epidemic of pneumonic plague, the most dangerous form of plague, which is spread by coughing.
Indians panicked and fled the areas where the disease had been reported.
Tourists canceled trips to India and other countries imposed surveillance checks of passengers arriving at many airports from India and banned imports of goods from India.
Now, despite reports that a World Health Organization team has found that plague did strike in two cities, Indian experts in infectious diseases maintain that the epidemic was not plague, but was due to some other as yet unidentified agent.
Their contention is based largely on two points: that the plague bacterium, Yersinia pestis, was never isolated from any case and that the types of laboratory tests used in India are not definitive.


Lost Period Results in Lost Game For Knicks
It was the Knicks' worst offensive drought of the young season, and it came at a most inopportune time.
The Knicks were held scoreless for 5 minutes 38 seconds of the fourth quarter tonight.
And during that time, the Utah Jazz ran off 16 consecutive points, turning an 88-83 deficit into a 99-88 lead.


DANCE
Painters and Gertrude Stein Provide the Inspiration  Merce Cunningham Studio
Rachel Thorne Germond choreographically reaffirmed the fun of dancing in "Splendor Again," one of the works she presented on Saturday night.
This solo abounded with lithe, slithery movements, which Pedro Alejandro performed with skill and glee.


The Sanchez Express Halted By Halard
When the match was finally over and the upset had fully registered in the victor's mind, Julie Halard, a Parisian pixie ranked 22d in the world, sat down and stared down at her racquet as if she could not fathom what it had just done for her.
Meanwhile, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, clearly taken aback by Halard's impassioned 6-2, 1-6, 7-6 (7-2) victory, quickly zipped her racquet into its case as if she could not believe what it had done to her at this first-round encounter at the Virginia Slims Championships in Madison Square Garden.


Palestinian Police Rounding Up Radicals
Tensions between Islamic militants and Yasir Arafat's autonomy government rose sharply today when Palestinian authorities banned street protests and promised a sustained crackdown against radicals.
Hundreds of blue-uniformed police officers, part of the Palestinian Authority's armed forces, filled Gaza City, turning away cars and buses to prevent supporters of Islamic Holy War from holding a memorial march for a suicide bomber who killed three Israeli soldiers on Friday.


U.S. MIGHT ADMIT DETAINED CUBANS TO HELP CHILDREN
Facing intense pressure from Cuban-American groups, the Clinton Administration is leaning toward granting entry to Cuban families being held at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Station on the ground that holding children there month after month is inhumane.
An Administration official said the decision would probably be announced over the next 10 days to reduce the chances of embarrassing demonstrations by Cuban-Americans when President Clinton meets with Latin American leaders in Miami in early December.


The Rise of a Self-Proclaimed Phenomenon
VAMPS AND TRAMPS  By Camille Paglia  532 pages. Vintage Books. $15.
Camille Paglia is only too happy to tell those benighted readers who might be unfamiliar with her earlier books and essays exactly who she is, or at least who she thinks she is.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Isaac Stern Celebrates A Brooklyn Anniversary  Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts
The Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College is celebrating its 40th anniversary of presenting concerts, and on Sunday afternoon Isaac Stern contributed a recital to the celebration.
Mr.
Stern has been performing for about a decade longer than the center has been open, and in addition to performing, he has busied himself with musical politics of all kinds, from overseeing Carnegie Hall to keeping tabs on young players.
One never knows what to expect of him these days.
Often he seems to have let his artistry take a back seat to his other interests.
Yet at times he comes through with a sizzling performance worthy of his age and stature.


Monk-Austin Inc.(MK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lost Period Results in Lost Game For Knicks
It was the Knicks' worst offensive drought of the young season, and it came at a most inopportune time.
The Knicks were held scoreless for 5 minutes 38 seconds of the fourth quarter tonight.
And during that time, the Utah Jazz ran off 16 consecutive points, turning an 88-83 deficit into a 99-88 lead.


Working to Keep the Memory Alive


Hot-Weather Marathon Concerns the Athletes
If anything can match the expected heat of the men's marathon at the 1996 Summer Olympics, it is the emotional parboiling of top American runners who are seething at the prospect of having to run 26.2 miles in the late-afternoon sauna of Atlanta.
While the women's Olympic marathon is tentatively scheduled to be run on the morning of July 28, 1996, the men's marathon has for the last decade traditionally been the final event of the Summer Games, with the runners entering a packed stadium just before the closing ceremonies.


Indonesia's Embarrassment
Indonesia is the world's fourth most populous country.
It is a diverse society, rich in both culture and natural resources and eager to take a respected place in the community of nations.
So it is appropriate that the Indonesian city of Bogor is hosting the informal summit of the newly formed Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation alliance.
However, Indonesia's image has been marred by the perennially embarrassing issue of East Timor, the former Portuguese colony it invaded in 1975 and forcibly annexed.
Anticipating world attention on the summit, 29 East Timorese students entered the U.S.
Embassy grounds in Jakarta on Saturday and have refused to move.
Rioting in Dili, the capital of East Timor, broke out over the weekend after the alleged killing of an East Timorese merchant by Indonesian soldiers.


Inphynet Medical Management Inc.(IMMI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goldman, Sachs to Let Investment Bankers Go
Amid its worst slump in recent memory, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company has begun laying off investment bankers, according to executives both inside and outside the firm.
At least a few bankers have already been given their walking papers, the executives said, and others will be notified soon.


Cinemark USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raveling Resigns as Coach Of U.S.C., Citing Accident
Still recuperating from a car crash that hospitalized him for much of the autumn, George Raveling resigned today as the University of Southern California basketball coach.
Raveling, 57, cited a low amount of energy as the determining factor.
On the morning of Sept. 25, his Jeep was blindsided in a two-car collision, and he suffered a broken pelvis, nine broken ribs, a broken clavicle, a collapsed lung, a traumatized heart and bleeding in the chest cavity.


G.P., Call City Hall
George Pataki owes Rudolph Giuliani a telephone call.
Mr.
Giuliani, the Mayor of New York City, placed a call to Mr.
Pataki last Tuesday night to congratulate him on his election that day as governor of New York State.
The Governor-elect did not return the call.
Mayor Giuliani called a second time, and again Mr.
Pataki did not call back.
Almost a week later, the two have yet to talk.


You'd Hardly Know Cuba's Open for Business; A Shirt for Every Man
To the Editor:
I visited Cuba in June 1977, when President Carter briefly lifted the ban on travel there.
I went quite by chance, on the Greek cruise ship Daphne, having heard of a low-cost luxury voyage.


In House and Senate, 2 Kinds of G.O.P.
When they were in opposition, Senate and House Republicans sounded pretty much alike in their complaints.
When they won last Tuesday, they sang in jubilation from the same page, promising a diminished Federal Government.
But now that they taste power, their message is mixed.


Pioneer Financial Services Inc.(PFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Graham May Go Back to Bench; Miller May Go
When teams win, there are few changes.
Coaches don't tamper with the chemistry of a winner.
Losing is different.
To losing teams, changes are almost a part of daily life.
And right now, the 3-7 Giants are on a seven-game losing streak.
That's why there could be two drastic changes, one immediately and the other soon.
The first possibility is quarterback Dave Brown being reinserted as the starter for Monday night's game against the Houston Oilers after sitting on the bench for just one week.


Los Angeles Sports Entrepreneur Charged With Fraud
Bruce P. McNall, part-owner and president of the Los Angeles Kings hockey team, was charged by Federal prosecutors today with defrauding banks to obtain millions of dollars in loans.
Some lawyers in the case estimate the loans exceeded $200 million.


Designs Inc.(DESI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


METRO DIGEST
CITY COLLEGE DEMOTION CASE IS REOPENED
The Supreme Court gave City College of New York a second chance to show that its demotion of the outspoken chairman of its black studies department did not violate the Constitution.
The Justices ordered an appeals court to reconsider the case in light of a Supreme Court decision, issued in May, that may give public employers more latitude to dismiss employees whose speech, while constitutionally protected, is likely to disrupt the workplace.
A1.
SEEKING NEW WAYS TO RESCUE PARKS
Maintenance has become a critical problem in the city's 905 playgrounds and 479 parks, especially the small ones that fail to attract the private donations that glamour parks like Central Park do.
Now park advocates are debating a flurry of new ideas to change the way city parks have long been operated and financed.
Many of the proposals put more responsibility in the private sector.
A1.


Pope Wants the Church to Atone for Historical Errors
Pope John Paul II urged the Roman Catholic Church today to mark the third millennium of Christianity starting in the year 2000 by atoning for transgressions, including what he termed "acquiescence" in human rights abuses under totalitarian governments of the 20th century.
The Pope, who is 74, also suggested in a letter preparing for "the Great Jubilee" that he was counting on being part of the celebrations, five years away, by embarking on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land.


Judge Hands Two Setbacks To Lawyers For Simpson
In a setback to the lawyers defending O. J. Simpson against murder charges, the judge in the case today denied their request that evidence taken from Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco be excluded from trial.
He also rejected defense assertions that evidence helpful to Mr.
Simpson's case had been lost because of police bungling.
In a three-page opinion released late this afternoon, Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles Superior Court said there "exists no concrete evidence of tampering" of Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco.
Defense lawyers had argued that evidence obtained from the Bronco should be excluded because the vehicle was burglarized while it was in police custody at a private tow yard.


Rutgers Point Guard Returns to Her Roots
A familiar name will be a new face in the backcourt for the Rutgers women's basketball team when it begins its season Tuesday night in a first-round Preseason Women's National Invitation Tournament game against Seton Hall.
Kristen Somogyi, New Jersey's highest high school basketball scorer ever -- boy or girl -- is back in the neighborhood.
After a stop at Virginia and a year on Rutgers' bench after transferring, the point guard is ready to add to her basketball resume just across the river from where she began writing it.


REPUBLICANS PLAN AMBITIOUS AGENDA IN NEXT CONGRESS
As it rolled out its "new order" for Congress and the nation, the incoming House Republican leadership announced today that it would force Congress to work 20 hours a day, seven days a week, if necessary, to push through Newt Gingrich's "Contract With America" in 100 days.
The Republicans also pledged to hold hearings around the country on a constitutional amendment that would reintroduce prayers in public schools, which was not part of the contract, and vote on the matter by the 4th of July.
Hearings also will be held on the Federal budget so that citizens can tell lawmakers what the Government's spending priorities should be.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
N.C.A.A. Tournament
The National Collegiate Athletic Association awarded berths yesterday to 32 teams for the Division I tournament, which will start on campuses this week and conclude with the final four Dec. 9-11 at Davidson College in Davidson, N.C.
In keeping with tradition, the N.C.A.A. divided the country into eight regions for the tournament.
But it reduced the minimum number of teams in each region from two to one to make room for more at-large berths.
Virginia (17-3-1) is in quest of its fourth consecutive national title and it appears that the Cavaliers are playing their best right now.
Seeded second in the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament that was staged over three days at Clemson, the Cavaliers captured the tournament with victories over Wake Forest, Duke and Clemson.
North Carolina-Greensboro (17-4-0) will be Virginia's opponent in the first round, which also includes four other teams from the Atlantic Coast Conference, proof that the conference is the strongest in the country.
North Carolina State (13-6-0), Duke (14-6-1), North Carolina (13-6-0) and Maryland (13-5-1) are also in the tournament, whose first round must be completed by Sunday.
St.
John's (14-4-3) earned the automatic bid that goes to the winner of the Big East tournament by capturing the tournament for the third consecutive year.
This time, the Red Storm did it with a 1-0 triumph over Georgetown on a goal by Huey Ferguson with just under five minutes left.
Georgetown (18-3-0) was the regular-season winner in the Big East for the first time and was awarded its first tournament bid.
The Hoyas were the most improved team in the league.
"The league is getting stronger every year," said Dave Masur, the coach at St.
John's, who took over the Red Storm three years ago and made it into a powerhouse.
"We've had 5 teams ranked in the top 20 in the country."
While St.
John's will visit Rutgers, Georgetown will play Maryland.
Georgetown was ranked 9th and St.
John's 10th in the coaches' final regular-season poll, which has the first nine positions unchanged from the previous week.
Rutgers (11-4-3) is in the tournament as a result of winning the Atlantic 10 and then beating Loyola (Md.), the winner of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.
Boston University (18-0-1) finished atop the coaches' national ranking for the end of the regular season as the only undefeated team in the country.
The Terriers ended the regular season with a 3-2 triumph over New Hampshire and will meet Harvard.
Harvard (5-8-2) is in the tournament because of the automatic bid that goes to the winner of the Ivy League, where Brown finished with an overall record of 11-3-1.
The victory over Hartwick earned Brown a bid, and the Bears will play host to New Hampshire (15-4-2) in the first round.
Indiana (19-2-0) was seeded first in the tournament and will play host to Notre Dame (12-9-2).
Indiana took the Big Ten tournament with victories over Wisconsin and Penn State, who both made the tournament.
Wisconsin (14-5-0) will play at Southern Methodist (14-3-1), while Penn State (15-5-1) will meet Robert Morris (15-6-1) in a rematch from last year.
San Francisco (9-6-3) is in the tournament for the 26th time thanks to the automatic bid that goes to the winner of the West Coast Conference.
The Dons, who have captured the national title four times, the last time in 1980, appeared to be out of it this season, after winning only twice in their first eight games, but they have lost only once in their last 10 games.
San Francisco will play Fresno State (17-2-1), while San Diego (13-5-0) will be at Fullerton State (12-6-2) in another West Coast match.
In other matches around the country, St.
Louis (16-5-0) will play Creighton (14-4-1), Alabama-Birmingham (15-3-1) will play U.C.L.A. (15-4-0) and North Carolina-Charlotte (16-3-0) will play host to Charleston (17-6-0).
Women's Division I
North Carolina is a step closer to its 12th overall title , and ninth consecutive N.C.A.A. national title.
The Tar Heels reached the semifinals again with a 3-1 victory over Duke, the team that ended their undefeated streak at 101 games last month.
Connecticut (19-3-0) will provide the opposition for the Tar Heels (23-1-1) in the semifinals, which will be staged Friday at the University of Portland (Ore.).
The Huskies reached the final four with tournament victories over Brown and Hartford.
Notre Dame (21-0-1), the only undefeated team in the country, will play Portland (16-5-0) in the other semifinal to decide Sunday's finalists for the championship.
Notre Dame reached the final four for the first time in its history with victories over George Mason and William and Mary, while Portland advanced by eliminating St.
Mary's and Stanford.
ALEX YANNIS


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Sybase agreed to acquire Powersoft in a $940 million stock swap.
The deal would create the world's seventh-largest software company and give Sybase control of the leading maker of development tools for client-server computing.  [ Page D1. ]


DANCE
Seven Solos of Simplicity Presented by a Wanderer  New York Conservatory of Dance
There was an enjoyably homemade quality to a program of solos presented on Saturday night by Aki Sato, a Japanese-born dancer, choreographer and director.
None of the accompaniment was credited in the program, and a listing of what seemed to be solo titles looked like an afterthought.


Graham May Go Back to Bench; Miller May Go
When teams win, there are few changes.
Coaches don't tamper with the chemistry of a winner.
Losing is different.
To losing teams, changes are almost a part of daily life.
And right now, the 3-7 Giants are on a seven-game losing streak.
That's why there could be two drastic changes, one immediately and the other soon.
The first possibility is quarterback Dave Brown being reinserted as the starter for Monday night's game against the Houston Oilers after sitting on the bench for just one week.


In Russia, Corruption Inflates the Cost of Dying
The Russian way of death would make anyone want to live forever.
Burials, once one of the many subsidies doled out by the worker's state, have become so costly and so thoroughly dependent on graft, bribery and connections that few people can contemplate finding quiet plots of land or buying headstones.


Decking the Screen With Lots of Savers
DEAR Santa,
For Christmas I would like a 21-inch SVGA monitor and a one-gigabyte hard disk drive in a Pentium with 32 megs of RAM.
If you can't handle that, here are a few other ideas.


Hindsight Offers Little Safety
After the Giants lost to the Arizona Cardinals, Coach Dan Reeves was in the shower thinking the game over.
As coaches do, Reeves pondered what might have been.
And the thing that continued to stick in his gut today was not a call he made, but one he didn't make.
Leading by 9-3 late in the fourth quarter, the Giants ended up punting on their second-to-last possession.
They kicked from the 6 and the Cardinals took over at their 46.
They went on to score and win the game, 10-6.


Bosnia Army Retreating in North As Serbs Press Attack, U.N. Says
Nationalist Serbs have forced Bosnian Government fighters to withdraw from about 60 percent of the territory they recaptured two weeks ago near Bihac, in the northwest, United Nations officials here said today.
As of this morning, the Serbs had neared Jankov Vrh, a hilltop about six miles east of Bihac town and about three miles from the edge of the United Nations-designated "safe area," said a United Nations military spokesman, Maj.
Koos Sol.


U.N. Council Decides to Keep Economic Sanctions on Iraq
The Security Council maintained its economic sanctions against Iraq today after the United States provided evidence that President Saddam Hussein was spending lavishly on his own comforts while millions of Iraqis lacked food and medicine.
The United States representative, Madeleine K. Albright, told the Council that while "living standards for most Iraqis have fallen," the Iraqi leader has spent more than $500 million on "dozens of opulent new palaces for the exclusive use of his family."


Hatch Falls From Plane On Takeoff
A cockpit emergency hatch flew off of an American Eagle commuter plane yesterday, seconds after takeoff from Kennedy International Airport, injuring no one but frightening 13 passengers and three crew members.
The aircraft, a twin-engine turboprop with 36 seats, was bound for Albany when it took off at 9:02 A.M. from runway 4-left at Kennedy.
When the hatch fell to the ground, the plane immediately landed on a parallel runway, said Peter Yerkes, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport.


Giuliani Joins Give-and-Take Among Regions
With upstate residents saying they voted against New York City in last week's gubernatorial election, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani defended the city yesterday and the perception that it is a drain on state tax dollars.
"New York City and this region of the state of New York contributes $3.3 billion to Albany that it does not receive back," Mr.
Giuliani said in a speech to the Broadway Association, a civic group of business and real estate executives.


Executive Changes
ACORDIA INC., Indianapolis, a holding company for 22 operating units that provide insurance brokerage, managed-care administration and consulting services, named Frank C. Witthun to the new post of president and chief operating officer.
AYDIN CORP., Horsham, Pa., appointed Donald Taylor president.


Prudential Places Account in Review
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that it had placed in review its estimated $50 million account, which has been handled by Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York for almost five years.
"We really decided to look at our underlying strategy and positioning and really open it up to creative options across the board," said Mary Lou Sack, advertising director at Prudential in Newark, confirming a report of the review this week in Adweek.
A decision is expected by the end of January or early February, she said.


Tire Company Leaves
The latest Nascar tire war ended abruptly yesterday with a surprise announcement from Hoosier Racing Tire that it was withdrawing immediately from the Winston Cup and Grand National series. (AP)


Lyle Lovett, From Wistful to Weird
Lyle Lovett can make any song sound like a small tragedy.
His pained, honeyed voice, with its bluesy turns and its countryish ache, fills every line with sincerity; his unhurried, deadpan delivery gives every line the air of an intimate confession.
He uses his Large Band, including horns, strings and backup singers, to add small touches of down-home Americana like gospel harmonies or a Western-swing fiddle solo; it's a virtuosic group that always defers to its leader.
While Mr.
Lovett always comes across as sympathetic and convincing, his songs leave it up to listeners to decide what's really going on.
Sometimes his narrators are genuinely affectionate or heartbroken; sometimes they're the weirdos who appear in "Creeps Like Me."
At Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday night, in the first of two shows, Mr.
Lovett played a generous, leisurely concert, 2 hours and 40 minutes long.
For its first part, he lavished attention on songs that weren't always worth it: material from his latest, and least, album, "I Love Everybody" (Curb/MCA).
Mr.
Lovett is at the highest plateau of his career so far, after building a dedicated following and then extending his name recognition by marrying the actress Julia Roberts.
But to make "I Love Everybody," he dipped into his archive of early songs, and many of them are juvenalia: clever and trivial, built on one-liners ("Penguins are so sensitive to my needs") or easy ironies.
"Fat Babies," Mr.
Lovett explained, was written to embarrass anyone who sang along; the audience enthusiastically joined in.


Cheeks Considers Return as Player
The assistant coach MAURICE CHEEKS practiced as a player yesterday with the Philadelphia 76ers and said he might try to resume his National Basketball Association career.
"I don't really know what I want to do," said Cheeks, 38, who last played with the New Jersey Nets in 1992-93.
"I didn't come back to play, I came back as a coach. I played in the N.B.A. a long time, and I always enjoyed coming back to the Spectrum.


Ralphs Grocery Co. reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 9


P.T.A. President Accused of Sexual Abuse
The president of a P.T.A. at an elementary school in Brooklyn was forced to resign five months after four girls accused him of molesting them in the school auditorium, officials said yesterday.
The former president, Gary Session, 30, was forced out last month by parents at Public School 249 in Flatbush, who had only just learned of the accusations, said Harold Wilson, the school's principal.
By the time Mr.
Session resigned, he had been arrested in another incident, after a 7-year-old accused him of molesting her at his home, said a spokeswoman for Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney.


Looking Back: All the Bustle Over Retro
People who enjoy the luxury of not being designers are the first to cry foul when retro arises on a runway.
But the common view in fashion that there exists some amorphous "modern" idea of dress may be, in itself, a myth.
When three of the most inventive designers of this decade -- Vivienne Westwood, John Galliano and Jean-Paul Gaultier -- looked back this season, they did more than offer historians in the field the opportunity to compare three distinguished artists' views of the same subject (consider it fashion's equivalent of Marilyn Monroe's being interpreted by Andy Warhol, James Rosenquist and Keith Haring).
They also signaled a time to make a fresh appraisal of retro, often interpreted as being a sign of a poverty of ideas.


Observer; The Final Analysis
The most interesting explanation of the famous Republican triumph comes from my wife, who is not political and whose mind, therefore, has not been ossified by total immersion in polling statistics.
She thinks it was the inevitable result in a nation with a really heavy channel-surfing habit.
Voters treated the familiar old Democrats just as they treat the familiar old TV shows when they plop down in the parlor with a remote-control gadget.


Unilever (UN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. C. Andrew L. Bassett, 70, Professor of Orthopedic Surgery
Dr.
C.
Andrew L. Bassett, a New York orthopedic surgeon whose work led to faster healing of broken bones, died yesterday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 70.
The cause was a brain tumor, his family said.


25 Films Added to National Registry
The Library of Congress added 25 films to the National Film Registry yesterday, including "The Manchurian Candidate," the original "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" and the Zapruder film of the John F. Kennedy assassination.
The additions to the registry were announced by James H. Billington, the librarian of Congress, at the Museum of Modern Art in New York during a meeting of the National Film Preservation Board.
The board advises the librarian of Congress on the selection of films for the registry and on national film preservation policy.


Seton Hall Edges Rutgers as Women's N.I.T. Kicks Off
The college basketball season opened tonight with the first round of the National Invitation Tournament.
No, this is not the N.I.T. that took the men's game from musty prairie field houses to the big-city gloss and evils of Madison Square Garden.
Instead, it is a new 16-team, privately owned preseason tournament for women, sanctioned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


CHRONICLE
ARTHUR LEVINE, who will be inaugurated as the ninth president of Teachers College at Columbia University tomorrow, took a field trip yesterday to his old elementary school, P.S. 79, at 180th Street and Creston Avenue in the South Bronx.
Dr.
Levine, 46, graduated from the sixth grade at the school in 1960.
"I had grown in up in a time and world in which the American dream was guaranteed to all the kids," he said yesterday after his visit.
"The real estate there is the same, the building is the same, but the kids no longer see education as a way out. The American dream has died. My old school is facing all the obstacles an educational institution can face."


Angolan Foes Sign a Truce in Step Toward a Formal Peace
Leaders of the rival armies that have mauled Angola for 19 years signed a truce tonight, promising that in 24 hours they would stop fighting the last war in southern Africa.
If it holds, the truce will open the way for a formal peace treaty that will disband the Unita rebel army, begin integrating the insurgents into the Government and a unified military, and set in motion United Nations cease-fire monitors.


Tiffany &amp; Co. (TIF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Fantasies and a Love That Led to Murder
"Next time I write in this diary, Mother will be dead," wrote Pauline Parker, a 15-year-old living in Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1954.
"How odd -- yet how pleasing." Making good on that promise, Pauline and her school friend Juliet Hulme went on an outing with Honora Parker, Pauline's mother, and bludgeoned her to death with a brick stuffed in a stocking.
Just before this fateful stroll in the woods, the threesome had stopped to enjoy tea.
Like Leopold and Loeb, their American counterparts, Pauline and Juliet scandalized their countrymen in ways that have not yet been forgotten.
They were smugly superior; they were caught in the grip of illicit passion; they were capable of murdering an innocent relative for no good reason.
On top of this, they broke more serious taboos.
They were genteel schoolgirls who fell in love with each other and, goaded by that love, committed a terminally unladylike crime.


Leader Says Austria Must Face Nazi Past
President Thomas Klestil of Austria, going where none of his predecessors had ever been, went before the Israeli Parliament today to say that his country had often failed to face its past and that it produced "many of the worst henchmen in the Nazi dictatorship."
Mr.
Klestil's remarks fell short of an explicit Austrian apology for the Nazis' mass killing of Jews, though Israelis had been told they could expect an apology.


Pollsters Say Health Care Helped Sweep Away Democrats
Candidates may not have talked much about health care in the 1994 campaign, but some leading pollsters suggested today that the bitter 18-month-long struggle over the issue was crucial in stoking the attitudes at the heart of last week's election: anger, cynicism and disappointment with the Democrats.
Moreover, a new post-election survey released today showed that voters still expected Congress to do something to alter the health care system, but something decidedly modest and incremental.
Only 25 percent said they thought Congress should enact a major reform bill, according to the survey sponsored by Harvard's School of Public Health and the Kaiser Family Foundation; 41 percent said there should be modest changes and 25 percent said the system should be left alone.


Play in New U.S. League Won't Kick Off Until 1996
The World Cup may yet achieve its intended legacy of a first-rate professional soccer league in the United States, but not next year as planned.
Officials of Major League Soccer, the incipient league that has had difficulty attracting investors and still lacks players and a complete roster of franchises and stadiums, will announce today in New York that regular-season play will not begin until the 1996 season.


Leslie Fay Cos. Inc.(LES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Candid Self-Portrait Of a Drag Queen in Mufti  Dixon Place
The most amusing riff in "My Tiny Life," a self-portrait written and performed by Mark F. Rizzo, an East Village drag queen also known as Hapi Phace, is a description of his "Zen apartment." Inside his minuscule one-room space, he says, he has crammed a stereo, an LP collection, a tape recorder, a television, a VCR, a CD player, a computer and a telephone answering machine.
Add to this a rice cooker, an electric coffee maker, a hot plate and several cooking contraptions advertised on television infomercials, and you have the clotted mess that Hapi shows on a video screen.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Reindeer and Rockettes Are in Residence Again  Radio City Music Hall
Rudolph the Mayor was there.
So was Rudolph the reindeer.
And winds of change and tidings of the season were mingled in that potpourri of secular spectacle and religious miracle that is the annual "Radio City Christmas Spectacular."


Eating Well
THE nutrition police may have trouble with some items on this list of mail-order holiday gifts.
But Eating Well is not just about low-fat or low-sodium food.
It's also about eating organically and eating green -- in ways that are helpful to the environment.
It's about eating foods that have fewer calories and less fat than their traditional counterparts.
Most of all, it's about eating food that tastes good.


Staples Inc.(SPLS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Familiar Texas Tales, Told With Sarcasm  Bottom Line
A good storyteller is not hard to find, but one who can write good stories is.
Robert Earl Keen, who performed on Monday night, is such a rarity.
His Texas is the same Texas immortalized in song by everyone from Ernest Tubb to Waylon Jennings to Guy Clark: a state crisscrossed by highways and railway tracks, littered with shotgun cartridges and broken hearts, and doused in barbecue sauce and beer.


Consolidated Stores Corp.(CNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Wrong Defense, Wrong Enemy
Propelled by memories of the threat that Iraqi Scuds posed to U.S. troops and Israeli cities during the Persian Gulf war, the Clinton Administration is eager to test a variety of theater missile defenses.
The Republicans who control Congress would go one step further.
Many want to test anti-missile defenses to protect the continental U.S.
Both the Administration and the Republicans are making a mistake.
Advanced theater defenses -- and certainly defenses designed to protect America -- would undercut the 22-year-old Antiballistic Missile Treaty, threaten the Russians and complicate the essential task of persuading Moscow to reduce its still-formidable nuclear arsenal and secure it against smugglers.
Those who would test anti-missile defenses are trying to guard against threats that have yet to materialize while ignoring a clear and present danger.


D.R. Horton Inc.(DRHI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World News Briefs; Confidence Vote Postponed in Ireland
A confidence vote in the Government was postponed today until Wednesday as Prime Minister Albert Reynolds apologized to the country for his Attorney General's failure to extradite a Roman Catholic priest to Northern Ireland.
Northern Ireland sought the extradition of the priest last year on charges related to acts of child molestation.
Attorney General Harry Whelehan never acted on repeated extradition warrants, but the priest, the Rev.
Brendan Smyth, eventually surrendered voluntarily, was convicted in June and began serving a four-year prison sentence.


NATO Keeps Bosnia Arms Blockade as U.S. Drops Role
Washington's allies in NATO said today that they would continue a sea blockade of arms shipments to the Muslim-led Bosnian Government even though American forces are no longer fully taking part.
A statement issued after a meeting of the alliance's 16 representatives in Brussels said Navy ships of the other member countries would enforce the blockade even though United States warships would no longer take action to keep arms from going to Bosnia or provide intelligence information on such shipments to the allies.


A Tree Grew In Ridgefield


Weicker Gives Budget Plan But Rowland Sees Problem
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today issued a budget plan for the next two years that would increase spending 7.3 percent without new taxes, but Governor-elect John G. Rowland immediately said he would reduce spending to make possible the income-tax cut he promised in his campaign.
Unlike four years ago, when Mr.
Weicker as Governor-elect was presented a proposed budget with a $1.6 billion revenue shortfall on top of a $562 million deficit for the current year, Mr.
Rowland received a two-year budget that was in balance and within the state's legal spending limit.


3 Enterprising Women: Bright Lights of the City
THREE women, three stories.
Panathy Hill, who is a 30-year-old guard at the prison ward of Bellevue Hospital Center, thought she would like to earn money moonlighting by taking a doorman job after her supervisors cut back on the amount of overtime they were authorizing.


Ex-State Police Investigator Admits Evidence Tampering
Three weeks after saying he was pleading guilty to evidence tampering only because he was emotionally drained and could not afford to mount a defense, a former state police investigator admitted at his sentencing today that he had faked evidence in a 1992 Orange County burglary.
"I sincerely apologize for the harm and disgrace my actions have put on law-enforcement personnel," said the former investigator, Edward Pilus.
"I know that I have jeopardized the whole basis of the criminal-justice system and the reasons it was created."


In America; Scapegoat Time
Troubled times require the comforting presence of scapegoats.
I remember an incident many years ago in which a thin, bespectacled, awkward and dim-witted recruit at Fort Leonard Wood, Mo., was beaten up by fellow soldiers who blamed him for a blizzard that had confined everybody to the base.
A delighted roar arose when the hapless recruit was tossed out of the barracks and into the snow.
The scapegoat had done his job.
He had made everybody feel better, even though nothing had changed.


Ammirati Lays Off 40 Employees
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York said yesterday that it had laid off 40 of its 700 employees, from all areas of the agency, as it continues reorganizing after the merger in July that combined Ammirati &amp; Puris with the New York office of Lintas Worldwide.


Taiwan Apologizes After Troops Fire Artillery Shells Into China
Taiwan acknowledged today that its troops had fired at least a dozen artillery shells into a village on mainland China on Monday, wounding four people.
It expressed "deep regret" over the incident.
A Chinese Government spokesman in Beijing called the episode "a vicious incident that sabotaged the peaceful atmosphere across the Taiwan Strait."


Coach Is Dismissed at Louisiana State
Louisiana State University Coach CURLEY HALLMAN was dropped yesterday but will be allowed to coach the Tigers' final two games of the season.
Hallman will coach L.S.U. (2-7) on Saturday against Tulane and Nov. 26 at Arkansas.
In four years, Hallman's record at L.S.U. is 14-28.


News Staff Faces Layoffs At Journal
The Wall Street Journal told more than a dozen members of its news staff yesterday that they would be laid off as part of a cost-cutting move, the newspaper's managing editor said in an interview.
The layoffs were the first at The Journal since 1989, when the paper was being squeezed by the recession and the downturn in financial advertising that followed the 1987 stock market crash.


Sir Patrick Dean of Britain, 85, Envoy to U.N. and Washington
Sir Patrick Dean, who was Britain's representative at the United Nations from 1960 to 1964 and Ambassador to the United States from 1965 to 1969, died on Nov. 5 in Kingston in the English county of Surrey.
He was 85 and lived in London.
Sir Patrick gave up his law practice at the outbreak of World War II, joined the British Foreign Office and became a leading light of the British Foreign Service.
He was knighted in 1957 and retired from the Foreign Service in 1969.


CHRONICLE
To many people, an 80th birthday is, in itself, reason for a major celebration.
To JAMES W. ROUSE, the developer of such sites as the South Street Seaport in lower Manhattan, Faneuil Hall in Boston and the town of Columbia, Md., it is an occasion to promote his favorite cause.
The guests who go to Industria Superstudio in Greenwich Village tonight to wish Mr.
Rouse a happy birthday will also learn about a five-year, $78 million fund-raising campaign for his Enterprise Foundation.
The campaign, "Communities for Change: New Homes, New Hope," will support the foundation's efforts to develop affordable housing in low-income neighborhoods and link housing with social services.


A Debate on the Greater Evil: Inflation or Chill or Pink Slips
The Federal Reserve's decision to increase interest rates by the largest amount in years intensified a debate that focuses not so much on the amount of the rise but whether the Federal Reserve should have acted at all.
On one side are those who applauded the Federal Reserve's action, most of them on Wall Street.
They are challenged by an unlikely coalition of manufacturers and labor leaders who charged that yesterday's increase would slow the economy too much, cutting back sales and eliminating jobs.


Manley Released on Bail After Drug Arrest
DEXTER MANLEY, once one of the N.F.L.'s top defensive linemen, appeared in court yesterday after a crack cocaine arrest in Houston.
Manley, who was banned from the N.F.L. for violating the league's drug policy, was arrested Sunday night and was released Monday after posting $5,000 bail.
Yesterday, he made an initial appearance in court with his lawyer, PAULA ASHER, who said, "He is anxious to get this matter resolved." A Dec. 6 arraignment has been scheduled.
Manley, 36, failed the fourth drug test of his career in December 1991.
The defensive end later attempted a comeback, bouncing around the N.F.L. and the Canadian Football League.
He played for the C.F.L.
Shreveport Pirates earlier this season.


White House Counterattacks
The White House hit back at Republicans, saying it was nonsense for them to contend tax cuts would pay for themselves.
Page A16.


Watch Your Thoughts in Gingrich's Land; I Wish Him Well
To the Editor:
"Bitter Tone of the '94 Campaign Elicits Worry on Public Debate" (front page, Nov. 13) laments the decline in civility of public discourse, a condition against which there is sadly little argument.


A Chinese-Italian Effort
THE Chinese and the Italians have been making culinary marriages since Marco Polo brought noodles from China.
This dish joins the two cultures once more.
To cool the spiciness of the sauce, try a yogurt salad with carrot and cucumber.
Yogurt Carrot Cucumber Salad
3 ounces Kirby cucumber  2 ounces peeled baby carrots  1 small clove garlic  1 cup nonfat plain yogurt.
1.
Wash and trim cucumber, and julienne in a food processor.
Julienne carrots.
Squeeze out the liquid from vegetables, and discard it.
Add vegetables to serving bowl.
2. Mince garlic, and stir into vegetables with yogurt.
Yield: 2 servings
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 85 calories, 0 grams fat, 2 milligrams cholesterol, 100 milligrams sodium, 7 grams protein, 13 grams carbohydrate.
Linguine With Firecracker Shrimp
1 large clove garlic
Fresh or frozen ginger to yield 1 tablespoon coarsely grated  2 tablespoons dry Sherry  1 tablespoon oyster sauce  1 teaspoon red-wine vinegar  2 teaspoons chili paste with garlic  2 tablespoons tomato paste  4 ounces sugar snap peas  5 ounces zucchini  8 ounces fresh linguine  1 teaspoon sesame oil  2 scallions  10 ounces cooked, peeled shrimp  1/8 teaspoon salt.
1.
Mince garlic, grate ginger and place in small bowl with Sherry, oyster sauce, vinegar, chili paste and tomato paste; mix well.
2.
Rinse peas, and pull out the strings.
Wash and trim zucchini and cut into 1/4-inch cubes.
3. Put on water for linguine.
4. Heat a nonstick skillet to hot; add oil, and reduce heat to medium.
5. Stir peas and zucchini into hot oil, and stir fry for about one minute.
6.
Add the garlic and ginger mixture to the vegetables, and mix well to coat.
Remove from heat.
7. Cook linguine.
8. Wash, trim and slice scallions.
9.
Return vegetables and sauce to heat, and add shrimp, stirring long enough to heat shrimp through.
Season with salt.
10. Drain linguine, and stir into sauce, mixing well. Serve sprinkled with scallions.
Yield: 2 servings
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 690 calories, 8 grams fat, 280 milligrams cholesterol, 1,065 milligrams sodium, 50 grams protein, 105 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan Prepare pasta dish through Step 6. Make yogurt salad. Finish pasta dish.


Waban Inc.(WBN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Watch Your Thoughts in Gingrich's Land; North Deja Vu
To the Editor:
It appears as if the voters in Virginia's Senate race faced the same dilemma as those voting in the 1884 Presidential election.


Running Game Puts Jets Into Big First-Down Rut
Coach Pete Carroll believes that in order for the Jets to be successful, they have to establish their running game, something they have had trouble doing this season.
The Jets could have a problem again on Sunday in Minneapolis, where their opponents, the Vikings, have the best run defense in the National Football League, averaging 61.8 yards per game.


Maturing Jazz Industry Opens Convention Tonight
The Jazz Times Convention starts tonight, which means that tired-looking, cigarette-smoking people from all over the world will gather to talk about what they heard last night, what kinds of deals can be cooked up today and who is sitting in with whom and where.
For the next four days, the convention becomes jazz's business paradise, with bookers, musicians, radio programmers, record company executives, agents, club owners and critics swarming like fish around a particularly fertile reef.
The convention started in Washington 10 years ago as a casual meeting of some of the disparate elements that make up the jazz world.
It has grown into big business, with attendance up nearly 20 percent from last year.
This year's version draws nearly 700 people from across the country, along with people from India, Sweden, Russia, England and more.
In its success, its internationalism and its growth, the convention suggests that jazz is taking itself more seriously as an industry, and flourishing because of it.


Kohl Elected to 4th Term as German Chancellor, but by a Hair
Chancellor Helmut Kohl was officially elected to a fourth term today, but members of Parliament gave him only a single vote more than the required majority, suggesting that his new Government may be weak and perhaps short-lived.
After the result was announced, a beaming Mr.
Kohl pledged to devote himself to the twin challenges of German and European unity.
"We need to grow closer, to exchange experiences, to recognize finally that reunited Germany is not a simple annexation of the former East Germany, but something new in the best sense of the word," he said.


Tearing Down Trade Barriers, After a Fashion


Nets Answer Wake-Up Call And Triumph
They had an All-Star forward whose game needed an awakening and an exhausted All-Star guard whose body needed a rest.
So the Nets, daydreaming away the first month of the season, reached back into time tonight.
They inserted Eric (Sleepy) Floyd, who last played for the Nets in a regular-season game 12 years ago, into their backcourt.
Floyd, with droopy eyes and 34-year-old legs, teamed with a resilient Derrick Coleman and a refreshed Kenny Anderson to help wake the Nets from their early-season slumber.
Together, they sparked a team that was having better luck hitting its snooze button than its shots to a 112-106 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics before 15,310 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Frederic Spiegelberg, Religion Teacher, 97
Frederic Spiegelberg, an early teacher of comparative religion in the United States, died on Thursday at the California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco, where he lived.
He was 97.
The cause of death was complications from abdominal surgery, said Michael Murphy of San Rafael, Calif., a friend and former student.


Bronx Man Charged in Slaying of Executive
A 19-year-old Bronx man was charged with second-degree murder yesterday in the shooting death last month of an investment banker on a path near the Mayor's residence on the Upper East Side, the police said.
The suspect, Alexander Hernandez, of 318 East 198th Street, was arrested on drug charges Monday at 98th Street and Lexington Avenue by officers from a Manhattan North narcotics unit, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Timberwolves Win First Game And Deal Warriors First Loss
Timberwolves 114, Warriors 112
Isaiah Rider had a career-high 35 points as visiting Minnesota broke a 16-game losing streak last night and handed Golden State its first loss of the season, 114-112.


Brian Dutton, 59, Scholar of Spanish
Brian Dutton, a scholar of medieval Spanish literature, died on Oct. 21 at his home in Oak Park, Ill.
He was 59 and also had a home in Madison, Wis., where he taught at the University of Wisconsin.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his daughter Anna Dutton, also of Oak Park.


No Headline
"I am not sounding the alarm on tax cuts per se. I am saying that tax cuts must be paid for. Tax cuts without spending cuts would increase the budget deficit and would be an irresponsible thing to do." ALICE M. RIVLIN, the Federal Budget Director.  [ A16:5. ]


Long-Bond Yield Dips After Fed's Tightening
The long end of the Treasury market rallied yesterday after the Federal Reserve announced its sixth and largest interest rate increase of the year, easing traders' fears of inflation.
By late in the day, the 30-year bond was up 8/32 , to a price of 9327/32 , for a yield of 8.05 percent, down from 8.07 percent on Monday.
Despite the rise in the long end of the Treasury market, prices in shorter maturities were mixed.


Toxicity Test Delaying Dredging to Reopen Marine Terminal
A plan to revitalize commercial shipping in New York City by reopening a marine terminal on Staten Island has been delayed for at least several months after contaminated sediment was unexpectedly found around the terminal's berths, port officials said yesterday.
The long-dormant terminal, Howland Hook, was supposed to have been dredged in the coming months so large freighters could use it.
But on Monday, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey learned that the material that was to have been scooped from the Arthur Kill failed a toxicity test.


In Schools, Money Matters if It's Spent Wisely
To the Editor:
In " 'Bell Curve' Critics Say Early I.Q. Isn't Destiny" (Education page, Nov. 9), you continue to propagate the notion that educational research data support the contention that money does not matter in schools.


Officer's Protective Jacket Stops a Bullet
A 38-year-old police officer who was chasing a drug suspect in East New York, Brooklyn, was shot in the ribs yesterday, but the bullet was stopped by a protective shield sewn into the officer's denim jacket, the police said.
The officer, Jacob Brown, a nine-year veteran of the force, was in good condition last night at Jamaica Hospital.


Pataki's Break: Mostly in Vermont
Governor-elect George E. Pataki did not spend his four-day holiday in New York State, as his aides said on Monday, but crossed the border to Vermont, where he stayed at the Equinox Hotel in Manchester, his spokeswoman, Zenia Mucha, said today.
She said Mr.
Pataki did visit friends in Washington County, north of Albany, but spent Friday through Sunday nights in Vermont.
Ms.
Mucha said a Pataki aide, Caroline Quartararo, had known about the upstate stop but not about Mr.
Pataki's final destination when she said on Monday that the Governor-elect had spent his post-election break in northern New York State.


Earle M. Jorgensen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


W.B.C. Planning Ban of California Bouts
The world's biggest boxing authority announced yesterday that it would stop sanctioning world title fights in California because of what it termed racist measures against illegal immigrants recently approved by California voters.
The World Boxing Council will not approve any world title fight in California as of Nov. 22 this year, the W.B.C. president, JOSE SULAIMAN, told a news conference in Mexico City.


Libel Suit Against Prodigy Tests On-Line Speech Limits
The Prodigy Services Company, operator of one of the country's largest on-line information services, has agreed to help track down a computer user who posted an electronic message accusing a Long Island investment bank of fraud and other criminal activity.
Prodigy's move, agreed to late Monday in State Supreme Court in Nassau County, comes in response to a $100 million lawsuit charging libel and negligence by Prodigy and a subscriber, David Lusby of Key West, Fla.
The suit seeks $100 million more in punitive damages.


APS Holding Corp.(APSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Smoke, Not Substance, at APEC
The leaders of 18 nations who gathered this week at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting in Indonesia arrived with lofty talk of achieving a sweeping agreement to stimulate economic growth on the Pacific Rim, already among the most vibrant economic regions in the world.
Their final communique enshrines a noble objective: free trade and investment by the year 2020.
Unfortunately, the APEC pledge fails to include a single substantive measure.
The easy task is to commit to a vague goal a quarter-century away.
The hard task -- apparently too hard -- is to take concrete measures that would challenge entrenched interests in each country.


Tennessee Williams, With Love and Pain
"The Glass Menagerie" is the American theater's most exquisite mea culpa.
When it appeared on Broadway in 1945, it established Tennessee Williams as one of the country's foremost playwrights.
You do not have to probe too deeply, however, to find a brother who believes he let his sister down badly, or a son who admits he was driven to distraction by his mother and devoutly wishes it weren't so.


Tele-Communications Inc.(TCOMA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Leaderless Orpheus Finds Singularity in Plurality  Carnegie Hall
Orpheus has developed a following that sounds very much like the orchestra itself.
Its program of Haydn, Britten, Mendelssohn and Beethoven on Saturday night was greeted, in other words, with an audience response that was warm, deep and unflaggingly ardent.


Food Notes
Dial 'T' for Turkey
Need help with the turkey? The pie? The leftovers? Choose your expert.
Authorities with the Federal Department of Agriculture will be available from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Eastern standard time every day through Nov. 23.
On Thanksgiving Day, Nov. 24, the hours will be 8 A.M. to 2 P.M.
For food tips the rest of the year, the schedule is 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., Monday through Friday.
Recorded messages are played 24 hours a day.
Telephone: (800) 535-4555 and (202) 720-3333 in Washington.


Kohl's Corp.(KSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Stormy Weather, Choreographically Speaking  Judson Memorial Church
Some storms are purely destructive.
Others are so exciting that they inspire people to rush out into blizzards or thundershowers for the sheer messy fun of it.
Choreographically stormy weather proved invigorating on Monday night when Amy Cox and Andrea Kleine shared a program as part of the Movement Research series.


Opera, Yes, And More From Ebony
Since 1974, Opera Ebony has been presenting minority singers in low-budget but inventive productions in Harlem, on tour and, lately, as part of the 651 series at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
It has offered an interesting repertory of mostly contemporary American works, particularly operas by minority composers or about aspects of black history.
And it has just released its first compact disk, "Done Crossed Every River" (Arcadia).
With all that behind it, the company celebrated its 20th anniversary on Monday evening at Alice Tully Hall with a concert that drew on everything from standard repertory (an aria from "Aida"), revamped standards (a song from "Carmen Jones") and excerpts from operas about Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass, to spirituals, theater songs and jazz.


Pastrami on Rye, Hold the West Coast
Seeking the solace of salami and the balm of brisket amid the aftershocks of the 1993 earthquake, a long line of people gathered outside Nate 'n Al's, the venerable show-biz delicatessen here.
When some customers grew antsy at the wait, a counterman reminded them that they had a choice: they could always go down the block to the Carnegie Deli.
The Carnegie Deli.
In New York, the sound of those words would have been like chicken soup to shattered nerves.
But something was evidently lost in transit between Seventh Avenue and 54th Street, site of the flagship Carnegie, and the corner of North Beverly Drive and Dayton Way, its West Coast outpost.
At Nate 'n Al's that morning, no one even budged.


Motoo Kimura; Japanese Geneticist, 70
Dr.
Motoo Kimura, a Japanese geneticist who challenged prevailing views about evolution, died on Sunday in a hospital in Shizuoka, Japan, after collapsing in his home, The Associated Press reported.
He was 70.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, The A.P. said.


President-Elect In Brazil Aided By State Races
In victories likely to strengthen the free-market mandate of President-elect Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the governors' seats in Brazil's three most powerful states went to his allies today, according to preliminary returns and voter surveys.
"Fernando Henrique Cardoso will emerge from today's voting as the strongest President of the republican era," Teodomiro Braga, a political columnist, predicted, referring to Brazil's century-old system of elected government.
"Until today, no President elected by the people had the support of the majority in Congress and of the governors of Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais and Rio, states that represent 55 percent of the Brazilian GNP."


Navratilova Beaten, but She Wins Garden's Heart
She wore her heart on her sleeve, and for 22 years she jammed her backhand volley -- one that won't be replicated and was rarely returned -- down the throats of any and all opponents who weren't savvy enough to get out of harm's way.
Last night in the opening round of the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden, Martina Navratilova, the tennis dynamo generally regarded as the finest woman athlete to grace her sport, played her last-ever singles match under the same prestigious roof where she'd earned a record 18 titles.


Moscow Journal; Historian Looks Darkly at Russia, and Sees Light
One of Russia's most penetrating democratic voices, Yuri N. Afanasyev, has by his desk a bronze statue of Diogenes, lantern lifted, searching for a single honest man.
It is an obvious analogy for these times of moral improvisation in Russia, when so many officials and businessmen are seeking personal advantage to the detriment of a still-weak public spirit.
A handsome man with a wrestler's blocky build, Mr.
Afanasyev was one of the stars of Russia's perestroika period.
Now 60, a scholar of French history, he was a close colleague of Andrei D. Sakharov and other dissident intellectuals like Gavriil Popov, a former Mayor of Moscow.


World News Briefs; 8 Algerian Militants Slain in Escape Attempt
Eight people were killed and 60 were wounded on Monday when Government forces put down an escape attempt by Muslim militants on death row in Algeria, an Algerian newspaper reported today.
[ The Associated Press, citing the accounts of unidentified officials, said at least 30 prisoners were killed in the uprising. ]


TJX Cos.(TJX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Simpson Judge Under Fire for TV Interview
This has been a week of rare complaint about the temperament and legal savvy of Lance A. Ito, the judge in the O. J. Simpson trial.
For much of the trial, Judge Ito has railed against the news media, particularly television, describing it at times as a pernicious influence on the case and worrying aloud that it could irreparably damage Mr.
Simpson's ability to receive a fair trial.


Joseph H. Hazen, 96, Is Dead; Lawyer and Movie Producer
Joseph H. Hazen, a retired lawyer, film producer, art collector and philanthropist, died on Sunday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 96..
He died in his sleep, said his daughter, Cynthia Hazen Polsky.


2 Officers Are Acquitted of Assault on a Prisoner
Two New York City police officers were acquitted yesterday of assault charges in a case in which they were accused of causing a prisoner to become a virtual quadriplegic by slamming him violently into a station house door.
Saying that "sympathy cannot replace evidence," Justice Alan Marrus of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, who tried the case without a jury, returned the not guilty verdicts against the officers, Donald Alesi, 35, and Steven Zimmerman, 31.
The officers had exercised their right to have the judge try them.


With 3 Votes to Spare
Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Connecticut, was declared the victor in his re-election bid -- by just four votes.
His Republican opponent vowed to challenge the results all the way, if necessary, to the new Republican-controlled Congress, which has the final say.
Article, page B1.


Kohl Elected to 4th Term as German Chancellor, but by a Hair
Chancellor Helmut Kohl was officially elected to a fourth term today, but members of Parliament gave him only a single vote more than the required majority, suggesting that his new Government may be weak and perhaps short-lived.
After the result was announced, a beaming Mr.
Kohl pledged to devote himself to the twin challenges of German and European unity.
"We need to grow closer, to exchange experiences, to recognize finally that reunited Germany is not a simple annexation of the former East Germany, but something new in the best sense of the word," he said.


Leaders Agree On Free Trade For the Pacific
The glow of Tuesday's victory of creating the largest free-trade zone in the Asia-Pacific region dissipated today as President Clinton and President Suharto of Indonesia clashed over the issue of Indonesia's much-criticized human rights record.
Mr.
Clinton stated frankly that relations between the United States and Indonesia would not reach their full potential unless there was an improvement in human rights, a senior Administration official said.


Elizabeth G. Speare, 84, Author Of Children's Historical Novels
Elizabeth George Speare, an author of historical novels for children, died yesterday in Northwest General Hospital in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 84.
The cause was an aortic aneurysm, her family said.
Beginning in 1957 with "Calico Captive," Mrs.
Speare wrote a string of novels that soon became familiar to thousands of American schoolchildren.
Two of her early works, "The Witch of Blackbird Pond" (1958) and "The Bronze Bow" (1961), were awarded the Newbery Medal by the American Library Association.


Fed Move Sends Stocks on Roller Coaster
Stock traders had clamored for strong inflation-fighting medicine but swooned when they got it yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average initially plummeted almost 50 points after the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates by a surprisingly large three-quarters of a percentage point.
Barely an hour later, Wall Street was confronted by the consequences of getting what it wished for.
Large money-center banks like Citicorp and Wells Fargo raised their prime, or minimum, lending rate by three-quarters of a point, too.
By then, however, the market had turned and ended the day mixed but essentially unchanged, despite heavy trading.


Con Edison Agrees To $9 Million Fine For Contamination
Con Edison agreed yesterday to pay New York State a $9 million fine for illegally discharging oil and contaminants into New York Harbor, allowing contractors to dump waste from cleanup sites into the city's sewer system and ignoring complaints filed by state environmental officials.
The fine, for what the state charged were hundreds of violations, dating from 1984 to 1991, is the largest administrative penalty ever given by the Department of Environmental Conservation.


Public Interest Law Students Need Support
To the Editor:
Re "Free Tuition for Public Service Law" (Education page, Nov. 9):


Without a Date, It Will Be Pretty Hard Setting a Curfew
So what exactly is the date to announce the cancellation of the National Hockey League season?
Thanksgiving?
Christmas?
New Year's Day?
Valentine's Day?
Would April Fools' Day be appropriate?


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Named Ted Polakowski director of Arizona baseball operations and David Salow director of Arizona business operations.


HELMS REQUESTS A DELAY IN VOTE ON TRADE ACCORD
With a threat to disrupt the Administration's foreign policy plans, Senator Jesse Helms urged President Clinton today to delay a Congressional vote on a worldwide trade pact until next year, a move that could unravel the 123-nation agreement.
In a letter to Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Helms, who is expected to become chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee when the Republican-led Senate takes office in January, objected strenuously to the Administration plan to push through the bill in a special session that begins after the Thanksgiving holiday.


Watch Your Thoughts in Gingrich's Land
To the Editor:
Newt Gingrich, former history professor and soon to be Speaker of the House, wants to restore a "moral tone" to American society, a restoration that would include "teaching the truth about American history, teaching about the Founding Fathers and how this country came to be the most extraordinary civilization in history" (front page, Nov. 10).


Metropolitan Diary
RETURNING to Manhattan on the D train after a dance program at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Perl Muter overheard this exchange:
Woman one: But I don't want him as a friend.
I want him as a lover.
Like we used be.
But he doesn't have it for me anymore.


Aikman's Injury Draws N.F.L.'s Attention
The Dallas Cowboys did nothing wrong by not immediately reporting quarterback TROY AIKMAN's thumb injury to the National Football League, the team owner, JERRY JONES, said yesterday.
The N.F.L. is reviewing whether the Cowboys violated policy in not reporting that Aikman was hurt last Friday in a closed workout.
Aikman missed the last two plays of practice.
Aikman played in the Cowboys' 21-14 loss to the San Francisco 49ers on Sunday with a swollen and bruised thumb on his passing hand and threw three interceptions.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about a gun battle between a heavily armed drifter and the police in San Francisco was published in error.
It showed Robert Pinckney, a bystander who was wounded, not Victor Boutwell, the gunman, who was killed.
The article also included an incorrect desciption of the gunman.
That description was based on the photograph of Mr.
Pinckney.


Bosnian Government Begins Training Women for Combat


U.S. Industry Had a Surge In October
American factories, mines and utilities stepped up their operating rate to nearly 85 percent of industrial capacity in October -- a level that had not been reached since 1980 during the Carter Administration.
A strong increase in output, pushing against industry's ability to turn out additional products without raising prices, contributed to the Federal Reserve's decision today to raise short-term interest rates yet again in an attempt to restrain the robust economy.


Columbia to Celebrate 75 Years of Great Books
In a Columbia College classroom the other day, Prof.
Hamid Dabashi, 43, was discussing Machiavelli's "The Prince." He pointed to a passage about the dangers of political alliances in uncertain times.
The professor paused.
"Mayor Giuliani didn't take CC -- or at least he never read Machiavelli," he said, to laughter from his students.


Market Place; After two recent acquisitions, more software mergers are likely.
TWO deals do not a trend make, especially two with as little in common as Microsoft's $1.5 billion acquisition of Intuit last month and Sybase's $940 million acquisition of Powersoft this week.
Still, investment bankers and analysts say they expect more software mergers, if not necessarily of this size.
Both deals filled specific gaps for the acquiring company.
The Microsoft Corporation had a personal finance program, Money, but its market share was a fraction of Intuit Inc.'s Quicken.
Sybase Inc. had applications development tools, but they were thought to lag behind those of its rivals in the data base management market, the Oracle Corporation and the Informix Corporation; in the Powersoft Corporation, it acquired the market's leading tool, Powerbuilder.


Sergeant Pleads Guilty in Harlem Thefts
The police sergeant who supervised a band of officers accused of corruption in the troubled 30th Precinct in Harlem pleaded guilty yesterday to breaking Federal law during what investigators say was a two-year binge of theft.
The sergeant, Kevin P. Nannery, 49, commanded an eight-person unit that called itself "Nannery's Raiders." The group is suspected of smashing down drug dealers' doors, burglarizing their cars and dividing up the cash that was inside.


Cardinals' Beuerlein Will Miss 2-3 Weeks
STEVE BEUERLEIN underwent surgery yesterday to repair his injured left knee, and the quarterback will be lost to the Arizona Cardinals for two to three weeks.
Beuerlein injured the knee early in Sunday's 10-9 victory over the Giants.
He continued to play and directed both second-half scoring drives that helped the Cardinals improve to 4-6.
Beuerlein said the knee's medial meniscus cartilage is torn. (AP)


Mystery Solved
To The Living Section:
In your review of Richard Sax's "Classic Home Desserts" (Kitchen Bookshelf, Nov. 2), you note that "it is certainly curious" that the book carries a blurb by M. F. K. Fisher, who died a year and a half ago.


CHRONICLE
Governor-elect JOHN G. ROWLAND of Connecticut announced the leaders of his transition team today, and minutes later announced the state's soon-to-be First Lady, saying he is to marry PATRICIA LARGAY, his high school sweetheart, on Saturday.
"I figure, if you can do transition, do it all at once, while the mind-set is right," Mr.
Rowland said, adding that he and Ms.
Largay would marry on Block Island in a small ceremony for family and a few friends.
There will be no honeymoon, he said, because of the work to be done before his inauguration on Jan. 4.


Goodbye, Capitol Hill


Bumper Crops Pose Political Problem for Farmers
The nation's farmers have been reaping their most bountiful harvest ever in many important crops, benefiting shoppers for groceries from meat to cooking oil but costing taxpayers an estimated $3 billion to $4 billion in additional farm subsidies.
Production of corn, the nation's biggest crop, is expected to reach 10.01 billion bushels, nearly 5.6 percent higher than 1992's record crop and almost 60 percent more than last year when the Midwest flooded and the Southeast baked, according to Department of Agriculture estimates released last Wednesday.
Production also soared to new records for rice and soybeans, which are widely used in animal feed, cooking oil and food ingredients.
Wheat crops, while short of records, were larger than average.


Democrat Gets Nearer Top Job In Maryland
Parris N. Glendening, the Democratic candidate for Governor of Maryland, moved a step closer to victory today when the state election board finished counting absentee ballots and said he had 6,064 more votes than his Republican challenger, Ellen R. Sauerbrey.
The results are still considered unofficial, pending the tally of votes cast by members of the military and a final review by all 24 voting jurisdictions.
But state officials said that Mr.
Glendening, who now leads 704,818 to 698,754, is likely to be declared the winner when the outstanding ballots are counted.


The Pleasures of Craft, Honesty and Intelligence
THE POST OFFICE MURALS RESTORED
By Robert B. Shaw
80 pages. Copper Beech Press. $11.  THANKSGIVING OVER THE WATER
By Stephen Sandy
83 pages. Knopf. $11.  THE GREEN LAKE IS AWAKE
By Joseph Ceravolo
131 pages. Coffee House Press. $11.95


Opening Asia's Door
In setting their vast and vital region on the path toward free trade by the year 2020, the leaders of 18 nations around the Pacific Ocean have taken a step that appears to be a bold move toward the future.
But whether it will truly be so judged by history will depend not so much on what the leaders said today but on how their "declaration of common resolve" is translated into action.
Carrying out the free trade agreement will be far more arduous and contentious than merely enunciating the vision.


Class Notes
Carl Westcott, Ford dealer turned education entrepreneur, is standing in his office adjacent to the glitzy Galleria mall in north Dallas clicking quickly across the channels on his Toshiba television until he comes to his TI-IN educational network, which serves 2,000 schools.
"Pobre Ramon," laments a teacher with diction so exaggerated a listener almost doesn't need to know Spanish to understand her.
"No se siente bien. Ayer estaba malo, pero hoy esta peor." Her class and other young viewers out there in videoland repeat after her and Mr.
Westcott looks on approvingly.


Stephen Dykes Bower, 91, Architect
Stephen Dykes Bower, a British church architect skilled in the Gothic style, died on Friday in Quendon, 20 miles north of London.
He was 91 and lived in Quendon.
Mr.
Dykes Bower was known particularly for his work on Westminster Abbey.
From 1951 to 1973, he held the title of Surveyor of the Fabric of the abbey.
The newspaper The Independent said on Monday: "Dykes Bower found the Abbey hidden beneath the dust of centuries. He left it as a unified work of art, its disparate elements brought into harmony."


Rockefeller Center May Face Mortgage Default
The Rockefeller Group, the company that owns Rockefeller Center in Manhattan, lacks the cash to make the mortgage payments and may be close to defaulting on the loan, according to a Government filing by the company that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on the property.
Such a default could mark a drastic setback for one of the most prominent Japanese investments in the United States.
In October 1989, the heirs of John D. Rockefeller Jr., sold a controlling interest in the property to the Mitsubishi Estate Company, one of the world's largest real estate companies.


Getting the Lead Out on the Tappan Zee


Singapore Questions American's Actions
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 7 news article on Christopher Lingle, an American who left Singapore after having written a critical newspaper article, quotes Mr.
Lingle's complaint that the Singapore police "intimidated the hell out of me." But shortly after his questioning by the police, Mr.
Lingle had told the media he was treated with "dignity and professionalism."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOSNIA EMBARGO AFFIRMED  Even though American forces are no longer fully taking part, Washington's allies in NATO said they would continue a sea blockade of arms shipments to Bosnia's Muslim-led Government.
A3  A STRATEGY TO AVERT WARS  President Clinton will join allies in Budapest next month to sign an accord aimed at helping European and former Soviet-bloc countries resolve conflicts before they lead to war, officials said.
A3


Gold Glove: It's New Garb For Boggs, Old For Mattingly
Don Mattingly's remarkable play at first base has made him synonymous with fielding excellence for a decade.
Wade Boggs's steady play at third base has rarely forced anyone to include his name in the same sentence with Brooks Robinson.
Until this season.
Boggs, who has long been lauded for his hitting while earning five batting titles, added a new wrinkle to his portfolio yesterday when he joined Mattingly as one of nine players to receive the American League Rawlings Gold Glove Award for 1994.
By winning his first Gold Glove in his 13th season, the 36-year-old Boggs is perhaps the player who has logged the most service time before corralling the award.
Rawlings was unsure whether another winner had matched or surpassed Boggs's longevity-without-gold streak.


Mugging Victim Looks At Drop in Crime Rate
To the Editor:
I was reassured by the much-ballyhooed drop in the reported crime rate until last Thursday, when a mugger thrust his gun into my face and demanded my money.
When I attempted to report the crime to the police over the telephone, I was told the police would not accept the information unless I showed up in person at the station house in the 107th Precinct in Flushing, in whose jurisdiction the crime occurred.


For Navratilova, an Emotional Exit


Who Gets No. 1 Job? A Riddle For Reeves
When the Giants won their first three games this season, their quarterback was Dave Brown.
When they lost their next six, their quarterback was still Dave Brown.
When they lost by a point Sunday to the Arizona Cardinals, their quarterback was Kent Graham.
Now, Coach Dan Reeves must decide which quarterback -- Brown or Graham -- will start Monday night against the Oilers in the Houston Astrodome.
He said he would decide Wednesday.
All signs point to Brown's recapturing the job for this week and the rest of the season.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the At the Bar column on Friday, about American lawyers who are helping to shape the legal system in Albania, referred to one of them incorrectly.
Donn Rubin of Washington is a man.


New Look at Disputed Study Is Reassuring on Lumpectomy
Women who have breast cancer that has not spread outside the breast can almost always safely choose a lumpectomy followed by radiation rather than a mastectomy, researchers concluded at a workshop here today.
The meeting, held by the National Cancer Institute, was called in the aftermath of disconcerting questions raised recently about the relative efficacy of mastectomy and lumpectomy followed by radiation therapy.
In a mastectomy, most or all of the breast is removed, while in a lumpectomy, only the lump and immediately surrounding tissue is removed.
In 1990, a consensus conference called by the cancer institute confidently stated that lumpectomy followed by radiation was as effective as mastectomy in preventing recurrence of cancer for a vast majority of women with early breast cancer.


Fox May Propose Series of Tournaments
The Fox Television Network, already involved in professional football and -- if the season begins -- professional hockey, may be attempting to step into golf in a big way.
Fox, in conjunction with the golf superstar GREG NORMAN, has plans to establish the beginnings of a world golf tour.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 11
Nov. 4
Nov. 12
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.5
7.8
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.5
Gasoline stocks
203.3
202.3
212.4
Distillate stocks
142.4
142.5
138.1
Crude imports, daily
7.3
6.7
7.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.6
1.5
Crude stocks
340.8
339.8
335.4
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.6
90.1
91.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Clinton Outlines Plan to Bolster Europe-Wide Security
President Clinton will join the leaders of Russia, Germany, France and Britain in Budapest next month to sign an agreement aimed at helping European and former Soviet-bloc countries resolve conflicts before they lead to war, American officials said today.
The Administration wants to accomplish this by transforming the 53-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe into a stronger group specializing in conflict resolution and peacekeeping.


Donald Ballard Jones, a Lawyer And Preservationist, Dies at 83
Donald Ballard Jones, a Trenton lawyer and preservationist, died on Saturday at his home in Sergeantsville, N.J.
He was 83.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Israel Turns Over More Responsibility to Palestinian Authority
Israel handed over responsibility for tourism and social services in the West Bank today to the Palestinian Authority.
The transfer was part of an agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization to move five spheres of authority in the West Bank to Palestinian control as a step toward extending self-rule beyond Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Hughes Supply (HUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Assembly Speaker Voices Doubts On Pataki's Pledge to Cut Taxes
Starting to build a Democratic case against Governor-elect George E. Pataki's central campaign promise, the Assembly Speaker said today that it would be difficult to cut taxes as quickly and deeply as Mr.
Pataki has pledged, and added that the Assembly Democrats might offer a tax-cutting plan of their own.
The Speaker, Sheldon Silver, said at a news conference in Albany that New Yorkers would "understand if, in fact, any tax cuts have to go slower than were promised in the campaign."


Banesto Criminal Charges
Spanish prosecutors filed charges today against Mario Conde, the dismissed chairman of the Banco Espanol de Credito, and nine of his executives, formally accusing them with misappropriating funds, manipulating stock prices and falsifying documents.
The prosecutors are demanding a bond of almost $97 million against civil damages that Mr.
Conde and his management team are said to have caused.


Guidelines For Classes On Civics Are Issued
National educational standards for civics and government were announced today, provoking less criticism than did the recently unveiled standards for American and world history.
Noting that only 37 percent of the electorate voted in last week's midterm election, some of the participants at today's announcement in a chamber at the United States Supreme Court saw a connection between the lack of civics teaching and the decline in what Thomas Jefferson called "enlightened people."


New Judge In a Crucial Tobacco Case
A Federal judge in New Orleans reassigned a much-watched tobacco-liability case to another Federal judge yesterday, postponing a crucial hearing scheduled for today on a landmark class-action lawsuit.
The court will determine whether, for the first time, the tobacco industry can be sued for addicting huge numbers of smokers to cigarettes.
The judge, Frederick J. R. Heebe, was to have heard arguments today from representatives of a consortium of 60 of the nation's most prominent lawyers, who have mounted a campaign against the industry that will cost them $100,000 per firm, or $6 million a year, in expenses.


Ruling in City College Demotion Suit Is Greeted With Concern
Academics and legal experts reacted with concern yesterday to the Supreme Court's order that the City College of New York be given a second chance to defend the demotion of its black studies chairman, who has been accused of bigotry.
The Supreme Court action -- which sent the matter back to an appeals court for further consideration -- succeeded in uniting some detractors of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries in his defense.


Ameridata Technologies Inc.(ADA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; The Politics of Meanness
This is my new motto: Keep Al Gore Healthy.
Because when Newt Gingrich becomes Speaker of the House, that puts him third in the line of Presidential succession, after Mr.
Gore.
And that is a terrifying prospect for the moral compass of this country.


Great Dane Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Concern Over Airline Safety
A study by the National Transportation Safety Board and an investigation by New York Times reporters cast a disturbing light on airline safety rules and regulations.
The Safety Board, focusing on commuter airlines, said all but their smallest aircraft, and the people who fly them, should meet the same safety standards as major carriers.
The Times's investigation of USAir, the nation's sixth-largest carrier, indicated that even major carriers' safety procedures can be flawed.
Flying is still safer than driving to the airport.
But two recent devastating crashes -- one on a commuter airline, American Eagle, and the other on USAir -- have heightened public concern.


Enthusiasm Is Lacking During the Knicks' Trip
The Knicks have not played their first five games with the intensity that has become their signature.
So before today's practice at the Forum, Coach Pat Riley met with the team briefly and voiced his displeasure, followed by a hard, 90-minute workout.
With 77 games to play, it is too early for the Knicks (3-2) to panic.
But New York is 0-2 on this four-game trip, facing back-to-back games against the Lakers on Wednesday and the Golden State Warriors on Thursday.
Riley has seen enough lethargic play, and he made it clear that if the Knicks do not play with more effort, they will not win.


People
*
Craig Middleton has rejoined Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, in the new position of executive vice president and strategic planning director.
He was previously executive vice president and director of marketing and planning at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York. *
Brian Jacobs, senior vice president and international media director at the Leo Burnett Co., London, has resigned, the agency said, when he was asked to relocate to Chicago.
Robert C. Brennan, senior vice president and media director on the agency's McDonald's account, succeeds him in Chicago.


Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.(MC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Reach Out to the Homeless, But Often Find Efforts Rejected
The night was windy and brittle.
On Central Park West near 68th Street, the police officers spotted a grizzled man with tufted eyebrows hunched alongside a bench under a street lamp.
In the stiff breeze, his windbreaker made an empty rustle.
The two officers slid out of the van and headed in his direction.
"You want to go to a drop-in center tonight?" Officer James Sutton said after some opening pleasantries.


China Approves Big Power Project
In a major decision to clear the backlog of pending power generation projects in China, top Communist Party authorities have approved a $1.2 billion power plant in Guangdong province.
The partners in the deal, signed on Monday, include the Entergy Power Corporation, one of the largest utility companies in the United States.
"We had very little advance warning that Beijing was going to approve this thing," said Kenneth W. Oberg, Entergy's director in Asia.


America Embraces Its Native Foods
The Thanksgiving menu springs from the soil of the Americas.
The sentimental favorites are cranberries, corn, squash, pumpkins, pecans, wild rice, sweet potatoes and turkey.
But now the shopping list of foods native to the New World is expanding.
Other foods that were grown or gathered by American Indians, like Jerusalem artichokes, blue corn, amaranth and appaloosa beans, are increasingly showing up on supermarket shelves.


Precious Ingredients
To The Living Section:
I love the recipes.
I try to follow them every week, but every once in a while you throw me a curve: you include ingredients that are a mystery to the food vendors here.


Mesa Airlines Inc.(MESA,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Jackson Journal; The Rich Are Different. They Can Afford Homes.
In all the sweet-breathed valleys of the West, there is no designation more feared than being labeled "the next Aspen," a reference to the Colorado ski town where the rich gather like deer to a salt lick.
In mountain hamlets on the pivot between being a pleasant hideaway and a destination resort, people watch real estate prices like heart monitors.
An uptick is welcomed, at first, but is soon followed by alarm, and then a full-fledged civic crisis.


Cliburn Competition Winner's Debut
By a curious turn of fashion, winning a music competition has become a liability.
Audiences have spent too many boring hours listening to the pearly touch of human player pianos; juries have proven themselves better at judging technique and proficiency than insight and musicianship.
Competitions are, properly, on the defensive.
So what a pleasure it was on Monday night in Carnegie Hall to hear the gold medalist of the ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition, and to feel that this was the New York debut of a musician rather than a pianist -- not a fully formed musician, perhaps, but a fascinating musician nonetheless.
The Italian pianist Simone Pedroni was 24 when he won the contest in 1993, and is the highest-ranking veteran of the Cliburn wars to play in New York in recent months; Frederic Chiu appeared in the spring, Armen Babakhanyan gave a debut concert a few weeks ago that received critical plaudits, and Fabio Bidini, who played here last February, will give a recital at Tully Hall in December.
Mr.
Pedroni bested them all in the Van Cliburn Competition, but judging from this performance, he did so without resorting to the typical competition weaponry.


Clinton Devises New Guidelines On Arms Sales
Making explicit a policy that has existed in practice for three years, the Clinton Administration is preparing new guidelines that will consider the health of the nation's military contractors when reviewing arms sales to foreign countries.
Such sales require approval from the United States Government, which has ruled on arms sales in the past based on whether they bolstered American foreign policy goals and strengthen regional alliances.
Under a plan now before the President, a sale's benefit to the nation's shrinking military industry would also be considered.


Off the Menu
For the Fashionable
The superstar models Claudia Schiffer, Elle MacPherson and Naomi Campbell have become partners in the Fashion Cafe, a new restaurant with fashion as its theme that will take over the former Banker's Trust space at 53 Rockefeller Plaza.
Described as a restaurant-museum hybrid, it is planned by its creator, Tommaso Buti, to be the first of many in different cities, in Planet Hollywood-Hard Rock Cafe style.
The 15,000-square-foot space is expected to open by spring, and construction starts with a ceremony on Nov. 29.
Bring on the paparazzi.
As the Zagat Turns
The Zagat Survey of New York City Restaurants for 1995 has just been published.
Bouley is again rated highest for food, with a 29 (out of a possible 30), followed by Aureole, Lespinasse and La Grenouille with 28.
Last year, only Aureole had a 28.
It seems the surveyors think New York food is improving, because this year 18 places were rated 27 or better, compared with only 10 last year.


Health Care Awards Given
The New York Festivals has named the first winners of its international awards competition honoring health care communications work.
In the competition, called the Globals, 4 Grand Global best of show awards and 24 best of category awards were presented.
The Grand Global for best communication to health care professionals was awarded to Dugan/Farley Communications in Upper Saddle River, N.J., for a direct-mail campaign for Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals.
The Grand Global for best promotion to consumers went to Cossette Communication-Marketing and Grapheme Communication Design in Montreal for a multimedia entry promoting Claritin, a hay fever and allergy treatment from Schering Canada.


City Council Offers Plans On Budget
Opening negotiations with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over his plan to close a $1.1 billion budget gap with deep spending cuts, the City Council revealed a wish list of alternatives yesterday, including the creation of an authority to oversee recycling, an increase in taxi medallions and the consolidation of nearly a dozen of New York City's agencies.
The Council's plan also included charging more for licenses and permits, turning the Staten Island Ferry over to the state and eliminating 2 of the 12 paid holidays city employees now receive.
The Council also proposed raising money by leasing the 79th Street Boat Basin, franchising Offtrack Betting parlors and selling air rights above city buildings, including City Hall, to real-estate developers to raise cash.


AT THE MOVIES WITH: Paul Rudnick; Would Libby, Like, Even Read This?
DOES Libby like "Stargate"?
You bet.
Big time.
No need to ask, really.
How could a movie in which Kurt Russell kicks keister among the ancient Egyptians at the far end of the universe fail to enchant Libby Gelman-Waxner, the monthly film critic for Premiere magazine and the finest judge of cinematic art ever to come out of Great Neck, L.I.?
"Libby is guided primarily by trailers, and 'Stargate' resembles 40 trailers back to back," says Paul Rudnick, Libby's creator, dissecting the film at a Times Square restaurant around the corner from the Criterion Center, where he has just seen it.
"Also, Libby is a huge Kurt Russell fan, although in this film he seems to be playing an angry shaving brush." (The reference is to Mr. Russell's coif, the fiercest-looking crew cut since Michael Douglas's buzz job in "Falling Down.")


Bulls Are Victors in Spain
The giant metallic bulls along Spain's highways will be protected from bulldozers under a decree approved today by a parliamentary commission.
A national outcry arose last month when the Public Works Ministry announced that the bulls had to go under a 1988 decree banning all advertising along public highways.


Seymour Malman; Developer, 76
Seymour Malman, a retired Long Island developer, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 76 and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
The cause was a heart attack, according to Riverside-Nassau North Chapels, a funeral home in Great Neck.


Recount Shows Rep. Gejdenson Wins in Connecticut by 4 Votes
After seven days of counting and recounting, Sam Gejdenson, a seven-term Democratic Congressman from eastern Connecticut, was declared the victor today in his bid for re-election -- by four votes out of 186,000 cast.
But his Republican opponent, Edward W. Munster, vowed to challenge the results of the Second District vote all the way, if necessary, to the new Republican-controlled Congress, which has the final say in the seating of its members.
The election has already made the record books as one of only eight Congressional races settled by a single-digit vote margin in this century.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Kmart Corp., Troy, Mich., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $180 million of pass-through certificates through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Whirlpool to Shut 2 Plants and Cut Work Force
Continuing a trend among large companies of cutting employment even in times of prosperity, the Whirlpool Corporation said today that it would close two North American factories and reduce its worldwide work force by more than 8 percent.
The cutbacks will result in a one-time charge of $240 million against earnings in the current quarter but are expected eventually to save $150 million in annual operating expenses.
Whirlpool, based in Benton Harbor, Mich., has earned $249 million on sales of $6 billion in the first nine months of the year.
The company has a worldwide work force of about 40,000 employees.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75-8.50
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.48
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.29
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.72
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.91
7.91
5.61
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.05
8.07
6.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.86
8.88
7.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.27
5.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a landlord-tenant dispute at the Belnord apartment building on the Upper West Side described one aspect of an agreement between the new owners of the building and some tenants incorrectly.
The agreement calls for the owners to pay $670,000 directly to the tenants association, and also to provide rent credits to some tenants that the tenants' lawyer said would total about $3 million; it does not call for a direct payment of about $4 million.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about David Salomon, a decorator, misstated his relationship with the late Francoise de la Renta.
She was his mentor, not a grandparent.


Remembering Aerobics
To The Living Section:
It was with quite a bit of bemusement (and envy) that I read Carol Lawson's article "One Killer Job Not Enough? Add a 2d, With Sweat" (Nov. 2).
Eleven years ago, when I entered medical school, I gave up jogging in favor of the convenience of aerobics classes.
They were given hourly, and all one had to do was stop in, exercise and head home.


INSIDE
With or Without U.S., Allies Will Blockade Bosnia Arms
Meeting in Brussels, Washington's NATO allies said they would continue their sea blockade of arms shipments to Bosnia.
The statement makes it clear that the Americans' decision to stop enforcing the embargo will have little effect.
Page A3.
Commuter Air Safety
A Federal board called for making the rules on flying hours and training the same for pilots at both commuter and major airlines.
Page A12.
New York's Tax Tug-of-War
With a possible tax-cut plan of their own, Assembly Democrats prepared to battle George E. Pataki over his central campaign pledge.
Page B1.
A Mystery in Space
Telescope observations have left cosmologists more mystified than ever about the universe's "dark matter," so they are shifting the focus of their search.
Page B8.


10 Percent of Islanders Sold
The four-member management committee that has run the Islanders since 1992 announced yesterday that it has bought 10 percent of the hockey team from John O. Pickett Jr., the majority owner.
"Our group had previously made a loan to the team," said Stephen Walsh, co-chairman and chief executive officer of the committee, which invested in the Islanders when Pickett put them up for sale two years ago.
"In exchange for that, we converted the loan to equity, which makes the team a lot stronger financially."


Spreading the Word in the South Bronx; In a World Stripped of Luxuries, Mormon Missionaries Help Faith Take Root
Soon after arriving in New York last December, Kevin Mower sidled up to a young woman on the subway and tried to engage her in conversation.
His subject: Jesus Christ.
Her response: first, stony silence, and then this piece of advice: "Don't mix and mingle too much."


Ailing Lungs Said to Improve When Smokers Stop
Nearly all smokers experience an accelerated decline in lung function, and many eventually develop a chronic lung disease like chronic bronchitis or emphysema.
But a new study has found that quitting smoking can repair some of the damage.
The study, conducted at 10 medical centers in the United States and Canada under the direction of Dr.
Nicholas R. Anthonisen of the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg, is being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
The study was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.


In Schools, Money Matters if It's Spent Wisely; Nurture, Not Nature
To the Editor:
I write to offer a more hopeful perspective on the debate generated by the Charles Murray-Richard J. Herrnstein thesis on race and I.Q. (Education page, Nov. 9).


Clinton Reaches Out to G.O.P. On School Prayer Amendment
President Clinton said today that he would consider working with Congressional Republicans toward a constitutional amendment guaranteeing a right to prayer in public schools.
The statement by Mr.
Clinton at a news conference here tonight was the strongest evidence yet of his determination to accommodate overtures by Republicans, who will control both houses of the new Congress.
Although Mr.
Clinton has long supported voluntary school prayer, he had not seriously discussed a constitutional amendment until today.


When a Tax Resembles a Salary Cap
Anyone deliriously optimistic about the so-called breakthrough in negotiations in the three-month-old baseball strike hasn't been paying attention to the negotiations in the month-and-a-half-old hockey lockout.
The National Hockey League has a taxing problem, and baseball is about to get one, too.
N.H.L. owners have been unable to induce their players to accept a luxury tax on payrolls, and baseball club owners are virtually certain to find the same resistance if they propose a luxury tax along similar lines.


Arrest of Released Sex Offender Unnerves New England Region
Despite police warnings that he remained a "chronic sexual predator," Ronald W. Caron was released from jail here eight days ago, then arrested on Monday amid concern that he was returning to his old patterns of behavior.
His release from the Strafford County Jail here on Nov. 7, after serving a term on a sex charge, set off a highly publicized search in which he was tracked to Portland, Me., where, the authorities say, he offered beer to two teen-agers in an effort to lure them into sex, and back to New Hampshire, where he was arrested on a charge of trespassing at a day care center in nearby Rochester.


Space Telescope Leaves Scientists Puzzled About the Mass of the Universe
The Hubble Space Telescope looked deep into the sky and what it did not see has left cosmologists more mystified than ever about the unseen stuff out there, called dark matter, that may account for at least 90 percent of the universe's mass.
Astronomers using the orbiting telescope reported yesterday that their observations ruled out the possibility that dim small stars, known as red dwarfs, are plentiful enough to constitute much of the invisible mass.
For almost three decades, this had been the most favored explanation by astronomers for the mass they could not see but could infer from gravitational forces shaping galactic structures.


A New Analysis Casts Doubt On the Superiority of Olive Oil
ONE of the firmer tenets of nutrition, a notably slippery subject, has been that olive oil is better for the heart than, say, corn oil and safflower oil.
So said a study published nine years ago, which gained considerable support from the very low rates of heart disease found among Mediterranean cultures that consume more olive oil than any other dietary fat.
But an analysis presented yesterday by Dr.
Christopher Gardner of Stanford University at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Dallas seems to suggest otherwise.
There is little to be gained, he found, from switching from the polyunsaturated oils like corn, soybean and sunflower to canola oil or to the more costly olive oil.


School Lunches
To The Living Section:
In your article on what kids eat at school lunch programs ("What's for Lunch? American," Oct. 26), you quote the principal of Public School 144 as saying that new immigrant students often bring lunches that reflect their ethnic backgrounds but that after a few months, those same children are eating cheese or bologna sandwiches or pizza from the hot lunch menu.


What the Steeler Offense Lacks, A Healthy Foster Could Provide
With the Steelers' offense sputtering like a car about to run out of gas, the return of running back Barry Foster is a welcome sign.
Pittsburgh's offense hasn't scored a touchdown in 32 offensive series over 10 quarters.
The Steelers defeated Buffalo, 23-10, on Monday night with the help of three field goals by Gary Anderson and two touchdowns by their defense.
Cornerback Rod Woodson returned an interception 37 yards for a score; Woodson also sacked Bills quarterback Jim Kelly at the Buffalo 1 and defensive end Gerald Williams recovered the fumble in the end zone for a touchdown.


Frito-Lay Plans Media Consolidation
The Frito-Lay snack foods subsidiary of Pepsico Inc. will consolidate the media planning portion of its brands account, divided between BBDO New York and DDB Needham Chicago, at one of those agencies.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $70 million.


A Correction


Kodak Plans To Eliminate 800 More Jobs
The Eastman Kodak Company, which has been trimming its ranks for several years to cut operating costs, announced yesterday that it would eliminate about 800 jobs at its big Kodak Park manufacturing complex in Rochester.
The cutbacks will take place by the end of the first quarter of 1995, the company said in a statement.
The cuts will come in the company's core film manufacturing business, but will not involve production workers.
Office workers and other staff that support the production process will be the target of the reduction, a spokesman said.


Personal Health; Clinical trials: the bogged-down hub of progress.
THIRTY-ODD years ago when I became a science and health writer, cancer treatment was a hit-or-miss affair that relied mostly on surgery and mop-up radiation therapy.
Only a handful of children with acute leukemia and only about a quarter of children with solid tumors survived.
Women dreaded breast cancer not only for its life-threatening implications but also because the diagnosis inevitably meant mutilating surgery: a radical mastectomy.
Today the picture is far brighter.
About 90 percent of youngsters with acute leukemia, Wilms's tumor and Hodgkin's disease are being cured.
Overall survival for solid tumors in children is now 70 percent.
And the standard treatment for most breast cancers is now minimal tumor-removing surgery with radiation, chemotherapy or both to reduce the risk of recurrence.


Preseason N.I.T. Tipping Off
Nobody needs to remind Jack Powers that ranking teams before they've played a single game can be a fatuous exercise, but as the executive director of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament, Powers, at least, didn't have a choice.
He had to have 16 teams to fill the 1994 tournament, and for anybody who disdains his selections the argument begins tonight.
That's when 12 of the teams face off in campus games to begin the road to Madison Square Garden, with 4 others due to play first-round games tomorrow.


Accounts
*
New World Telephone, Hong Kong, to Bozell Ltd., Hong Kong, as the first agency to handle the telecommunications company's account.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Royal Oak Enterprises, Atlanta, to Fricks Advertising, Atlanta, to handle advertising for the marketer of Royal Oak charcoal briquets and other related products, previously at Tausche Martin Lonsdorf, Atlanta.
Billings were estimated to exceed $3 million.


JUMP IS LARGEST SINCE 1981
Determined to prevent strong economic growth from feeding inflation, the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates today by the largest amount since 1981 and left open the possibility of further increases.
Banks followed by raising the rates they charge for loans.
The increases are likely to show up immediately in the rates charged millions of Americans on everything from home equity loans to credit cards to small-business loans.
Already, interest rates on 30-year mortgages that were available at slightly more than 7 percent at the start of the year have risen to 9.05 percent.


As It Scrubs Down Its Art, Rome Takes The Brush to Itself
Nowadays, when you stand on the Campidoglio, Michelangelo's piazza atop the Capitoline Hill, you can clearly see the cleaned corkscrew dome of Sant'Ivo della Sapienza, which Borromini designed, rising among the city's rooftops.
The spanking white facades of San Andrea della Valle and the Church of the Gesu punctuate the gritty Corso Vittorio Emanuele, the busy street leading from the bridge over the Tiber to the Vatican.
Across town, the exterior of the giant Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore has been thoroughly scrubbed.
Inside, its patterned floor, medieval mosaics, delicate wood-coffered ceiling and voluminous chapels have been given the once-over, too.
The news that draws busloads of tourists each day is the much-touted restoration of Michelangelo's "Last Judgment," the fresco on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel at the Vatican, not to mention the chapel's restored ceiling.
But all across Rome, a wave of refurbished churches and palazzi, as well as repainted facades, in colors like pale blue and orange sherbet, have begun to change the look of this ancient capital.


Clinton Aide Criticizes G.O.P. Plans for Tax Cuts
President Clinton's budget director said today that it was nonsense for Republicans to suggest that tax cuts would pay for themselves by stimulating economic activity.
The director insisted that such cuts had to be offset by reductions in Federal spending.
The director, Alice M. Rivlin, said she feared that the Republicans taking charge of Congress would lead the nation into "a tax-cutting frenzy" that would increase the Federal budget deficit.
She thus attacked an economic theory that has been an article of faith for many Republicans, including those who orchestrated the Republican takeover of the House.


A 3-D Film Gets Its Broadway Debut
Three-dimensional movies, a decades-old trick, have always involved fooling the eye.
But the Imax Corporation, which specializes in giant-screen films, has taken fooling to a whole new level.
The company helped record two films that will open Friday in Manhattan at the new Sony Theater Lincoln Square at 67th Street and Broadway, a cineplex that includes an Imax theater with a screen eight stories high.
This will be the first exhibition of an Imax 3-D film in this country, although it has appeared in Japan and Europe.


Sports of The Times; Martina Exits Smiling
THE curtain was coming down.
The banner was going up.
Martina Navratilova, out of habit, carried out a box of tissues.
"I don't know whether to laugh or cry," she said after losing the last singles match of her magnificent 22-year career to Gabriela Sabatini.
The scores were 6-4, 6-2, retired.


Prison Inmates Stage Dining Room Protest
About 2,500 of the 15,000 Rikers Island inmates refused to eat lunch and dinner yesterday, apparently to protest conditions at the prison and to show their anger over possible operational changes, correction officials said.
Tom Kelly, a spokesman for the city's Department of Correction, said no inmate leaders came forward to explain the action, and he added that it did not appear that it would continue today.


The Last Ship


METRO DIGEST
CON ED TO PAY $9 MILLION POLLUTION FINE
Con Edison agreed to pay a $9 million fine for illegally discharging oil and contaminants into New York Harbor, allowing contractors to dump waste from cleanup sites into the city's sewer system and ignoring complaints filed by state environmental officials.
A1.


Of Torvill and Dean, With Dreams on Ice
Apparently still salivating over the media feast delivered by the sensational "battle" of Nancy and Tonya, television is pushing just about any figure-skating button it can find.
The menu is filled to bursting.
CBS just offered something called "Ice Wars: The USA vs. the World," and on Nov. 25 at 8 P.M. it is to broadcast "Disney's Greatest Hits on Ice." This Saturday at 8 P.M.
NBC has from Alberta, Canada, "Figure Skating: The Gold Championship," with a $1 million prize pot.
On cable, TBS's skating card over the next couple of months includes "The United States Open Figure-Skating Championships," on Dec. 18 and 19.


The Fed's Moves: How Consumer Rates React
Six times this year, the Federal Reserve has increased short-term interest rates, trying to brake the economy, including a 0.75-percent jump yesterday.
Some rates that consumers earn or pay have reacted sharply and promptly; others have shrugged off the Fed's moves.
Articles, pages A1 and D6.


Penney (J.C.) Co. (JCP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Wine Talk
TRADITIONALLY, Thanksgiving marks the beginning of the holiday season.
Unless you are a Beaujolais devotee.
For fans of France's favorite wine, the fun begins tomorrow, the third Thursday of November, the day this very special wine, the first of the new vintage, goes on sale.
The Beaujolais region of southern Burgundy consists of some 34 miles of granite hills stretching north from the outskirts of the city of Lyons.
Beaujolais grapes, like most wine grapes, are picked and fermented in early fall.
A scant two months later, the wine destined to be called "nouveau" is bottled and shipped to Paris and around the world.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CORP., Atlanta, completed the purchase of most of the assets of Western Union Financial Services Inc. from New Valley Corp., Upper Saddle River, N.J., in a transaction valued at $1.19 billion.
GENERAL ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS INC., a unit of General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., signed a $250 million contract with Tenaga Nasional Berhad, a Malaysian utility, to supply power generation equipment for a plant in Kapar, Selangor, Malaysia.


Living Centers of America Inc.(LCA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World News Briefs; Khmer Rouge Admit Killing Western Tourists
The Khmer Rouge admitted today that they had executed three backpacking Western tourists whose bodies were found in a shallow grave in southern Cambodia earlier this month.
The rebel Khmer Rouge said in a radio broadcast that the hostages -- an Australian, David Wilson, 29, a Briton, Mark Slater, 28, and a Frenchman, Jean-Michel Braquet, 27 -- were killed because they were "spies" for Vietnam, which backs the Cambodian Government.


Bills to Lift 3-Casino Limit Clear Panels in Legislature
Mayor James Whelan's protestations that enough is enough fell on deaf ears today as two legislative committees released identical bills that would enable Donald Trump to seek his fourth casino license here.
Mr.
Whelan said that while Mr.
Trump is the city's biggest employer and taxpayer and does an outstanding job of promoting the city and his properties, he also "has a record of attempting to limit competition from other casinos in Atlantic City."


Stopping Sex Abuse in Schools
Sexual abuse of children is one of those issues that easily leads to overreaction.
All the more reason to welcome sensible recommendations from a special commission on how the New York City school system should handle child sex abuse.
It has not been a huge problem.
Since 1991 the special investigator for the school system, Edward Stancik, has substantiated 110 allegations of abuse by school employees.
That is not horrific for a system of one million students and about 90,000 teachers and school staff members.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The sharpest increase in interest rates since 1981 was made by the Federal Reserve.
The central bank raised the discount rate and the Federal funds rate by three-quarters of a percentage point each.
Big banking companies, including Citicorp, soon followed suit, raising the minimum rates they charge for loans.  [ Page A1. ]


Cortines May Seize District
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday summoned the board of Brooklyn's largest school district to a meeting on Monday, a move that could lead to his seizing control of the troubled district.
If he does, it will be the second time for District 17, which includes 26 schools in Crown Heights and East Flatbush.
Three and a half years ago, the district was in such disarray that then Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez took control.


K-III Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commuter Airlines Need Tougher Rules, Panel Says
The National Transportation Safety Board said today that commuter airline pilots fly more hours than major-carrier pilots but receive less training, less help on safety issues, less help from ground personnel and less rest between flights.
The board said there was no justification for the differences and called on the Federal Aviation Administration to put most commuter operations under the same rules the big airlines must follow.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; With a new name and logo, a financial giant tries to brand its units.
THERE are those who let a smile be their umbrella.
Then there is Travelers Inc., which will let an umbrella be its umbrella.
Travelers, the financial services giant formed in December when Primerica acquired the Travelers Corporation, is introducing a corporate identity and brand-image program that uses the familiar Travelers Insurance umbrella as a logo for the entire company and its new name.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75-8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.59
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.37
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.77
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
7.91
5.62
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.09
8.05
6.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.86
7.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.24
5.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc.(CBRL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


QE2 Has a Sample Sale
WHEN more than 1,500 pieces of furniture that once graced the Queen Elizabeth 2 luxury liner docked at local Salvation Army thrift stores this week, the waiting crowds got a royal disappointment.
"To be honest, I was expecting a lot better than what I see," said Kevin Madison, a Salvation Army district supervisor.
He was filling in for the absent manager of Store No. 5, at 268 West 96th Street, between Broadway and West End Avenue.
"The phone's been ringing off the hook," Mr.
Madison added somewhat incredulously.
"I mean, nothing's wrong with the stuff, but I do wonder what all the fuss is about."


A Stolen Old Master Painting Is Bought Back for Poland
A Dutch Old Master painting stolen from a Polish museum by German forces during World War II has been bought for the Polish Government in a convoluted deal that some experts deplore as ransom.
The 17th-century Gabriel Metsu painting, called "The Washerwoman," was flown to Warsaw from New York on Tuesday after payment of about $65,000 to an anonymous collector who had consigned the work to Sotheby's nearly two years ago for auction.
The painting was withdrawn by the auction house after a Polish art restorer in New Jersey spotted the work in a Sotheby's catalogue and questioned its sale.


Report Blames School's Staff In Drowning
A Bronx eighth-grader drowned on a field trip last summer in part because six adults from his school let 138 pupils loose to roam a 187-acre water park without even knowing who could swim, a special school investigator has concluded.
And once the boy was reported missing, an assistant principal failed to act, the investigator found.
The scathing report from the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City Schools accuses the teachers and administrators of Intermediate School 166 of gross misjudgment, detailing how on June 14, 1994, they left the Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom near Allentown, Pa., even though they knew 14-year-old Daniel Maracallo had not been found.
When the buses arrived back at his school, the report says, two teachers went home to watch a Knicks game even though some students stayed behind, unattended, waiting for parents.


'Incredible Universe' Seeks a Big New York Bang
National retailers of consumer electronics have squeezed smaller competitors out of one American city after another in recent years, following a pattern set by discount department stores and mammoth supermarkets.
But New York City, with its high rents, low margins, costly advertising and savvy local competitors, has intimidated big chains like Circuit City Stores and Best Buy, despite the $9.5 billion spent on consumer electronics here each year, a sizable share of the nearly $80 billion spent nationally.


Hadson Corp.(HAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whitman to Speak on Grant's Show
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has agreed to be a guest on Thursday of Bob Grant, the New York City radio talk show host who became an issue in the New Jersey Senate race.
Mrs.
Whitman's chief spokesman, Carl Golden, said today that the Governor agreed to talk about racial issues and intolerance with Mr.
Grant, who has frequently been accused of using his program to promote bigotry.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's visit to Indonesia misstated the length of time his host, President Suharto, has been in power.
It is 28 years, not nearly four decades.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about President Clinton's meeting with two Asian leaders misidentified them in some copies.
President Kim Young Sam of South Korea was at the left, and Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan at the right.


Booker Washington, Architect, 79, Dies
Booker T. Washington 3d, a retired New York architect and grandson of the educator and author, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Harlem.
He had been in failing health for several years, said his wife, Joyce Dodson Washington.


Quincy Jones in Another Purchase
Quincy Jones, the music and television producer, announced yesterday that he was teaming up with the talk show host Geraldo Rivera; Willie Davis, the former football star, and the Tribune Company to buy television stations around the country.
The new company, Qwest Broadcasting, has already reached an agreement to buy two UHF stations, one in Atlanta and one in New Orleans, for a total of $167 million, and Mr.
Jones is hoping to acquire more stations during the next few years.


Corrections
A listing in the Calendar column of The Home Section last Thursday about the Cooper Union Great Hall misstated the dates of three events.
A corrected version appears today on page C13.


Cholesterol Drugs Found to Save Lives
After years of studies that found cholesterol-lowering drugs reduced deaths from heart attacks but not the overall death rate, new research in Scandinavia has emphatically shown that the drugs do save lives.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Pruning the Brambles
Q.
I have wild raspberries in my garden that take a lot of space.
If I prune them now, will they be ruined, or can I expect them to bear again? -- Walter Montenegro, Maywood, N.J.


Business Week Picks Adler Boschetto
Business Week said yesterday that it had selected Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners in New York to handle the magazine's trade advertising account, which had been at Ted Chin &amp; Company in New York for the last two years until that agency and Business Week parted company in June.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Although inflation appears to be calm, a number of problems are just below the surface that could lead to higher inflation sometime within the next year.
That helps explain why the Federal Reserve decided to raise interest rates.
Economic Analysis.  [ Page D1. ] Estimates of how tax cuts will affect tax revenue are crucial to Republican proposals.
Washington Memo.  [ D1. ]


Prestone Account Placed in Review
Young &amp; Rubicam New York said yesterday that after almost a decade it had "amicably agreed" to end its handling of the Prestone line of antifreeze and automotive products because the brand's ownership had changed.
As a result, the account of the Prestone Products Corporation, with billings estimated at $3 million, has been placed in review.
Prestone was acquired in July by Vestar Capital Partners in New York from the First Brands Corporation in Danbury, Conn., which hired Y.&amp; R. New York in 1985.
The agency said it was concerned about "conflict situations" between Prestone Products and First Brands because Y.&amp; R. New York continues to handle First Brands' automotive aftermarket products, with billings estimated at more than $12 million.


In Fearful Thrift, Elderly Forage in Garbage Bins
A gray-haired man in a blue Yankees cap lifts the lid of a garbage bin next to a supermarket.
Peering inside, he pulls out a tray of mushrooms still wrapped in plastic and slips it surreptitiously into a small gym bag.
A few minutes later, a man in his 80's walks to another of the three green bins outside the market.
He forages through the garbage, using his cane to stir the bottom, and removes a red pepper, some potatoes, an apple and wilted broccoli.


Two for the Seesaw: Graham Is Out, Brown Is In
This morning, quarterback Kent Graham was told by Dan Reeves that he was being benched in favor of Dave Brown.
Graham was infuriated but kept his composure and asked his head coach for another chance.
There would be no other chance.
The decision had been made.
Graham then saw his teammates and told them what Reeves had said.
They were perhaps more shocked than he was but not as angry.
They, along with several Giants assistants, tried to calm Graham down throughout the morning and early afternoon after he said he was going to rip Reeves to the news media.


Another Failed Test For the Chinese Women
Another Chinese swimmer has flunked a drug test, this time a world champion who had almost three times the legal level of steroids in her system.
The swimmer, YANG AIHUA, was the fifth member of China's powerful women's teams to test positive for drugs since last year, and by far the biggest name.
She won the women's 400-meter freestyle at the world swimming championships in September with a time of 4 minutes 9.64 seconds.


Hasidic Student Takes the Witness Stand


Pierce Comes Back to Top Coetzer
Last year, Mary Pierce showed up in the spotlight at Madison Square Garden for all the right reasons.
Instead of having her identity linked to the ongoing family soap opera that starred her estranged and abusive father, Jim, she made a name for herself as a genuine prospect, not a mere curiosity, by defeating Martina Navratilova and Gabriela Sabatini to reach the semifinals of the Virginia Slims Championships.
Last night, after a testy, tremulous beginning, Pierce used her most reliable tactic, brute force, to get past her opening-round opponent, Amanda Coetzer of South Africa.


INSIDE
Popularity and Its Perils
With Governor Whitman's tax-cut politics the rage in other states, she increasingly finds herself on the national stage, yet sometimes at odds with other top Republicans.
Page B1.
Behind the Rate Increase
Although inflation is currently low, the Federal Reserve is pushing up interest rates to head off future trouble.
Economic analysis, page D1.
Ukraine to Be Nuclear -Free
Ukraine's Parliament voted to make the nation nuclear free by removing hurdles to fulfilling two arms control accords.
Page A10.
Stolen Art Bought Back
An Old Master painting, stolen in World War II, was purchased for Poland in a complex deal some experts called ransom.
Page C15.


A Show for Lovers of Idiosyncrasy
IN the United States, Louis Comfort Tiffany designed glass lamps in the shape of luminous squash blossoms, peonies and lilies.
In France, Edgar Brandt shaped iron into gates of lacy, delicate curlicues (example, below).
Though their cultures were different, both designers were modernists who, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, explored new materials and technology to make exquisite designs that rejected the mass production of the Industrial Revolution.


METRO DIGEST
ELDERLY FORAGE IN GARBAGE BINS While shoppers stroll in front of the bustling Key Food supermarket on Seventh Avenue in Park Slope, Brooklyn, elderly people go almost unnoticed as they scavenge for food in the garbage bins just around the corner.
They are not homeless, and they are not entirely destitute.
But they say they are driven to the unappealing, humiliating task by a combination of financial need and fear of the future.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CO-OP SETTLEMENT HAILED AS GAY VICTORY Five years after his companion died and a year after his own death from AIDS, Harry Kirkpatrick has won a long and bitter battle with a Sutton Place co-op board over the right to inherit an apartment the two men shared.
As a result, co-ops throughout the city may find themselves extending to gay, lesbian and other unmarried couples the privilege customarily granted to married couples.
B3.


Mort Pye Is Retiring as Editor Of Star-Ledger after 31 Years
Mort Pye, editor of The Star-Ledger of Newark, New Jersey's largest daily newspaper in circulation, will retire at the end of the year, the paper announced yesterday.
He will be succeeded by James P. Willse, former editor and publisher of The Daily News.
Mr.
Pye, 76, has had one of the longest runs in the nation as a top editor of a major daily newspaper, arriving in the newsroom at The Star-Ledger in 1957 as managing editor and holding the post of editor since 1963.


End of Co-op Dispute Hailed As Victory for Gay Couples
Five years after his companion died and a year after his own death from AIDS, Harry Kirkpatrick has won a long and bitter battle with a Sutton Place co-op board over the right to inherit an apartment the two men shared.
As a result, co-ops throughout New York City may find themselves extending to gay, lesbian and other unmarried couples the privilege customarily granted to married couples: that a surviving partner may automatically inherit the lease to an apartment and shares in a co-op corporation, without the board's consent being required.


CHRONICLE
She may be the best-selling author of the book "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe," but writing has not always come easily to FANNIE FLAGG.
Ms.
Flagg, who received an "Outstanding Achiever" award at the 10th annual dinner for the Lab School of Washington on Monday evening at the Hilton Hotel, told guests about her struggles with dyslexia.
The school educates children with learning disabilities.
Relating how she had always wanted to write but avoided it out of fear, she said she went to a writer's conference in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1976 to hear her idol, Eudora Welty.
During the conference, she entered a short-story contest whose theme was childhood.


White House Gunman May Face Assassination-Attempt Charge
Federal prosecutors are preparing to seek a charge of attempted assassination against Francisco M. Duran, the gunman who raked the White House with semiautomatic rifle fire last month, lawyers following the case said today.
The charge is more serious than the four felony charges currently lodged against Mr.
Duran and could result in a sentence of life in prison if he is convicted.
The indictment is expected to be returned as early as Thursday, said the lawyers, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified.


Wallace Is Rebuked For Taping Interview On Hidden Camera
Mike Wallace and a producer for the CBS News program "60 Minutes" were reprimanded by top CBS news executives yesterday for doing a hidden-camera interview with a freelance writer.
The writer, Karon Haller, is the author of a magazine story about a 65-year-old Connecticut man who has been charged with second-degree manslaughter for helping his 88-year-old father to commit suicide.


New York Marathon Runners Received Needed Medical Help
To the Editor:
In "New York City Marathon Casualty Got Medical Help Too Late" (letter, Nov. 10), Jon Pageler relates how he observed a "tall man" who "appeared punch-drunk" and made "determined progress" as an "official went back to his post," leaving the marathoner "dangerously on his own." Mr.
Pageler wrongly concludes that this competitor, who "beat 3:45" on the clock, was Pierre Marquet, who went into cardiac arrest after crossing the finish line and, despite receiving immediate medical attention, died later.


Blue Chips Gain as Broader Market Slips
After gyrating following the Federal Reserve's interest rate increase, blue-chip stocks steadied yesterday and ended with modest gains.
But the broader market headed in the opposite direction, indicating that many investors remained confused about the economy's prospects.


Toney Talks Tough
JAMES TONEY says he doesn't like ROY JONES Jr., but Jones shouldn't take it personally, because Toney doesn't like anybody.
That controlled malevolence has made Toney the holder of the International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight title, which he will defend against Jones Friday night at the MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.
"It's about business," Toney said yesterday.
"He's in my way, so I've got to get rid of him."


Man in the News; The Victor (Again): Bonn's Long-Distance Runner -- Helmut Kohl
The narrow confirmation of Chancellor Helmut Kohl as head of the German Government with one vote to spare in Parliament on Tuesday put him one step closer to his goal of holding power longer than Konrad Adenauer, his mentor and Germany's first postwar leader, did -- 14 years.
Mr.
Kohl still has two years to go to beat that record.
Whether his shaky coalition Government can hold together for a full four-year term has been the subject of intense speculation since its heavy losses in the Oct. 16 national elections, but Mr.
Kohl, a trained historian who remembers that Adenauer's first election in 1949 was also by a bare majority, says he has no doubts.


Sea Containers Ltd.(SCRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Celtics Trounce Sonics  Dominique Wilkins had his best game as a Celtic with 29 points and 10 rebounds as host Boston pulled away in the third quarter for a 120-93 rout of the Seattle SuperSonics last night.
Wilkins, off to a slow start in his first five games, got the first 6 points of the third quarter as the Celtics rallied from a 53-53 halftime tie.
They outscored Seattle by 39-18 to take a 92-71 lead after the period.
Dino Radja added 28 points and 15 rebounds and Dee Brown scored 15 for Boston. (AP)
76ers 109, Heat 96: Jeff Malone scored 12 of his game-high 31 points in the third quarter to lead host Philadelphia over Miami.
Malone led the Sixers on a 16-4 run late in the third quarter after Miami had closed to 67-66.
He scored 6 points during a 10-0 run, and Dana Barros's 35-foot jumper at the buzzer gave Philadelphia an 88-75 lead heading into the final quarter.
Barros had 24 points and 10 assists.
Glenn Rice led Miami with 24 points.(AP)


Let the Democrats Act More Like Democrats; Women Made Gains
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 11 front-page article on the impact of gender on the 1994 election does not focus on gender in statewide elections, which would give a more realistic portrait of the gains women are making.


For New Top Marketer, G.M. Goes Outside Auto Industry
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had reached outside its ranks -- outside the auto industry, in fact -- to fill what may be one of the toughest jobs in Corporate America: G.M.'s top North American marketing post.
In the position, an executive is responsible for whipping G.M.'s fractious and overlapping car and truck divisions into line, convincing its independent dealers to sell vehicles more effectively and luring back customers burned by quality problems in the past.
And for the job so crucial to G.M.'s success, the company chose an official who has been marketing sunglasses and contact lenses.


'Ooh, Ahh' Stage Left. 'Humbug!' Stage Right.
IN Dickens's "Christmas Carol," Scrooge is as selfish as he is wealthy.
Bob Cratchit, his clerk, is as loving as he is poor.
When a musical version of the story begins previews next Wednesday at the Paramount, on Seventh Avenue at 32d Street in Manhattan, the gulf between the rich and the poor will be instantly evoked in the set designs by Tony Walton and the costumes by William Ivey Long.
Dickens's story takes place in the 1840's.
Mike Ockrent, the show's director, set the musical in the 1880's, with a flashback to the 1830's.
"The 1880's was the time of England's maximum financial power," Mr.
Walton said, "and polarized the comparison between the rich and the poor."
Scrooge's nephew, Fred, lives in a house (at left) with gilt picture frames, voluptuously upholstered furniture and masses of candelabra.
The Cratchit house (above) has drab walls, mismatched furniture and beds no better than pallets.


La-Z-Boy Chair Co. (LZB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


A Master of the Dynamic Image With an Unexpected Guise
Garth Fagan's choreography, usually oblique but also resonant with mood and meaning, has acquired a cult following in recent years.
"Postcards: Pressures and Possibilities," his latest and often witty premiere, easily explains why.
Toward the end of the third segment in the work, Natalie Rogers leans out in profile, as Norwood Pennewell holds her hand above her head.
She arches her back and this shape, recalling a bow without its arrow, impresses itself upon the eye.


Pep Boys-Manny, Moe &amp; Jack (PBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


CHRONICLE
It was lights, camera, action Tuesday evening at the Washington home of COKIE and STEVE ROBERTS as LINDY BOGGS, microphone strapped around her waist, was trailed by a television production crew and photographers.
Mrs.
Boggs, who is Ms.
Roberts's mother, is a capital legend, having arrived in Washington as the wife of Representative Hale Boggs, Democrat of Louisiana, when she was 24, and later serving in that seat herself for 17 years.
Some 150 friends had assembled to celebrate the publication by Harcourt Brace of her book, "Washington Through a Purple Veil: Memoirs of a Southern Woman." Ms.
Roberts, the ABC News correspondent, had already taped an interview for ABC-TV's "Prime Time Live" with her 78-year-old mother.


No Headline
"What's wrong with these apples? What's wrong with this squash? The young people, they won't buy it if it has a nick or a scratch or a bump. They weren't brought up right. My father said people throw out food that's perfectly good." -- CASEY LOSIK, 87, picking through a garbage bin in Brooklyn.  [ B4:1. ]


Bad News? Jets Meet Good Team In Vikings
Sometime soon, say in about four days, the Jets must beat a good team to even think about the playoffs.
They don't get a chance at a bad team again until the day before Christmas, when they visit the Houston Oilers.
That is also the last game of the regular season.


Gingrich Moves Quickly To Put Stamp on House
Representative Newt Gingrich, soon to be the Speaker, said today that Republicans would abolish at least three House committees.
He also disclosed several choices for chairmanships that skipped over seniority for three important posts.
The committees to be scrapped -- Merchant Marine and Fisheries, Post Office and Civil Service, and the District of Columbia -- all have had long histories but control issues that are no longer of great importance to the House.


Film Society to Honor MacLaine in May
The Film Society of Lincoln Center will honor Shirley MacLaine at its annual tribute in May.
Ms.
MacLaine has acted in more than 40 films since Alfred Hitchcock's "Trouble With Harry" in 1955.
She has been nominated for six Academy Awards and won the Oscar for best actress in 1983 for her starring role in James Brooks's "Terms of Endearment."


Macy Chief Will Head DFS Group
Myron E. Ullman, the departing chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, was named yesterday to head DFS Group Ltd., a privately held retailer that operates duty-free luxury goods stores in airports, effective Feb. 1.
The move surprised retailing executives, who said Mr.
Ullman was rumored to be a candidate for a top job at Kmart, the huge discount chain that is struggling to reverse a slide in its profits and market share.


36 Accused of Committing Violent Crimes in Quest to Join Mafia
They are known in the underworld as "wannabes," ambitious criminals who hope to become full-fledged Mafia members by committing violent crimes and sharing their spoils with mob leaders.
Before dawn yesterday, Federal agents and New York City officers swept up 36 men they identified as "wannabes" and accused them of engaging in dozens of hijackings, street robberies and narcotics deals and selling machine guns and automatic weapons to mobsters and other criminals in the city.
In the charges, agents and prosecutors listed a bevy of street names that were commonly used by some defendants, including Sal the Geep, Tony the Nose, Jack Five Hands, Matty Square and Blond Joe.
Wives of two of the men were also arrested.


Bridge
One of the world's greatest players and theorists became an octogenarian last week.
Alvin Roth, who devised the forcing no-trump response to a major opening, the negative double, the unusual no-trump, and many other significant bidding ideas, lived most of his life in New York City but now lives in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was given an 80th birthday party during a tournament in Orlando, Fla., and had an opportunity as South to demonstrate his playing skill on the diagramed deal.
One would expect North-South to play in three no-trump, making 10 or 11 tricks, but Roth and his partner, Bernard Chazen of Tamarac, Fla., were trying to make up lost ground and climbed optimistically to six diamonds.


War on Kurds Hurts Turks in U.S. Eyes
As Turkey's war with Kurdish separatists has become ever more violent and uncompromising, the Government has faced a predicament: the more it succeeds, by its own accounts, the more it loses the tolerance of the United States and other Western allies concerned about its increasingly harsh tactics.
Now, the rift is deeper than ever.


Sports of The Times; Ravitch's Pen Is Simply Not A Collectible
WHEN baseball's labor negotiators meet today in Washington, will any baseball memorabilia collectors ask for the shirt off Donald Fehr's back or the pen out of Richard Ravitch's pocket?
Will the scribbled notes of the Federal mediator, Bill Usery Jr., ever be framed under glass?
The answer to all three questions, of course, is no.
All those union and club-owner grinches who stole the World Series should keep that in mind.
Whenever this labor dispute is eventually settled, keepsakes of the grinches will not be cherished.


Thinking as the Fed Thinks
After yesterday's benign inflation report -- consumer prices edged up a minuscule one-tenth of a percent -- even more people were left scratching their heads over the Fed's big interest rate increase on Tuesday.
What on earth, many asked, were Alan Greenspan, the moderate Republican who serves as Fed chairman, and Alan S. Blinder, the liberal Democrat who is vice chairman, thinking?
It is certainly true that there are few signs that inflation is a problem now.
The broad measures of prices generally look quite reassuring.
Producer prices, as well as the consumer prices that the Labor Department reported yesterday, have been rising slowly.  [ Page D6. ]


World News Briefs; U.S. Prevails at U.N. On Statements on Iraq
After two days of wrangling over half a dozen words, the Security Council today welcomed Iraq's recognition of Kuwait last week, but in less enthusiastic language than most members had favored.
The standoff pitted the United States and Britain against the 13 other members, provoking complaints that the Americans and British had given diplomats them an ultimatum to accept a toned-down document or get none at all.


COMPANY NEWS
AMR CORP., Fort Worth, the airline holding company, has announced that about $1 billion of preferred stock had been tendered under its offer to exchange new debt securities for its series A preferred stock.


Katherine Elliott, 75; Aided Health of Poor
Katherine Elliott, an advocate for simpler and more practical methods of health care for poor people, died on Saturday at the Hospital of St.
John and St.
Elizabeth in London, where she lived.
She was 75.
The cause was cancer, her daughter, Veronica Elliott of Washington, said.


Enterra Corp.(EN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Halloween Past and Present
To The Home Section:
Nowhere in a long article on contemporary Halloween practices ("Halloween: A Big Boom in Boos," Oct. 27) is mention made of the celebration's roots in the ancient Celtic festival of the dead.
Only a companion article, "What Is This Thing Called Home, After All?," alludes to the holiday's association with loss, death, change and renewal.


Legal Setback for F.T.C. in Bid to Block Tobacco Merger
The Federal Trade Commission suffered a setback yesterday in its attempt to block the planned merger of American Tobacco and Brown &amp; Williamson as a Federal judge denied an F.T.C. request for a court order to bar what the Government termed anticompetitive practices by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
The hourlong hearing was marked by repeated skeptical questioning of the commission's lawyer and some sharp statements by the judge, Milton Pollack, in the Federal District Court in Manhattan.
At one point, the judge said that he suspected there was a "cabal" at the American Tobacco Company opposed to the merger.


In a Newark Manor, Remains of the Day
WHAT Edith Wharton's fictional high-society characters did in Manhattan -- fret about social status while lounging on red velvet sofas -- the Ballantine family, of the brewery fortune, did in real life in Newark.
The house where they did so, a 27-room Victorian mansion built in 1885, reopens Dec. 10 after a two-year, $4 million renovation.
The mansion, a national historic landmark, has been a part of the Newark Museum since 1937 and serves as the decorative arts wing of the museum's four-building complex.
Its renovation added four new period rooms (for a total of nine) and six new galleries.


Mitsubishi Plays Down Its Mortgage Problems
Not many publicly listed companies here speak candidly with stock analysts, so when the Mitsubishi Estate Company invited some analysts for discussions in recent weeks, they attended eagerly.
Mitsubishi Estate's officials talked about the state of the battered property market here, the company's slowly recovering occupancy rates and signs that the condominium market may be rebounding.
But the most important -- and revealing -- aspect of the meetings was what the company chose not to say: In New York, an affiliated company was disclosing in a routine Government filing that Rockefeller Center, the trophy property in Manhattan that Mitsubishi Estate has controlled since 1989, was in serious financial straits.
The filing made it clear that Mitsubishi Estate and its partners may default on the mortgage on the property.


Caesars World Inc.(CAW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Some American Indian art is still afordable


Rouse Co.(ROUS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Folk Ritual of the Mayans, Gentle With One Exception
Julio Mateo Tecum, the director of Grupo Cultural Uk'Ux Pop Wuj, seeks to preserve folk dances that reflect the Mayan influence on Guatemalan culture.
Probably only anthropologists can ascertain how scrupulously authentic the company's stagings are.
But this troupe from Chicicastenango certainly offered a fascinating and artistically persuasive program in its American debut on Tuesday night at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center.
The presentation was part of the Southern Exposure series sponsored by the arts center and Pan American Musical Research Inc.
It was an evening of gentle dancing to live and recorded music for flutes and percussion.
Many steps were variations on graceful hops.
Performers in monkey masks became well-mannered, good-natured simians.
A man in a bull mask hopped companionably with dancers whose dignified masks made them resemble venerable kings.
Another scene inspired by animals involved fleet dancers in deer masks.
A corn-planting ritual looked joyous, and couples in a courtship ceremony expressed affection with an endearing shyness.


Hechinger Co. (HECHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Jake Dengel Is Dead; Character Actor, 61
Jake Dengel, a veteran character actor, died on Monday at the Group One Hospice in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
He was 61 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, said Roy Brocksmith, a friend.


Let the Democrats Act More Like Democrats; Divided We Stand
To the Editor:
I listened to President Clinton's post-election news conference (front page, Nov. 10).
It was striking to me, a European-born American, how he dwelt on the message that "the American people" sent on Election Day and how he planned to heed this message.


No Plans for Soon-to-Be Former Governor
It has come to this for Gov. Mario M. Cuomo.
"Governor Jim Florio called me yesterday," Mr.
Cuomo explained to a radio interviewer yesterday about a call on Tuesday.
"He says, 'So Mario, what's to be, here?' I said I think finally I'm going to have a legacy. Jan. 1, I don't have a place to live. I don't have a job. I'm going to be the first homeless, unemployed, former 12-year governor in the history of the state. By Jan. 9, I can picture myself all huddled, freezing on a cold pavement, you know, chilling my tush, telling some guy with a seven-day growth of beard, 'I don't want to go to your lousy shelter.' "


Rose on Rose
The ultimate football fan -- a man who calls football his favorite sport both as a player and a spectator -- sat at a back table yesterday at New York's newest eponymous football emporium, and solemnly declared:
"I am baseball's greatest ambassador."


Bosnia Chief Asks U.N.  To Act to Halt Serbian Drive
Bosnia's President appealed to the United Nations and NATO today for immediate action to halt an offensive by nationalist Serbs on Bihac, a Muslim enclave in northwestern Bosnia that was designated a United Nations "safe area" last year.
United Nations troops reported heavy shelling and evidence of infantry clashes around the broad Bihac pocket.
But no significant military action was reported inside a zone that United Nations commanders have tentatively sketched out as the so-called safe area, a United Nations military spokesman said.


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bishops Vote to Expand Women's Roles in Church
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops voted overwhelmingly today to explore alternative ways for women to attain leadership positions in the church, while acknowledging that sexism persists among "some members."
"We commit ourselves to enhancing the participation of women in every possible aspect of church life," the bishops said in their first major policy statement on women since Pope John Paul II ruled out women's priestly ordination in May.


Let the Democrats Act More Like Democrats
To the Editor:
The 1994 Republican landslide occurred because a small group of swing voters voted more Republican than they usually do.
To recover, the Democrats must deal not only with the anger of those voters, but with the apathy of the 10-times-larger group that didn't vote.


Mayor Announces New Assault on Graffiti, Citing Its Toll on City
In his continuing assault on so-called quality-of-life crimes, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday announced a sweeping program to use more than a dozen city agencies to combat graffiti.
The initiative ranges from establishing a 24-hour police telephone line to report graffiti vandalism to a new Cultural Affairs Department program in which murals would be used as alternative outlets of expression for graffiti artists.


Economic Scene; Some creative ways Republicans could deliver on the contract.
FASTER than a speeding bullet, more powerful than a locomotive, the new Congressional Republican majority is about to sweep away despised taxes, smash the pork barrel and balance the budget, all while leaping tall buildings in a single bound.
That, at least, is the promise of Newt Gingrich, Richard Armey, Phil Gramm and other "new" Republicans who have taken the election as a mandate for a conservative revolution.
The real question is how far they are willing to go -- or can go -- to push an agenda that promises everything without explaining how it could be delivered.
While numerous variations are possible, two core strategies seem most plausible.


The Children of Guantanamo
What a difference three months make.
Lawton Chiles, a Democrat, has been safely re-elected as Governor of Florida.
Fidel Castro is again preventing his people from setting out in rafts, and a U.S.-occupied Haiti is no longer sending forth masses of terrified refugees.
As a result, the refugee question has cooled as a political issue in Florida and the Clinton Administration is testing the waters for another refugee policy U-turn.
For 28 years Cuban refugees arriving in the U.S. were automatically admitted under a double standard that distinguished them from other people fleeing government oppression and economic collapse.
But in August the Clinton Administration began intercepting Cubans at sea, taking them to the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base and proclaiming that they would never be admitted to the U.S.


Drug Screening to Be Required for Some Welfare Recipients
A new work-for-welfare plan by the Giuliani administration will require single, childless people who say they cannot work for medical reasons to undergo a medical exam and drug test in order to get benefits, officials said yesterday.
The screening will be part of a plan, set to begin in January, to require thousands of able-bodied adults who receive benefits to work doing jobs like snow removal, street cleaning and park maintenance.


Aftermath of a Florida Tornado


Webber Finds Way to Escape a Trap
News of Chris Webber's signing with the Golden State Warriors last night arrived just in time to quash the growing notion that for the second time in an otherwise first-rate basketball career, he appeared to have called an unfortunate timeout.
Just when he seemed to exorcise the one that cost Michigan a last shot at the 1993 national title, Webber was again trapped in a corner, fumbling for some way out of a spot that made him look driven by power and greed more than the desire to win.


Offer Made At Gypsum Concern
The National Gypsum Company's chairman, C. D. Spangler Jr., offered yesterday to buy the company for $940 million, or $43.50 a share.
But analysts ridiculed the price as far too low, and investors bid up the shares $12.0625, to $44.8125, in Nasdaq trading.
That price, however, represented a sharp increase from the $12.50 a share at which National Gypsum was valued 16 months ago, when the company emerged from bankruptcy protection.
At that time, the senior creditors and the company's management, since replaced, told other creditors, including asbestos claimants, that the company was not worth a penny more.


Norville Downie, 83, Collector of Beetles
Norville Morgan Downie, a former psychology professor whose lifelong hobby of collecting beetles resulted in an extensive contribution to the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, died on Nov. 9 at the Home Hospital in Lafayette, Ind., where he lived.
He was 83.
He died of cancer, said his son, J. Paul Downie of Fort Wayne, Ind.


Iraq Recognized Kuwait's Borders in '63
To the Editor:
A Nov. 11 front-page article says if Iraq carries out its pledge to accept Kuwait's sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence, this will be its first formal recognition of an independent Kuwait.


Embracing the New Family
To The Home Section:
Cathy R. Tempelsman's article ("What Is This Thing Called Home, After All?"), regarding a divorced woman establishing a new home for herself and her daughter, was so patronizing and misguided that it cannot pass without comment.


History By the Bin
ANTIQUE hunters need never leave New York.
Instead of heading up the Hudson Valley, people ready to add an old-fashioned touch to their homes can go straight to the Architectural Salvage Warehouse, at 337 Berry Street (at South Fifth Street), in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.


Medtronic Inc.(MDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Indian Art Is Still Affordable
PRICES for American Indian art may have rocketed recently to stratospheric levels, but many creative items of excellent quality by artists old and new remain affordable in the well-stocked galleries in Santa Fe and Taos, N.M.
Santa Fe and the surrounding area have recently attracted the greatest concentration of dealers in old and new Indian artifacts of any place in the United States.
But well-priced works and even some bargains are found throughout the country, sometimes far from where specialized merchants congregate.


Whitman: A 'Natural' in Helping the G.O.P.; The Governor Looks Back, and Ahead, for New Jersey and for Her Party
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman called John G. Rowland to congratulate him on winning the Connecticut governorship last week, but Mr.
Rowland was on his way to his first news conference after the victory, and he didn't have time for small talk.
"I know they're going to ask about the pensions, what about the pensions," Mr.
Rowland rattled into the phone to his fellow Republican in New Jersey.


Memorex Telex N.V. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knicks And Davis Finally Find Their Shots
The Knicks gave their morale a lift tonight by giving the Los Angeles Lakers a whipping.
Snapping a two-game losing streak on the road, New York dominated the Lakers, 110-89, at the Forum.
The Knicks (4-2) led by as many as 26 points in the third quarter, giving the late-arriving crowd of 13,630 a reason to leave early.


You Say Puh-TAH-Kee . . .
David Letterman complained at the beginning of his show yesterday that he was feeling a little down.
"For some reason," he said, "I just can't get Governor-elect George Pataki to return my call."


Bulls' Coach Fined
Chicago Bulls Coach PHIL JACKSON, who called Referee HUE HOLLINS's performance in Saturday's game with the Dallas Mavericks "brutish" and "irresponsible," was fined $10,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday.
Jackson's remarks came in the wake of Hollins's calls against SCOTTIE PIPPEN in the Bulls' 124-120 overtime loss to the Mavericks.
After a team practice in Chicago on Monday, Jackson said Hollins came into Saturday's game with an attitude problem.


Dismissal of Charges Is Urged For 3 in Chopper Shootdown
An Air Force judge recommended today that charges of dereliction of duty be dismissed against three radar plane officers implicated in the shooting down of two Army helicopters over northern Iraq last April.
The judge, acting as an investigator in the case, recommended that the charges stand against the senior director of the mission crew on the Awacs radar plane, Capt.
Jim Wang.
A fifth officer, Lieut.
Joseph Halcli, should receive administrative punishment, the investigator said.


Let the Democrats Act More Like Democrats; Clinton's Detractors
To the Editor:
Re "Dr. Fell's Election" (editorial, Nov. 10): I disagree that we cannot tell why people don't like Bill Clinton.
Obviously the attitude of the media, almost from his inauguration, has played an important role.


White House in Struggle To Take Back the Agenda
Inside an executive mansion fairly swarming with political advice-givers and abuzz with strategy, the burning question these days is not just what President Clinton will do with a Republican Congress, but what he will do with a Democratic White House.
It is also the toughest question.
And a week after Mr.
Clinton and his counsels lost command of the national legislature and any claim to a political mandate, they are still searching for an answer.


Fine-Tuning the Jeffries Case
The Supreme Court has called for more litigation in the Leonard Jeffries case, offering an opportunity to leap above past administrative squabbles and focus on the core issue: Can the City University of New York remove Professor Jeffries from his administrative post as chairman of the school's black studies department solely because of his racist speech?
Or would such a demotion violate his First Amendment rights to free speech?
Professor Jeffries had enjoyed his chairmanship for two decades when, in 1991, he delivered an off-campus speech denouncing "rich Jews" as slave traders and conspirators with the Mafia in Hollywood to defame African-Americans.
The university did not disturb the professor's tenure but it did take away his department chairmanship, a special credential.
He sued, persuading lower courts that even this sanction violated his constitutional rights, and the courts ordered him reinstated.


Report Urges Disposing of Plutonium by Encasing in Glass
With plutonium from military and civilian nuclear programs piling up and increasing the risk of bomb proliferation, a loose coalition of environmental groups suggested today that factories might be built to package it in huge blocks of glass, making it difficult to steal.
The idea was advanced in a report that even the author, Arjun Makhijani of the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, said was incomplete and would probably require revisions.
But he and other proponents said that five years after the end of the cold war, policy makers seemed paralyzed by having to choose among unattractive options.


After a 55-year absence, Maxwell House coffee embraces the Times Square market again.
MORE than five decades after advertising for Maxwell House last overlooked Times Square, the coffee brand will drop back into the neighborhood.
General Foods USA, which markets Maxwell House, plans to unveil an extravagant neon billboard -- the type that makers of outdoor signs call spectaculars -- on New Year's Eve, during the hullabaloo greeting the arrival of 1995.
The ad will join others on the exterior of the Marriott Marquis Hotel on Broadway; it will be erected on the building's 46th Street side, around the corner from gaudy, glitzy billboards for Eastman Kodak and Hertz.


Essay; Get Off the Floor
At a recent lunch for Old Nixon Hands hosted by Len Garment, someone noted that the mood in our former stomping grounds was bleak; for days after the election, Bill Clinton had been sulking and brooding.
"Gee," piped up John Ehrlichman, "can you imagine working for a President who sits in the Oval Office brooding and sulking?"


Bond Prices Fall Despite Inflation Data
Despite an increase in the Consumer Price Index that was smaller than expected, the prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the first time this week.
The report on consumer prices, a closely followed measure of inflation, sent long-bond prices up a half- point in the morning, but persistent fears that inflation could still accelerate quickly turned those modest gains into sharp losses by midday.


Giuliani Back on Political Offensive After Setback
Momentarily chastened after losing his gamble in the race for governor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is back on the political offensive, seeking to use George E. Pataki's refusal to call him to showcase himself as the champion of New York City.
The Mayor's new theme has emerged gradually, born out of Mr.
Pataki's decision to leave Mr.
Giuliani waiting at the phone like a spurned suitor, aides say, as well as from the Mayor's dislike of being humbled.
"He has a problem with meekness," said one adviser.


Keep Winning, Beard Says
Butch Beard is facing the same situation he was facing a week ago.
His team is coming off a key victory, but the Nets must follow up the task against the Washington Bullets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
The Bullets beat the Nets in Landover, Md., on Friday night.
"We lose, it makes last night's game mean nothing," Beard said.
"We must see if we can come out with the same intensity."


The Pop Life
Ferry's 7-Year Album
If the songs on Bryan Ferry's new album, "Mamouna" (Virgin), sound fragile and overwrought, it's because they are.


Embracing the New Family
To The Home Section:
Cathy R. Tempelsman's article ("What Is This Thing Called Home, After All?"), regarding a divorced woman establishing a new home for herself and her daughter, was so patronizing and misguided that it cannot pass without comment.


A Little Dirt for Your Studio Loft?
SOHO is not only for artists; it's for gardeners, too.
Smith &amp; Hawken is coming to downtown on Nov. 25, with doorhandles made from a garden fork and spade (at left) and the smell of narcissus in the air.
"In New York, there's a great longing in any way, shape or form, for gardening, whether it's container gardening on a balcony, a fire escape, a front stoop or a small plot of land behind a town house," said Bonnie Dahan, the executive vice president of merchandising and design at Smith &amp; Hawken in Mill Valley, Calif.


Museum of Modern Art Ends Troubled Search for a Chief
The Museum of Modern Art announced yesterday that it had finally found a new director, after a sometimes messy 14-month search.
He is Glenn D. Lowry, the 40-year-old director of the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto and a specialist in Islamic art.
He takes over on July 1, 1995.
Mr.
Lowry is a surprise choice to succeed Richard E. Oldenburg, who announced in September 1993 that he planned to retire.
Since then, several candidates had turned down offers from the museum, and the names of many others had been bandied about.
Mr.
Lowry's was not one of them.


Traders Can't Shuffle Their Decks
A group of high-profile men gathered here this week to try to plot their separate courses for next year, but a large amount of their attention has been focused, figuratively at least, on coming events in Washington.
They're not politicians but general managers of major league baseball teams.
"Right now there's so much that people don't know," Terry Ryan of the Minnesota Twins said.
"You don't know what route you're headed. I'm sure we will not be getting the answers here. The people working in Washington with Mr. Usery will tell us."


Appeals Court Reinstates Pension Suit Against Crane
A Federal appeals court panel in St.
Louis has reinstated a lawsuit that accuses the Crane Company, a diversified industrial manufacturer, of deliberately dodging the pension obligations of a former subsidiary, the CF&amp;I Steel Corporation.
The lawsuit was filed nearly four years ago by Stanley D. Rabushka of St.
Louis under the False Claims Act, a Federal statute that permits citizens to file civil fraud cases on behalf of the Government and to share in any money recovered as a result of those cases.
A trial court judge in St.
Louis dismissed the case in June 1993, ruling that it was based solely on already public information and thus was barred under the terms of the False Claims Act.


Playing the Numbers Game, Ownership Style
In an extraordinary group rant yesterday morning, the National Hockey League's assembled general managers expressed the usual arguments in unusually strident tones.
They used sarcasm and anger to convey their frustration with the players union and portions of the news media who are skeptical when the 26 teams say they lost a total of $37.6 million last season.
Only a radically altered collective bargaining agreement, with restrictions on wages, can save the remainder of the already-damaged season and the future of the business, they said.
Soon, they may hold their collective breath until they turn blue, or they may huff and puff and blow the league down.


ARISTIDE DECIDES TO QUIT AS PRIEST
Bowing to pressure from the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy here and in Rome, Haiti's President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has agreed to leave the priesthood, Government officials and members of the clergy said today.
The decision culminates years of tension between Father Aristide and his superiors over his criticism of the Haitian church and his espousal of a leftist liberation theology.
Those strains, which grew when he governed as President in 1991, have resurfaced since he returned to office last month in the reversal of a military coup.


Caesar Nobiletti, 89, Real Estate Lawyer
Caesar Nobiletti, a New York real estate lawyer associated with a number of well-known building projects, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
The continuation of a front-page article yesterday about the latest interest-rate increase by the Federal Reserve included scrambled passages in some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Ukraine Votes to Become a Nuclear-Free Country
The Ukrainian Parliament put aside its longstanding reservations and voted overwhelmingly today to make their nation nuclear-free, removing roadblocks to carrying out two major arms control agreements.
In a move that the United States eagerly sought for some time, the Parliament agreed to sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, which pledges its signers, with the exception of the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France, to rid themselves of all nuclear weapons.


Big Headache: Meggett's Flu
Giants running back David Meggett was sent home from practice today because of a severe case of the flu.
Meggett's illness is just the first of a long list of ailing Giants.
It is unclear whether Meggett will miss the game on Monday against the Oilers in Houston, although it would probably take more than a flu bug to keep him from playing.
Still, he was in such bad shape today that he simply went home to rest and couldn't practice.


Market Place; A toy maker's improbable rise in stock price continues unabated.
HERE we go again.
The stock of a little toy company that makes impulse-buy toys -- the cheap ones near the checkout counter -- has taken off once more.
Its sales and profits are zooming upward, but nowhere near as rapidly as its stock.
Under whatever name, the company, now called EXX Inc., has been one of the more amazing performers of this or any other year.
In the third quarter of 1994, when it was called the SFM Corporation, its stock price zoomed 250 percent on the strength of stunningly good earnings it reported for the second quarter.


As Some Sob, Hasid Recalls Fateful Ride
The 18-year-old Hasidic student who was so badly injured by a gunshot wound to his head that his doctors at first did not expect him to survive hobbled into a courtroom yesterday and testified against the man the prosecution says shot him on the Brooklyn Bridge last March.
Some spectators sobbed as the student, Nachum Sasonkin, holding a cane in one hand, walked slowly into the courtroom in State Supreme Court in Manhattan where the defendant, Rashid Baz, is on trial for the shooting on the bridge.
One student was killed and three were wounded in the attack.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday with an article about reaction on the Upper West Side to the election results misstated the occupation of one resident, Matt Fried.
As the article said, he is a psychologist, not a psychiatrist.


Israel Is Permitting Harsher Interrogation of Muslim Militants
A burst of attacks that killed nearly 30 Israelis in recent weeks has led the Government to permit harsher interrogations of suspected Muslim militants.
The loosening of past restrictions drew accusations today from a human rights group that the authorities had adopted the methods of their enemies.
Justice Minister David Libai said this week that a Cabinet committee on the Shin Bet security service had "taken a decision to strengthen the ability of the Shin Bet to deal with the wave of terror by Hamas and Islamic Holy War."


Heavy Rain Floods Florida's Winter Crops
Heavy rains from a tropical storm over the last two days have flooded tens of thousands of acres of farmland in Florida and destroyed a large part of its winter crop.
The storm, which has left at least 350 people dead in Haiti, according to radio reports, swept slowly across southern and central parts of Florida today before it moved into the Atlantic Ocean this evening.
Heavy rains subsided across much of the state as the storm, designated Tropical Storm Gordon, continued its northeastern course.


Exxon Leads Signers Of Indonesia Gas Deal
The Exxon Corporation and Pertamina, Indonesia's national oil company, have agreed to develop one of the largest offshore natural gas deposits in the world.
The project, which Exxon says will eventually require as much as $40 billion in investment, was announced here today as President Clinton turned to business issues on his last day in Indonesia, after the conclusion of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum here.


Medicaid Myths Linger In Wake of Campaign
CALL them the Medicaid Myths.
They were threaded through the New York governor's campaign.
They emerge every year in Albany at budget time.
They dominate the public debate about Medicaid.
And they are built on misunderstandings, confusion and a few politically useful distortions.
Since Medicaid accounts for about a fifth of the state's spending, Governor-elect George E. Pataki will have to cut it considerably to help to close the looming $4 billion budget gap, especially if he really does begin to lower taxes.


Baker Hughes Inc.(BHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT HOME WITH: David Mamet; Thoughts From A Man's Man
YOU may not think of David Mamet, the prolific author of angrified and angrifying plays and films, as an insecure fellow.
But there was a day not so long ago, he says, that in an agonizing fit of self-doubt, he sought out his wife, Rebecca Pidgeon, an actress and singer, and in a sort of desperate way, proclaimed his consuming love for her.
What, he asked, could have persuaded her to marry him, save him from himself, miserable wretch that he obviously was?
"She looked at me," Mr.
Mamet says, shifting his mimicry from his own earnest pleading to his wife's deadpan.
"And she said, 'Well, I don't know, you seemed like a nice guy.' "


Study of Death Wins A National Book Award
Choosing the least controversial book from among volumes that re-examined everything from the Tet offensive of the Vietnam War to the appointment of Justice Clarence M. Thomas to the Supreme Court, the National Book Award judges last night conferred the 1994 prize for nonfiction on "How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter" by Sherwin B. Nuland.
The book, published by Alfred A. Knopf, is a doctor's demythologizing of the fact of death.
It was chosen over four other books, including "Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas" (Houghton Mifflin), by Jill Abramson and Jane Mayer, which had been nominated before it was published last week.


A Musical on the Hopes of Youth And Disappointments of Adulthood
There's a lot of talk in "Three Postcards," the musical by Craig Lucas and Craig Carnelia at the Circle Repertory Company, about the elusiveness of reality.
One character, inspired by a magazine article about the mutability of subatomic particles, speculates, "Wouldn't it be incredible if all the secrets of the universe were aware when we started to get close to them, and they changed?"
Now, under this theory, it seems possible that once the lights go down on an evening's performance of this show, it turns into something else altogether: something richer, darker and more mysterious than what has been provided onstage.
As it is, audiences will have to make do with mild-mannered, minor variations on themes that Mr.
Lucas, the gifted author of "Reckless" and "Prelude to a Kiss," has explored with greater depth and imagination elsewhere.


CLINTON PLEDGES TO PUSH FOR VOTE ON TRADE ACCORD
President Clinton and a parade of the fallen and the survivors in Congress vowed today to plow ahead with House and Senate votes on a world trade agreement after Thanksgiving despite some bipartisan opposition.
They argued that if the votes were put off until next year, the agreement, which took 12 years to negotiate with 123 nations, would certainly die.


Echoes From All Over In the Songs of Basia
If there is such a thing as an international style of adult contemporary pop, the music of Basia comes as close as anything to embodying it.
A thirtysomething pop-jazz singer and songwriter from Poland, Basia has lived outside of London for the last 13 years and sings with an accent that is part British and part Eastern European.
Her music is a polished compendium of influences that range from the Brazilian bossa nova of Joao and Astrud Gilberto to the Motown anthems of Nick Ashford and Valerie Simpson to the sleek pop-funk of Kool and the Gang.
This recipe, refined by Basia and her songwriting collaborator and producer, Danny White, also brings in jazz-fusion harmonies and brass, saxophone and electric keyboard solos.
At its best, it yields an all-purpose pop that is sophisticated and tuneful while also seeming second-hand and anonymous.


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Journal; Newt Envy
Those of us who did not vote for the "Contract With America" have a new addiction: foaming at the mouth about Newt Gingrich.
I will not bore you by regurgitating the familiar reasons; they're already the new liberal catechism, and rightly so.
But addictions of any kind are defeating: they leave you frozen in place.
Isn't it time to get past the fulminations and examine why Mr.
Gingrich drives his adversaries particularly insane?
Not even the better-known right-wing Republicans panting to be President arouse the passions the Speaker-to-be does.


A Lottery for Prime Real Estate


Washington Memo; G.O.P.'s Tax Cut Theory: Bonanza or Bust?
With a conviction that approaches religious fervor, many Republicans hold that certain kinds of tax cuts would significantly strengthen the economy.
People and companies would earn more money as a consequence, they say.
And the taxes paid on that additional income would offset the revenue lost from the lower tax rates, completely or at least in part.
In the budget lexicon, this is what is called dynamic scoring.


Fox Network Launching Challenge to PGA Tour
If it succeeds, the Fox television network's bold foray into the world of golf -- in essence a plan to underwrite and broadcast an eight-tournament, $25 million World Tour starting in 1995 -- could alter the balance of power in the sport and force the PGA Tour to significantly change its structure and the way it does business.
Plans for the new tour will be announced today at a news conference at Sherwood Country Club in Thousand Oaks, Calif., site of Greg Norman's tournament, the Franklin Funds Shark Shootout.
What is known is that Fox has entered into a 10-year agreement with Executive Sports Inc., a management company based in Delray Beach, Fla., that already operates some 30 tournaments worldwide, and that Norman is one of the driving forces behind the World Tour concept.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  INDONESIA IS PRESSED ON RIGHTS  The United States and Indonesia announced $40 billion in joint projects, but President Clinton warned President Suharto that relations would ultimately be based on better human rights there.
A1


Misplaced Fears About the Fed
The Federal Reserve's decision this week to raise interest rates in order to ward off inflation was, as expected, criticized from all corners.
Manufacturers warned that higher interest rates would drive up costs and drive away consumers.
Labor unions predicted layoffs.
Politicians feared disgruntled voters.
The Fed, these critics argued, ought not to slow down the economy when inflation is low, seven million Americans cannot find jobs and tens of millions more cannot find work that pays good wages.
Besides, they complained, driving up interest rates amounts to an unfair assault on vulnerable workers and an unseemly giveaway to rich bondholders.


Study Finds Cholesterol-Lowering Drug May Save Lives
For the first time, a study has found that lowering cholesterol not only reduces the risk of heart attack but also saves lives.
Until now, large studies of cholesterol-lowering drugs have shown that they can reduce deaths from heart attacks but not the overall death rate.
People who lowered their cholesterol levels with drugs died at higher rates of other causes, like cancer or violence or suicide.
The connection was a mystery, but the numbers sparked a bitter debate over whether cholesterol lowering was worthwhile.


Police Force In Greenport Is Off Duty For Good
The local police made their last patrols today in this rustic village of 2,100 people on Long Island's East End.
The people they had sworn to protect voted by almost 2 to 1 on Tuesday to throw them out of work, abolishing the troubled nine-officer department, which has been criticized as poorly trained, inactive and incompetent.
"It hurts," said Sgt.
Raymond E. Van Etten, the acting police chief, who was busy today collecting radios and other equipment.
"But it's a democracy. The people decided what was best for the village, and I support their decision."


Rikers Is Tense As Cuts Loom, And Official Warns of Crisis
With tensions smoldering among the 16,000 detainees in the Rikers Island prison complex, the chairman of the city's Board of Correction warned yesterday that the Giuliani administration's plan for further budget cuts of 1,300 prison guards and social workers was fostering conditions similar to those in 1990, when inmates rioted.
"The current Rikers situation could get that bad or worse," said William H. Booth, chairman of the nine-member independent board that monitors prison conditions and which itself would be eliminated under $31 million in new budget cuts being proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Let the Democrats Act More Like Democrats; Before Dr. Fell
To the Editor:
"Dr. Fell's Election" (editorial, Nov. 10) proposes "the Fell Factor" ("I do not love thee, Dr. Fell. / The reason why I cannot tell . . .") as a convenient tag for the attitude toward President Clinton that voters evinced on Nov. 8.
You call such indistinct misgivings a phenomenon "first described three centuries ago by the poet Thomas Brown."


Man Shot Trying to Stop a Fight
A 34-year-old Brooklyn construction worker trying to end a fight between two pregnant women on a Bushwick sidewalk yesterday was critically wounded by a gunshot, the police said.
Witnesses said that the man, Deosaran Chatteran, was working at a construction site in the neighborhood about 11:45 A.M. when he saw the two women arguing in front of the building at 293 Jefferson Street, said a police spokeswoman, Detective Kim Royster.
The witnesses said that when the pregnant women started to grapple, Mr.
Chatteran tried to stop the fight.


Falcons Suspend Rison
The Atlanta Falcons suspended ANDRE RISON yesterday for one game, saying the wide receiver has repeatedly violated team rules.
Rison, a four-time Pro Bowl selection, is the team's second-leading receiver this year with 59 catches.
He had complained a week ago of being used too much as a decoy. (AP)


Government Coalition Collapses in Ireland
The two-year-old coalition Government of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds collapsed today, apparently forcing a general election before Christmas to select a new Parliament and Government.
Mr.
Reynolds had been striving to preserve his Government for five days, defending himself against charges of arrogance and deviousness made by his coalition partners in the Labor Party, which is led by Dick Spring.
Mr.
Reynolds had argued that a change of Government would impede efforts toward peace in Northern Ireland.


Pacificare Health Systems Inc.(PHSYA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Show, Two Shows, Old Shows, New Shows
TNT is in the midst of a Seuss-a-Bration (its phrase), offering through mid-December what is billed as "the most complete collection of Dr. Seuss animated features ever gathered for television." Not so coincidentally, the Turner effort is being coordinated with marketing strategies to sell Seuss books and new lines of clothing for children.
As it happens, the new Cat in the Hat Balloon in this year's Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade is sponsored by Random House in association with TNT and Esprit clothing.
All of which carries more than a whiff of paradox regarding a writer whose most famous tale, "How the Grinch Stole Christmas," ended with the astute realization: "Maybe Christmas doesn't come from a store. Maybe Christmas perhaps means a little bit more." But then Dr.
Seuss himself, really Theodor (Ted) S. Geisel, the son of immigrants from Germany -- Seuss was his mother's family name -- spent a good part of his professional life in advertising.
It was he who came up with the immortal (figured in ad years) line: "Quick, Henry, the Flit."


Longs Drug Stores Corp.(LDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Events: Design Shows, Antiques, Bridge Walk
Art and Style  Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (212) 472-1180.
Two shows, "Art at the Armory" and "Modernism: 1860-1960 -- a Century of Style and Design," will be open today and tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $10.


Giuliani's Endorsement
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 10 account of New York voter turnout states that on election night Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's media adviser, David Garth, and I "suggested that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of the Governor may well have backfired, allowing Mr. Pataki to rile upstate voters by casting the contest as an upstate-downstate struggle."


When the Window Is the Great View
IT'S no mystery why curtains are often compared with fashion.
A century ago, curtains were literally an interior decorator's version of a Worth gown -- ruched, furbelowed and spangled, built of countless yards of costly damask and layers of petticoats.
So it comes as no surprise that, as in fashion, curtains are available in couture and ready-to-wear varieties, some costing thousands of dollars, others little more than a double CD.


Teacher in Bronx Is Accused of Molesting Student
A Bronx junior high school gym teacher was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing a 13-year-old student in his office, the police said.
The teacher, Leonard Quartararo, 53, of 1373 Bronx River Avenue in Hunts Point, grabbed the boy's crotch in the incident, which occurred Nov. 9, the police said.
Investigators said the teen-ager had gone to the office to protest an earlier incident in which Mr.
Quartararo had touched his buttocks.


Arbor Drugs Inc.(ARBR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Love and the Art Dealer: Never Too Late
WHEN Eugene V. Thaw first encountered American Indian art as a graduate student at Columbia University in 1948, "it was a nonevent," he said.
"I paid no attention to it."
These days, Mr.
Thaw and his wife, Clare, live here in what many people call the land of the first Americans, surrounded by the extraordinary objects of their most recent collecting interest: 600 surrealist Eskimo masks, geometric-patterned Pueblo pots, Rothko-like Navajo blankets and colorfully beaded Blackfoot shirts.


Thomson Will Buy Medstat for $339 Million
The Thomson Corporation, a Canadian company whose media empire includes The Globe and Mail in Toronto and American Banker, said yesterday that it would acquire a medical data provider for $339 million in cash.
Thomson will pay $27 a share for the Medstat Group of Ann Arbor, Mich., a developer of health care information data bases and related software.


Nyakizu Journal; And the Church Refuge Became a Killing Field
The lush, green rolling hills are lifeless.
Square, mud-wall houses are abandoned.
No one is working in the terraced fields.
The only sounds are the slight rustle of leaves and an occasional bird.
It is the silence of death.
Many of the former inhabitants were Tutsi, massacred in April.
Other now-empty houses belonged to the Hutu "killers," as one current resident, herself a Hutu, described them, or to the killers' relatives.
They have not dared come back.


General Employment
Shares of General Employment Enterprises Inc., a national employment agency based in Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., jumped 41 percent yesterday on the American Stock Exchange.
The company posted a quarterly gain of 15 cents a share compared with a loss a year earlier.


Executive Changes
HARCOURT BRACE &amp; CO., Chestnut Hill, Mass., a unit of Harcourt General Inc., promoted Robert R. Simons, vice president and chief financial officer, to senior vice president.
NABISCO INC., Parsippany, N.J., named H. F. Powell executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Jazz Times Convention in New York included a misstatement from the organizers about admission to an event tomorrow night at Fez, an East Village club, featuring Rodney Kendrick, Bhaki Mseleku, Mark Whitfield and Django Bates and Human Chain.
It is open to conventiongoers only, not to the public.


G.O.P. Military Overseer Assails Troop Readiness
Representative Floyd D. Spence, a South Carolina Republican in line to be chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, has fired the opening shot in a new round of partisan battles over whether American troops are combat ready.
In a stinging letter to Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch on Tuesday, Mr.
Spence said that "U.S. military units are caught in the early stages of a downward readiness spiral that shows no prospect of easing in the foreseeable future."


Carjack-Killing Defendant Offers Alibi on the Stand
Edward L. Summers, the Bronx premedical student accused of stealing a Jeep in a suburban mall and killing its driver, took the stand in his own defense today and told how he had been terrorized into taking part in the crime by a shadowy figure named Dino who had once saved him from a street fight.
Mr.
Summers said he told Dino he did not know how to steal a car.
But Dino, he said, told him all he had to do was "show the gun," adding menacingly, "I didn't hesitate when those guys were going to" beat him last summer.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the Personal Health column yesterday, about clinical trials of drugs, included an incomplete sentence.
It should have read, "The use of pla cebos is particularly important in trials of experimental drugs because about one-third of patients improve just because they are being studied."


Court Blocks New Rule on Immigration
Saying it raised serious Constitutional questions, a Federal judge today temporarily blocked California officials from enforcing the heart of Proposition 187, the much-debated immigration-control measure the state's voters overwhelmingly passed last week.
Judge William Matthew Byrne Jr. of Federal District Court here found that the proposition, which would deny most government services to undocumented immigrants, might cause undue hardships and also might pre-empt law-enforcement powers reserved for the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Keeping Score, One Pound at a Time
You see him driving the lane, his cargo jiggly, moving a little faster than you think might be safe speed, his heft, his girth, his width and height giving rise to the thought that a sign should be affixed to his bulging shirt: "Oversize Load."
This is John Williams -- all 300 pounds of him -- advancing to the basket, working out with the Indianapolis Pacers.
He is being given a chance, perhaps his last, to salvage what was once one of the most promising but gluttonous careers in the National Basketball Association.


New Major League Delays Start of Play Until '96
Major League Soccer, the league that was supposed to be the legacy of holding the World Cup in the United States last summer, is in a holding pattern of its own.
The kickoff has been put back one year.
Alan Rothenberg, the chairman of the league, who was also the chairman of World Cup USA, confirmed the long-expected delay in the league's start at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday.


Clinton Is Stern With Indonesia On Rights but Gleeful on Trade
The United States and Indonesia today announced $40 billion in joint projects over the next decade, even as President Clinton warned President Suharto that the relationship between the two countries would never reach its full potential unless he treated his people better.
At almost the same time that Mr.
Clinton was chiding the Indonesian leader for his country's inadequate human rights record, Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown was witnessing the signing of 15 business deals that are part of the Administration's campaign of commercial diplomacy and will mean jobs for Americans.


A Mere Plaything, or a Goddess for Her Time?
FOREVER BARBIE The Unauthorized Biography of a Real Doll  By M. G. Lord  Illustrated. 326 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.
You might not think an 11 1/2-inch vinyl doll would be worth a 326-page book.
But as M. G. Lord, a former columnist and present book reviewer for Newsday, makes clear in "Forever Barbie: The Unauthorized Biography of a Real Doll," her subject inspires passion.


A Retiring Senator Sees Political Turmoil Ahead
Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma is one of dozens of Democrats leaving Congress.
In his case, however, the verdict came not from disgruntled voters, but from a disgruntled David L. Boren.
As he officially retires this week, with more than two years left in his Senate term, to become president of the University of Oklahoma, Mr.
Boren, a conservative Democrat, is already using his new academic perch to offer a bleak assessment of the prospects for two-party government in the nation's near future.
In fact, he predicts that Americans are likely to elect an independent Presidential candidate within a decade.


Daniel Industries Inc.(DAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mexican Economy Up 4.5%
In spite of continuing political shocks and disappointing corporate earnings, the Mexican economy managed to grow by 4.5 percent in the third quarter, surpassing even the Government's optimistic projections.
It marked the third straight quarter of growth, and Finance Ministry officials said this was the first economic recovery in 25 years not driven by greater Government spending.
Thus far in 1994, Mexico's economy has expanded 2.9 percent, the Finance Ministry said, leading analysts to predict that the year's growth will exceed the 3 percent the Government projected last year.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about the National Book Awards misidentified the publisher of "A Frolic of His Own," by William Gaddis, the winner of this year's fiction prize.
It is Poseidon Press, a subsidiary of Simon &amp; Schuster, not Alfred A. Knopf.


Democrats Vow to Oppose Part of Gingrich's Agenda
Hitting back for the first time since their Election Day rout, Democrats said today that Newt Gingrich's conservative agenda for America smacked of political extremism, and a House Democratic leader declared that there would be no "rush to judgment" on the Republican proposals.
Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the House Democratic whip, said the Republicans undoubtedly "have the votes to do what they want on many, many issues" next year.


INVESTIGATION OF CAREMARK IS SAID TO GROW
Expanding an investigation of kickbacks to doctors by home care companies, Federal officials have subpoenaed records from the Detroit area office of Caremark International, the nation's largest provider of intravenous drugs in patients' homes, people with knowledge of the case said yesterday.
They said investigators were examining bills submitted to the Medicaid program and Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Michigan, looking for overcharges and payments to physicians to recruit patients.
Kickbacks involving Medicaid and Medicare patients are illegal under Federal law.
Steve Mazur, a Caremark spokesman, said the Northbrook, Ill., company had "fully cooperated" in the three-year Federal investigation.
Caremark says its bills are legitimate.


Angelica Corp.(AGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


For Census, Panel Urges A Sampling Of Unlisted
Jumping into what promises to be a lively debate over the shape of the next census, the National Academy of Sciences today called for the Census Bureau to use statistical sampling techniques to supplement its actual head count in the year 2000.
In a report issued today, a panel of experts, including economists and demographers, said that using sampling techniques to estimate the number of people missed would result in a more accurate and less costly census count.
In the 1990 census, field workers made as many as six visits to each of the nearly 35 million households that failed to return their census forms.


Leaves for Grass and Other Green Things


Common Sense Is the Goal at Talks
Though 10 more games were shaved off the schedule yesterday, reducing the 84-game regular season to 60 games, Day 48 of the National Hockey League lockout brought at least three positive developments.
One was the decision by negotiators to stay in Boston overnight and meet again today.
It was the first time since Oct. 4-5 that two consecutive days of bargaining have been scheduled.


Seagram Works For a Bright Holiday
Everyone hopes for a bright holiday season, but the Seagram Company is trying to do something about it -- commercially, anyway.
For its Chivas Regal brand of Scotch whisky, Seagram will run an extravagant print advertisement that lights up in the Dec. 12 issue of The New Yorker magazine.
The ad, which will appear in 300,000 copies of the issue, includes 23 tiny red light-emitting diodes that glow when a button is pressed.
It cost more than $1 million to produce and was created by Bronner Slosberg Humphrey in Boston, the Seagram direct marketing agency, and Intervisual Communications in Santa Monica, Calif.


Base Closings Said to Miss Revenue Goal
Nearly 90 percent of the military installations scheduled to be shut in the first two rounds of base closings remain in the hands of the Federal Government or state or local governments, a new General Accounting Office report says.
As a result, the report says, the revenue from pending and completed property sales from these base closings has amounted to only $92 million so far, well behind the pace needed to reach the $1.2 billion in total sales the Defense Department had estimated it would eventually receive.
The Government plans to use the proceeds to reduce the Federal deficit.


On Stage, and Off
Doing Fine, Thank You
The first winners of the fall season are in.
"You Should Be So Lucky," by Charles Busch, now at Primary Stages, will move on Dec. 8 to the upstairs theater at West Side Arts, last home to "First Night." That means the relatively tiny Primary Stages will be the only nonprofit company with two productions in open-ended runs.
It also produced David Ives's "All in the Timing."


Mr. Clinton's Strange Compromise
Clearly President Clinton is going to have to learn to compromise with his Republican opponents.
The Constitution, however, is the wrong place to start.
It was unnerving to hear Mr.
Clinton, at a news conference in Indonesia, announcing that he would consider working with the G.O.P. on an amendment permitting "voluntary" school prayer.
"I have always supported voluntary prayer in the schools," he said the other day.
He reserved judgment on specific language in a proposed amendment, and his aides have spun his remarks into a proposal for silent meditation that he never mentioned.
But Mr.
Clinton's concept of "voluntary" plays into the hands of groups that have tried for decades to tear down safeguards for religious freedom that the Supreme Court has vigorously defended.


Crownx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Elizabeth George Speare, an author of historical novels for children, misidentified an award received by her last book, "The Sign of the Beaver" (1983).
It was a Newbery Honor Medal from the American Library Association, not a Newbery Medal.
The association awarded its top honor, the Newbery Medal, to two of Mrs.
Speare's other books.


Art in Review
'Modernism: 1860-1960, A Century of Style and Design' and 'Art at the Armory'
Seventh Regiment Armory  Park Avenue at 67th Street  Through Sunday
In its annual appearance at the Seventh Regiment Armory, the art fair titled "Modernism" has been divided into two separate, related shows, one (titled "Modernism") devoted primarily to the decorative arts, the other ("Art at the Armory") to the fine arts, including painting, sculpture, drawing and photography.


Loan Arranged at Rockefeller Center
Rockefeller Center Properties, the public company that holds the $1.3 billion mortgage on Rockefeller Center, said yesterday that it had arranged to borrow $225 million, averting what had been a looming financial crisis.
The deal does not affect the company's more fundamental problem: that Rockefeller Center's owner, the Rockefeller Group, which is controlled by the Mitsubishi Estate Company of Japan, does not have enough money to make the payments on the mortgage and may default on the loan.


Smithfield Foods Inc.(SFDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Refusing to Be a Face in a Crowd, Giuliani Won't Meet With Pataki
Governor-elect George E. Pataki, who refused to return Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's congratulatory phone call, asked the Mayor today to come to a meeting on Nov. 28 to discuss city issues -- but set off a new feud by scheduling the meeting on Staten Island and inviting nine other city officials as well.
The Mayor, according to his press secretary, Cristyne F. Lategano, will not attend.
"He doesn't think that that's the way to deal with city issues substantively," she said.


Federal Judges Propose Letting Cameras in Appellate Courts
The Federal judges who pulled the plug two months ago on an experiment with cameras in Federal courtrooms are having second thoughts.
It now appears likely that television will be invited into every Federal circuit court of appeals as soon as next year, not as a limited experiment, but on a permanent basis.
It is also possible that the experimental exploration of cameras in the Federal trial courts will be revived.
But this time, the experiments may test whether judges' concerns about the misleading nature of sound bites can be allayed by requiring the broadcast of at least a minute or 90 seconds of tape at one time.


Dostoyevsky's Life As a Departure Point
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG
By J. M. Coetzee
250 pages. Viking. $21.95
In his 1987 novel, "Foe," the South African writer J. M. Coetzee reinvented Daniel Defoe's tale of Robinson Crusoe, giving us a post-modernist parable about the ever-shifting relationship between reality and art.
A similar undertaking informs Mr.
Coetzee's latest novel, "The Master of Petersburg," an allusive, elusive work that conflates "The Possessed," Dostoyevsky's dark tale about nihilism and revolution, with facts plucked from Dostoyevsky's own melodramatic life.


Don Schanche, 68; Newspaper Reporter And Book Author
Don A. Schanche, who wrote books on American radicals and adventurers and was the chief editor of Holiday magazine, died yesterday at his home in Key Biscayne, Fla.
He was 68.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Marybelle.


I.B.M. Plans To License Macintosh
Confirming longstanding computer industry speculation, I.B.M. said yesterday that it expected to license the Macintosh operating system from Apple Computer Inc. and install it on I.B.M. personal computers.
"Are we going to offer the Mac operating system preloaded on our machines? Yes, we are going to do that, assuming our customers want it," Roger Bolton, a spokesman for the International Business Machines Corporation, said in an interview.
Mr.
Bolton said I.B.M. would not modify the Macintosh system.


5 Babies at Center Ring In a Publicity Circus
Having reached something of a zenith with the O. J. Simpson trial, the media event, it should be remembered, was not born yesterday.
Sixty years ago, for instance, there were the Dionne quintuplets, only about two pounds each when they were born in May 1934 to a poor French Canadian family in rural Ontario.
Marketed as "The Five Little Wonders," they became an international phenomenon, which is recounted in "Million Dollar Babies," a two-part Canadian movie beginning Sunday and concluding Tuesday on CBS.
It is a riveting indictment of media cynicism and public gullibility.
On one side stand the parents.
Elzire Dionne (Celine Bonnier), only 25, is already the mother of five children.
Oliva Dionne (Roy Dupuis) is a simple farmer whose fumbling strategies will earn him the label of "avaricious peasant." On the other side is the Ontario provincial government, eager to protect a tourism treasure, and Allan Roy Dafoe (Beau Bridges), the seemingly humble country doctor who delivers the quints and then usurps them for his own profit.


NEW YORK POLICE FACE PATROL CUTS
The Giuliani administration acknowledged for the first time yesterday that the spending cuts it has proposed to close a $1.1 billion budget gap could force the Police Department to take hundreds of officers off patrol duties and put them into jobs now filled by civilians.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton told a City Council committee that as many as 600 police officers could be shifted from patrol jobs to desk jobs under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to keep the city's $31.6 billion budget in balance.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
5.50-6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
5.53
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.35
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.77
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
7.96
5.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.12
8.09
6.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.92
7.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.33
7.27
5.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


'Boulevard' and Broadway Finally Converge


'Mahler Celebration'
The St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Leonard Slatkin, will perform Mahler's Symphony No. 3 at Carnegie Hall tomorrow at 8 P.M.
This concert begins the second year of Carnegie Hall's two-year "Mahler Celebration." Tickets are $13 to $60.
For information and to charge tickets: (212) 247-7800.


INSIDE
Reversal on Courtroom TV?
The judges who recently pulled the plug on television cameras in Federal courtrooms are having second thoughts.
It now appears likely that cameras will be invited into Federal appellate courts next year.
Page B9.
Homeless in Subways
In the first pilot program of its kind, the Federal Government is to offer vouchers for permanent housing to hundreds of homeless people living in the tunnels of New York City's subway system.
Page B1.
Democratic Resistance
Democrats said Newt Gingrich's conservative political agenda smacked of extremism, and a House Democratic leader promised that it would meet resistance.
Page A31.
Israel and P.L.O. and Rancor
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization are struggling to keep their peace talks alive against a backdrop of growing mistrust and rancor.
News analysis.
Page A3.
Shooting Suspect Is Indicted
A Federal grand jury returned an 11-count felony indictment charging the man accused of firing an assault rifle at the White House with trying to kill the President.
Page A18.


Boulevard Of Broken Dreams
THE mansion has landed.
Although the advance hype has been deafening and the backstage machinations have frequently threatened to eclipse those onstage, "Sunset Boulevard," Andrew Lloyd Webber's lurid new musical and extravaganza, officially took over the Minskoff Theater last night.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 9
Mahler's Ninth Symphony, the summit of the classical symphonic tradition, has inspired several major recordings.
In a Salzburg Festival performance preserved by Deutsche Grammophon, Herbert von Karajan had one of his finest hours with the Berlin Philharmonic, achieving a remarkable blend of lucidity and passion.
Jascha Horenstein's London performance on Music and Arts is furiously expressive, while Bernard Haitink's Concertgebouw version, part of a mid-price Philips box, lingers dreamily.
Bruno Walter's famous Ninth in Vienna, recorded on the eve of the Anschluss and reissued by EMI, cries from the heart.


Interim Services Inc.(INTM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


SONY, STRUGGLING, TAKES A HUGE LOSS ON MOVIE STUDIOS
After months of optimistic statements, the Sony Corporation today became the latest Japanese company to acknowledge serious problems with a landmark American investment, announcing that it was taking $3.2 billion in losses on the value of the Hollywood studios that it acquired only five years ago.
In a surprise announcement, Sony said that because of poor box office results, a wave of executive resignations and rising costs, it could never hope to recover its investment in the studios, Columbia Pictures and Tristar Pictures, and was reducing their value on its books by $2.7 billion.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 7
An entirely satisfying recording has yet to be made of Mahler's sumptuous, byzantine Seventh Symphony, the least famous of his series and, for at least a few Mahler connoisseurs, the most weirdly enchanting.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Nynex Capital Funding Corp., a unit of Nynex Corp., is selling $150 million of 8.75 percent medium-term notes due in 2004 through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.75 to yield 8.788 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps Inc.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 2
Mahler's music has the uncanny power to make a critic feel neurotic and uncertain, even when choosing recordings to recommend.
The "Resurrection" Symphony, No. 2, was the first glorious sign of Mahler's musical excess, the result of a seven-year attempt to evoke the apocalypse in about 90 minutes of sound.
How could any recording of it have priority over any other when the best ones make it seem as if their gargantuan world were the only true one?


Hancock Fabrics Inc.(HKF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


A British Novel-to-Be Sets a 2d Bidding Mark
Setting a record of $3.15 million for an advance for the North American publishing rights to a first novel, Dell Publishing outbid nine other publishers on Wednesday to acquire "The Horse Whisperer," a still-unfinished novel by a British writer.
It was the second time in a month that the work-in-progress by Nicholas Evans, a 44-year-old former print and broadcast journalist and screenwriter, set an industry record.


We Can't Treat Homelessness as Just a Housing Problem
To the Editor:
"Homeless Sleeping in City Office: Last Resort Is Now Part of System" (front page, Nov. 12) is a perfect example of why the public has become increasingly cynical about homelessness.
After more than a decade, family homelessness remains the most misunderstood issue in New York City.
And the most recent court-ordered response -- paying $100 a day to families for whom housing is not immediately available -- is ludicrous.


Hayes Move Reveals Modem Woes
When Dennis C. Hayes, the man whose name was long synonymous with computer modems, sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for his company on Tuesday, he exposed not only the deep problems of Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc. but also the extraordinary pressures that afflict the industry itself.
The main problem for Mr.
Hayes is that in the modem market these days, a name does not mean all that much.


Ranger Fan's Dream: Stanley Cup Forever!
Cancel the season already. Hockey is no longer my life.
There is nothing more I can prove as a fan.
I have suffered and I have celebrated.
I have slid to the bottom of the ice and I have climbed to the top of the glacier.
If they don't feel compelled to play for me, why should I feel compelled to care?


Sarajevo President's Office Attacked by Serbian Missiles
Nationalist Serbs attacked Bosnia's presidency building here with missiles today and bombarded a United Nations-designated "safe area" in northwestern Bosnia for the third day running.
Bosnian officials accused the United Nations military force of deliberately underreporting attacks by Serbs on the so-called safe area, around the Muslim town of Bihac.


Chalk Up Another Upset For Pierce
Mary Pierce doesn't consider herself a scalp collector, but last night at Madison Square Garden, she took up where she left off in 1993 and hunted down yet another competitor whose rank and reputation preceded hers.
Last year her victims were Martina Navratilova and Gabriela Sabatini.
Last night her prey was the world's No. 1 player, Steffi Graf, who succumbed, 6-4, 6-4, in the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims Championships.


On Not Doubting Sanity of Artists; Lifton's School
To the Editor:
In "Exploring the Links Between Depression, Writers and Suicide," (Arts pages, Nov. 14), you incorrectly describe one of the panelists, Robert J. Lifton, as "a professor of psychiatry and psychology at the City University of New York."


Deaths in 1979 Tied to Soviet Military
The worst known outbreak of anthrax, which occurred in 1979 in Sverdlovsk in the Urals and which became an international incident, has finally been proved to have originated from spores released from a Soviet biological warfare plant, a team of American and Russian scientists reported today.
The outbreak in the city infected at least 96 people and killed 66, in the official records, and may have killed more.


Sports of The Times; Is It Time For Smaller New League?
THE rumbling comes closer together now.
The world of sports is going through financial tremors unlike anything we have ever seen before -- strikes and shortfalls, power plays and dead seasons.
Where will it end?
Things happen on a daily basis now.
Baseball will never recover from canceling its 1994 season.
Hockey is destroying its once-promising future.
The owners in both sports cannot convince people they just might be telling the truth about the ledgers they will not display.


For Utilities, New Clean-Air Plan
Opening the door to a lower-cost method for reducing "greenhouse" gases that contribute to global warming, two big electric utilities have made a first-of-its-kind deal to trade air pollution allowances.
The agreement, scheduled to be announced today by Niagara Mohawk, serving upstate New York, and Arizona Public Service in Phoenix, is the first in which the right to emit one type of pollutant is being swapped for another.


Reeves: Inevitable Rumors Begin to Rattle
Dan Reeves says he is happy as the Giants' coach.
He has three years left on a five-year deal, and Reeves fully plans on honoring that contract -- unless.
The unless part is something Reeves got around to during a conversation this week, which may have been the toughest in his coaching life.
A snapshot of Reeves shows a coach who is still considered one of the best by his peers.
But the picture also shows a frustrated man who has been devastated by losing and disenchanted with how certain things are done in the organization.


Hilton Weighing a Sale; Stock Up
The stock of the Hilton Hotels Corporation jumped yesterday, breaking a long period of stagnation, after the company said it was considering selling itself or spinning off one or more of its businesses.
In a two-paragraph statement, the hotel and casino company said it had hired Smith Barney to study how the company might increase shareholder value through either a sale, a partial sale, a spinoff, a recapitalization, a merger or a repurchase of its shares.
A company spokesman, Marc Grossman, declined to explain the timing of the development or why the company was interested in any of the options it named.


Adelphia Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louis J. Kleinklaus; Radio Engineer, 83
Louis J. Kleinklaus, a retired chief engineer of WQXR and WQXR-FM in New York who helped to shape FM stereo broadcast standards, died last Friday at Fair Oaks Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 83 and lived in Manassas, Va.
He suffered a brief illness, said his stepdaughter, Virginia Heal of Manassas.


Days and Nights of Murder, Madness and Mayhem
IF ever a city was made for black and white, it's New York.
The city is a place of harsh light, dark shadows, strong angles and violent extremes.
The New York fashion magazines may dictate pastels or flaming reds to the rest of the nation.
In downtown Manhattan, it's all black clothes and pale skin.
The skyline itself, the city's most durable, seductive image, achieves full power, Lucifer-like, as darkness descends and a million cold white diamonds begin to glitter.
New York is a noir city.
It's no surprise to find that the Film Forum in the South Village has assembled more than 60 films (nearly all of them in black and white) in its series "NYC Noir," which begins today.
The city's uncompromising landscape and the endless surge of its anonymous crowds make an ideal setting for pitiless moral dramas in which doomed characters move inexorably toward a violent end.
In the classic New York noirs, the city's skyscrapers and streets simultaneously play the role of the gods and the chorus in Greek tragedy.
They are the impassive observers, the iron enforcers, of a bleak moral code.


Moderate Democrats' Poll Sends the President a Warning
An organization of moderate Democrats that helped Bill Clinton get his Presidential bid off the ground put him on notice today that he had better shift to the right or risk losing re-election in 1996.
The group, the Democratic Leadership Council, made public a new poll that showed -- as did exit polls last week -- that support for Democrats had collapsed among independent voters and that Mr.
Clinton needed to win them back if he was to recover.


World Tour Steps Up To First Tee vs. PGA
Oozing the same Aussie bravado and cocksure bearing that he brings to the golf course, Greg Norman took to the dais here today to assure the world that the proposed World Tour is no longer a proposal, but a reality.
Undaunted by a cool reception to the idea from some top American players on the PGA Tour, and despite the fact that specific sponsors, sites and players have yet to be named, Norman proclaimed that the eight-tournament, $25 million series with fields of the top 30 players in the world would begin in 1995 at sites in the United States, Canada, Scotland, Spain and Japan.


Jailed German Terrorist Wins Court Ruling
A German court ruled today that a member of the far-left Red Army Faction terrorist group, convicted of taking part in a 1972 bombing that killed three American soldiers, should be released after 22 years in prison.
The convict, Irmgard Moller, 47, has been serving a life sentence for her role in the bombing, which took place at a United States military post in Heidelberg.
A panel of judges in Lubeck, where Miss Moller has been imprisoned since 1980, ruled that she fulfilled legal stipulations permitting the early parole of long-term prisoners when no danger exists that they will return to crime.


Woolworth Corp.(Z,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Ex-Coach Is Indicted
A Federal grand jury in Waco, Tex., yesterday indicted the dismissed Baylor coach, DARREL JOHNSON, three former assistants and four others on mail and wire fraud charges.
The indictments come one day after Johnson was discharged by school administrators who determined that the men's basketball program had broken university and National Collegiate Athletic Association violations.


The Search for Knowledge In the Suffragists' Footsteps
Imagining Eve in the Garden of Eden, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the founding genius of the women's rights movement, offered memorable sarcasm a century ago in observing that, of course, Eve ate that apple, the better to satisfy "that intense thirst for knowledge that the simple pleasures of picking flowers and talking to Adam could not satisfy."
This thirst for knowledge goes forward with some of the same acerbic dedication at the new Women's Rights National Historical Park here in Stanton's picturesque hometown.
The acting superintendent of the park, Laura Rotegard, is about to realize one of her wish-list projects with the resurrection of the pioneer newspaper of the women's movement, The Lily, right here on Fall Street.


Art in Review
Kiki Smith  'Drawings'
Pace Wildenstein  32 East 57th Street  Through Nov. 26
For her debut at Pace Wildenstein, Kiki Smith has produced a nervous and unfocused show, but one that still manages to distill the flavor of her idiosyncratic sensibility.
It is titled "Drawings," though the work includes prints, reliefs, collages and sculptures, all done in or on paper and mostly in black and white with occasional touches of color.


A War of Signs Goes Skyward; Parking Warnings Raised To Help Ward Off Thefts
In the war over New York City's precious supply of parking spaces, some of the most intense fighting occurs over No Parking signs.
The city puts them up, and drivers, ever desperate for a spot, pull them down.
The late-night thievery has driven transportation officials and local merchants to distraction -- and desperate measures.
"I'm not kidding when I say we've had signs put up and torn down by the next day, just when you're not looking," said William L. Haines, the president of a real estate company that owns several commercial buildings along Fifth Avenue near 17th Street.
"The signs are put back up, and a week later they're gone again. People just shinny up the pole and take them down. They're shameless."


Tyson Foods Inc.(TYSNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Paul Dean Woodring, 87, Dies; Called For Reform in Education
Paul Dean Woodring, who wrote about education in the United States and offered suggestions for reforms, died last Saturday at his home in Bellingham, Wash.
He was 87.
The cause was leukemia, according to Western Washington University, with which he had been associated since 1939 as a teacher or administrator.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Pound Bulls  Hakeem Olajuwon's 29 points and Kenny Smith's 3-point shooting led Houston to a 106-83 victory over the visiting Chicago Bulls last night, extending the Rockets' season-opening winning streak to eight.
The Rockets also have a 22-game November winning streak over the last two seasons.
They were 14-0 a year ago in November when they won their first 15 games, tying a National Basketball Association record.
They are 8-0 this year.
Olajuwon dominated the inside from start to finish, and Smith, who finished with 19 points, was 4 of 6 on 3-point shots, including 2 in an early fourth-quarter run when the Rockets took command. (AP) Mavericks 96, Kings 94: Mavericks forward Roy Tarpley had 16 points and 9 rebounds in his return to the N.B.A., and Lucious Harris's 8-foot bank shot with 59 seconds remaining gave Dallas a 96-94 victory over visiting Sacramento.
Tarpley played in his first N.B.A. game since he was dismissed by the league for violating its anti-drug regulations Oct. 16, 1991.
Tarpley was activated from the injured list on Wednesday after missing the season's first five games with bursitis in his left knee. (AP)


Lessons From a Tragedy
A report by the New York City school system's special investigator concludes that officials who took 138 students to an amusement park in June, where 14-year-old Daniel Maracallo drowned, ignored existing rules and could have benefited from some additional ones.
Good enough.
But even more striking than the lack of attention to rules is the appalling lack of basic human judgment that might have prevented this tragic incident.
On June 15, eighth-grade students at Intermediate School 166 in the Bronx went to Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown, Pa., for their graduation trip.
Five teachers and one assistant principal accompanied the students on three buses.
One of the most popular attractions at the park is a "wave pool," which has machinery at its deep end to create powerful waves at a fast rate.


Culp Inc.(CULP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Corrections
A music review and a picture caption on Tuesday about programs by the Brooklyn Philharmonic centered on Charles Ives at the Brooklyn Academy of Music over the weekend misidentified the baritone who sang John Adams's "Wound Dresser." He was James Maddalena, not Kurt Ollmann.


Andrew Corp.(ANDW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.B.I. Director Falls Victim To His Own Code of Ethics
F.B.I.
Director Louis J. Freeh, who during his 14-month tenure has issued a stream of "bright-line" edicts to his agents warning them of a zero tolerance policy against lying, cheating and stealing, confessed to a little transgression of his own in his first annual report released today.
Mr.
Freeh, in appraising his first year as the country's top Federal law enforcement official, wrote that after he became Director in September 1993, he lost a cellular telephone issued to him by the F.B.I.


Man Charged With Trying To Assassinate The President
A Federal grand jury today returned an 11-count felony indictment charging the man accused of firing a semiautomatic assault rifle at the White House with attempting to murder President Clinton.
Later, at a hearing in Federal court, a lawyer for the man, Francisco M. Duran of Colorado Springs, entered a plea of not guilty to all charges.
If Mr.
Duran, 26, is convicted of attempting to assassinate the President, he will face a maximum penalty of life in prison.


Inside Art
Changes at Knoedler
There's been a shake-up at Knoedler &amp; Company, the 148-year-old art gallery at 19 East 70th Street in Manhattan, and matters have become quite contentious.
In October, Lawrence Rubin announced he would retire after 22 years as the gallery's director.
At the time, Mr.
Rubin said that he would stay on as a consultant and that the gallery would be run jointly by Ann Freedman, Knoedler's president for 17 years, and Donald Saff, who joined the gallery in 1992 as a vice president.


Fordham's Tower
The New York City Buildings Department, which ordered a halt to construction of a new radio tower at Fordham University several months ago, has ruled that the big steel skeleton can be built after all - 25 feet from where the uncompleted tower now stands.
Article, page B3.


New Chief of Judiciary Panel May Find an Early Test With Clinton
Senator Orrin G. Hatch will soon be thrust into the intense ideological battle over how aggressive the Republicans should be in using their new Congressional majority to shape areas like the Federal judiciary, spending on crime and civil rights policy.
Mr.
Hatch, a Utah Republican who easily won re-election last week, is in line to become chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, the stage on which many of the nation's contentious social issues are debated.
Federal judicial appointments also take the spotlight there, and one prospective nomination, that of Peter B. Edelman, a prominent liberal former law professor, could prove an early source of friction between the Senator and President Clinton.


WESTERN ACCEPTS SWEETENED OFFER BY BJ SERVICES
The BJ Services Company, a supplier of pressure pumping services to the oil and gas industry, said yesterday that the Western Company of North America had accepted a sweetened merger offer valued at $500 million.
Western, which also services oil and gas producers, agreed to a deal in which each shareholder would receive $20 a share: 50 percent in cash and 50 percent in BJ Services stock, plus a five-year warrant for every five BJ Services shares to buy BJ Services stock at $30 a share.
In August, Western spurned a cash and stock offer of $18.50 a share that did not include a warrant.
Both companies are based in Houston.
BJ expects to take a $40 million restructuring charge in the first quarter after the merger.


Fabri-Centers of America Inc.(FCA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Borden Deal Is Amended By Kohlberg
A change in the timing of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company's proposed $2 billion exchange of its RJR Nabisco stock for Borden Inc. is prompting investors to speculate that the Securities and Exchange Commission is concerned about the price that Borden shareholders might receive.
According to an amended exchange statement filed by RJR Nabisco with the S.E.C. on Wednesday evening, shareholders and arbitragers will know the exchange price at least 10 days before the expiration of the offer, enabling them to calculate exactly how many shares of RJR Nabisco they will receive for Borden shares.


Corrections
A list of tips in some editions on Saturday about ways to tell a bona fide police officer, with an article about the New York Police Department's efforts to combat impostors, referred incompletely to the badges worn by officers.
Those for lieutenants and higher-ranking officers have blue-enameled emblems and lack shield numbers; those for lower ranks are simply metallic and have numbers.
The list also misstated the color of the flashing lights on unmarked police cars.
They are generally red, not blue.


Jim Poole; Football Player, 79
Jim (Buster) Poole, one of three brothers to play football for the Giants and a member of four New York teams that played in championship games, died on Wednesday in Baptist Memorial Hospital in Oxford, Miss.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Bishops Assail Rule Hostile To Immigrants
The National Conference of Catholic Bishops urged today that greater emphasis be placed on Federal immigration policies rather than relying on punitive local measures like Proposition 187 in California, which denies illegal immigrants nonemergency medical, educational and social services.
In a statement issued on the final day of their annual fall meeting, the bishops said the taxpayer frustration that fueled passage of Proposition 187 established an intimidating tone that could foster "harassment of persons who may look or sound 'undocumented.' " What was needed, they said, was a rational discussion of Federal policies that regulate legal entry into the United States.


For Children
Wall-Climbing Classes
North Meadow Recreation Center  Midpark, at 97th Street; reachable from Central Park West and Fifth Avenue entrance  Central Park  (212) 348-4867  Recommended ages: 8 and up
Thirteen members of Girl Scout Troop No. 3005 from the Upper West Side of Manhattan were strapped into their harnesses and about to climb an outdoor 25-foot wall at a recent Central Park Outward Bound climbing class.
The harnesses around their waists and hips made the third and fourth graders feel ridiculous.
But the straps were attached to a rope, or belay, held by the class's two teachers as the girls climbed.
Without that, the girls would really have known what fear felt like.


Righting Wrongs of War: Billions in Claims Against Iraq
The Persian Gulf war ended more than three years ago, but the battle to win reparations from Iraq is just now heating up, with a battery of American lawyers leading the charge.
About 2.6 million claims for damages totaling $162 billion are wending their way through a special United Nations commission in Geneva, created after the war to insure that citizens, businesses and government agencies from 94 countries are compensated for their losses.


Kohl Trims His Cabinet
Two days after being formally re-elected by Parliament, Chancellor Helmut Kohl named a slimmed-down Cabinet today in which all key ministers retained their posts.
But Klaus Topfer, Minister of Environment, was named Minister of Construction and Housing.
Chancellor Kohl said he needed Mr.
Topfer to help oversee the move of the capital from Bonn to Berlin.
He was replaced by Angela Merkel, a physicist and Kohl ally who has not shown special interest in environmental issues.


Odor of Burning Interrupts 'Rigoletto'
A performance of "Rigoletto" at the Metropolitan Opera on Wednesday evening was interrupted when a projector on a lighting bridge over the stage overheated, sending fumes through the house.
The problem began just after the second intermission, when some patrons detected a faint burning odor.
As the third act continued, however, the odor grew stronger, and by 10:43, just after Sumi Jo, Paolo Gavanelli, Ramon Vargas and Birgitta Svenden sang the work's famous quartet, "Bella figlia dell'amore," audience members began leaving the hall.
Christian Badea, the conductor, stopped the orchestra, the house lights were raised, and the Met announced that it was investigating.


On Not Doubting Sanity of Artists
To the Editor:
"When we think of creative writers, we think of boldness, sensitivity, restlessness, discontent; this is the manic-depressive temperament." Such is the view of Kay Jamison, author of "Touched With Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament" and a speaker at the Nov. 11 conference at the 92d Street Y titled "Wanting to Die: Suicide and American Literature," which you report in a Nov. 14 article.


Mayors, Feeling Effects of Tax Cuts, Are Cool to Whitman
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman came here to the annual convention of the New Jersey State League of Municipalities to ask mayors and town leaders to enter into a new spirit of cooperation and understanding with her administration.
But compared with the electrifying response she received at last year's convention, the reaction was subdued today.
Mayors have complained privately and in news conferences throughout the four-day convention about the effects the state tax cuts are beginning to have on their budgets and property taxes.


Study of Death Wins National Book Award
The 1994 National Book Award for nonfiction was awarded to "How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter" (Alfred A. Knopf), by Sherwin B. Nuland, at a ceremony at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan on Wednesday night.
The other 1994 winners were "A Frolic of His Own," by William Gaddis (Poseidon Press), for fiction, and "Worshipful Company of Fletchers" (Ecco Press), by James Tate, for poetry.
Each award carries a $10,000 prize.


Speech at N.Y.U.
To the Editor:
To read your Nov. 9 Education page account of the speech of Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the former spokesman for the Nation of Islam, at New York University, a reader would not know that the event was a repeat of Mr.
Muhammad's hateful speech at Kean College in New Jersey a year ago.
Mr.
Muhammad's N.Y.U. address was replete with his usual anti-Semitic, racist and inciteful rhetoric.


Auction of Spy Booty Is Set
Aldrich Ames, the convicted spy inside the C.I.A., got rich selling American secrets.
Now the Government is selling his treasure.
Diamond pendants, gold chains, jade tiaras and a Rolex watch are among Mr.
Ames's personal possessions that will be auctioned off on Dec. 1.
Almost 200 items that were seized from his home by Federal authorities will be sold by Manheim Auctions in Atlanta, with the proceeds going to the Government.


Jets' Alipate, a Tongan, Has No Illusions of Stardom on Way to the Bank
The nephew of the Queen of Tonga put on his armor today: helmet, shoulder guards, pads.
Then he blended in among the other big men of the Jets' football team.
Despite his royal connection, Tuineau Alipate's name is rarely found among the small print in the football summaries this season.
He is a phenomenon of the new world of the National Football League, of free agency and the salary cap.


Industrial Scientific
Shares of the Industrial Scientific Corporation fell to a 52-week low of $17.75 in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
The company, a maker of safety instruments based in Oakdale, Pa., reported third-quarter earnings that were below expectations.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 1
The conductor Eliahu Inbal has written that he regards Mahler's symphonic output as "a single great novel with 11 chapters, consisting of the 10 symphonies and 'Das Lied von der Erde.' " To the limited extent that the cycle can indeed be seen as a huge novel in sound, the First Symphony is the chapter that brings listeners up to speed on the hero's world.
It draws on Mahler's earlier "Songs of a Wayfarer" and "Klagende Lied," and its rustic borrowings set the scene in broader ways.
Mahler himself was unsure what to make of it, terming it a tone poem at its premiere, in 1889; calling it "Titan" and adding descriptive movement titles in 1893; then discarding the titles (and the second movement, "Blumine") and presenting the work as a symphony in 1896.


Guilford Mills (GFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


M/A-Com Inc.(MAI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


A New 'Miracle on 34th St.,' This Time Without Macy's
Is a "Miracle on 34th Street" without Macy's like a Christmas without Santa Claus?
Moviegoers, R. H. Macy &amp; Company and 20th Century Fox will begin finding out today, when the remake of Fox's 1947 fantasy-comedy about Christmas, commercialism, childhood and faith opens without any of the original film's many references to the legendary New York department store.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 8
In a symphonic cycle in which every gesture is larger than life, Mahler's No. 8, the "Symphony of a Thousand," is far and away the most grandiose installment (although the Ninth has greater emotional impact).
Conventional symphonic movements give way to two extended parts, drawing on very different texts: "Veni, Creator Spiritus," a medieval hymn celebrating the Holy Spirit, and the final scene of Goethe's "Faust," which describes divine love as a protecting force.
To convey all this, Mahler uses an expanded orchestra, a huge chorus and eight vocal soloists.


Look Before You Park


Sexism and Rothbart As Obstacles to Love
An arrogant French frog named Jean-Bob (whose voice belongs to John Cleese) is convinced that one kiss from the beautiful Princess Odette will turn him into a handsome prince.
Stranger acts of magic have happened, and "The Swan Princess" is one of them.
Loosely based on the legend that inspired "Swan Lake," and blatantly borrowing the formula of Disney's "Beauty and the Beast," this animated musical turns out to be funny and enchanting on its own.
Directed by Richard Rich, who started an animation company after 14 years at Disney, "The Swan Princess" makes first-rate copying seem like a good idea.
The film begins shamelessly, with a Disney-looking castle in the background and the words "Once upon a time there was a king named William." This is a movie that luxuriates in its classic fairy-tale style, with a few updated twists.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 10
Searchers after completeness will want this last symphony whole, even when the gaps and loose ends Mahler left behind have been filled and tied up by others.
Instinct more than scholarship moves me to forget what is unfinished and stay with the completed Adagio.
It is a last great earthly sigh of human hope and unfulfillment.
God, Mahler's ultimate editor, seems to have decreed it so.


CHRONICLE
Time to readjust that image of GINA LOLLOBRIGIDA.
The sexy film star of the 1950's and 1960's has gone behind the camera to produce "The Wonder of Innocence," a book of photographs she took that has just been published by Harry N. Abrams.
The coffee-table book, whose forward is written by MOTHER TERESA, has dozens of photographs of children superimposed disproportionately on photographs of exotic animals.


2 Arrested in Kidnapping of Men in Queens
The police arrested two men early today in connection with the kidnapping of two Asian men who told investigators they were held for about seven days inside a modest house in Jackson Heights, Queens, officials said.
The names of the victims and the suspects were not released because details were still being worked out at 2 A.M. as all four men were being questioned at the 109th Precinct station house in Jackson Heights, said Lieut.
Peter Tartaglia of the Major Case Squad of the New York City Police Department.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) 'Das Lied von der Erde'
Mahler called this song cycle "a symphony for tenor, alto (or baritone) and orchestra." He might have called it his Ninth Symphony, but he was supposedly deathly afraid of reaching that Beethovenian milestone.


N.Y.R.A. Says It's on Stretch Run to Going Broke
Tolling a familiar dirge with a gloomy new gong, administrators of New York's three major thoroughbred tracks cited an independent auditor's opinion yesterday as evidence that excessive taxes were on the verge of reducing the princely sport of kings to a pauper.
Without a tax rollback or other prompt relief, they said, the New York Racing Association could run out of money by next spring.


U.S. to Adopt Conciliation With Burmese
Judging the initial results to be "somewhat promising," the Clinton Administration will take a conciliatory approach toward the Burmese military junta in an effort to encourage improvements in its human rights record, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
A recent high-level policy review recommended a strategy of trying to engage rather than isolate the Government of Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, one of the most repressive in the world.


He May Be a Killer, But He's Such a Sweetie
As the first American big-studio film about a man who dearly loves his houseplant, "The Professional" is bound to raise eyebrows.
And raise them on both sides of the Atlantic, since this is the work of the film world's most attention-getting man without a country, Luc Besson.
In "La Femme Nikita," Mr.
Besson stylishly melded American luridness with Gallic sophistication, though the violence level was enough to dismay French audiences and prompt a coarse American remake ("Point of No Return").
Emboldened by the success of that hybrid, Mr.
Besson has now made a film in New York, featuring characters who speak like Americans, think like Frenchmen and behave appallingly in any language.
"The Professional" lacks the sexy elan of "La Femme Nikita" and suffers from infinitely worse culture shock.


Crossing Guard Killed at Queens School
A 35-year-old mother, on crossing-guard duty outside her children's school in Queens, was killed yesterday when struck by a four-wheel-drive vehicle as she crossed the street to help someone.
The driver, who remained at the scene, was not charged or given a summons, the police said.


CHRONICLE
The New Republic magazine turned 80 this month, so on Wednesday evening it gave itself a party at Decatur House, a historic building near the White House.
Almost every conversation among the 250 guests seemed to focus on Representative NEWT GINGRICH, Republican of Georgia.
In a sign of what's to come, ANDREW SULLIVAN, the editor of the liberal journal of politics and culture, described the prospective Speaker of the House as the magazine's "biggest, fattest, ripest target."


Zhang Yimou's 'To Live'
"To Live" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 30.
The film -- in Mandarin with English subtitles -- opens today in Manhattan.
In the gambling house where Fugui (Ge You) spends his nights, letting his family fortune slip from his grasp, he is treated like a young prince.
The setting is China in the pre-revolutionary 1940's, and after hours of gambling, Fugui is carried home at dawn through the streets of his small town on the back of a man who deposits him at his extravagant house.
Fugui's wife, Jiazhen (Gong Li), begs him to stop gambling, for the sake of their small daughter and the child she is carrying.


A Ladder-Climber Reaches The Highest Rung at Nynex
Ivan G. Seidenberg, who started his career at the age of 19 as an assistant for telephone repairmen at New York Telephone, will succeed William C. Ferguson as chairman and chief executive of the Nynex Corporation next year, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Seidenberg, 47, has been a rising star at Nynex for several years and is currently president and one of two vice chairmen of the company.
He eclipsed Frederic V. Salerno, who also holds the title of vice chairman and who has been responsible for negotiating most of Nynex's business deals in television programming and wireless communications.


Applying Death Penalty
To the Editor:
George E. Pataki, the Governor-elect of New York, has confirmed his promise to sign a death penalty bill, which the State Legislature is likely to submit.
As a longtime advocate of the death penalty for murderers, I concur with Mr.
Pataki's decision.


Llewellyn Harrison, Stage Designer, 47
Llewellyn Charles Harrison Jr., a designer who worked in theater, television and film, died on Monday at the Medical College of Virginia Hospital in Richmond.
He was 47 and lived in Richmond.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his sister, Grace Lee Harrison.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI AGGRAVATES FEUD WITH GIULIANI
Governor-elect George E. Pataki, who refused to return Mayor Giuliani's congratulatory phone call, asked the Mayor to attend a meeting to discuss city issues -- but set off a new feud by scheduling the meeting on Staten Island and inviting nine other city officials as well.
The Mayor, according to his press secretary, will not attend, in part because he is offended that he was not invited exclusively.
A1.
NEW YORK POLICE FACE PATROL CUTS
The Giuliani administration acknowledged for the first time that the spending cuts it has proposed to close a $1.1 billion budget gap could force the Police Department to take hundreds of officers off patrol duties and put them into jobs now filled by civilians.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  JAIL CHIEF SAYS RIKERS IS UNDER CONTROL
Despite three days of food and work strikes by thousands of inmates at Rikers Island, the city's Correction Commissioner said that "we're not losing control" and insisted that the Giuliani administration's plan to cut the number of correction officers by 900 would not risk the safety of officers or inmates.
B3. 11TH POLICE SUICIDE LEAVES QUESTIONS
When Officer Daniel Atkinson shot himself in the head with his department-issued 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, he broke a grim record, becoming the 11th officer in the nation's largest police department to take his own life, the most in any year in recent history.
B3.
REGION  TALK-SHOW HOST GETS A REBUKE
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey went back on the Bob Grant radio talk show to politely lecture the show's host on his responsibility to avoid the sometimes "troubling" racial comments that occasionally come from him and his callers.
B7.
NEW JERSEY MAYORS ARE COOL TO WHITMAN
Governor Whitman went to the annual convention of the New Jersey State League of Municipalities to ask mayors and town leaders to enter into a new spirit of cooperation and understanding with her administration.
But compared with the electrifying response she received at last year's convention, the reaction was subdued.
Mayors have complained throughout the convention about the effects the Governor's state tax cuts are beginning to have on their budgets and property taxes.
B7.
THEY SAID SHE WAS D.O.A.; THEN SHE MOVED
The old woman was sprawled on the floor, cold and motionless.
Paramedics and the Albany County Coroner found no signs of life.
But as a morgue attendant was transferring the body to a funeral home, he noticed movement and a faint breathing sound.
She was alive, but unconscious.
The coroner -- an elected official who is an insurance agent, not a doctor -- called it a miracle.
Health officials were debating whether Albany ought to have a full-fledged medical examiner.
B7.
SUSPECT SAYS CONFESSION WAS REHEARSED
The defendant in the Rockland County murder and carjacking trial said that he was "rehearsed and coached" by two detectives into giving a 49-page confession to an assistant district attorney just hours after the crime.
B6.
D'AMATO EXAMINING BROTHER'S EXAMINERS
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said he would investigate Justice Department actions in the Federal fraud case against his brother, Armand, that was recently dropped.
B8.
Chronicle B8


Hollywood Article Intended No Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
The reaction to my article in The Spectator, the British magazine, pointing out that Hollywood's feudal power structure is predominantly Jewish, has been wholly misconstrued (Arts pages, Nov. 7; letters, Nov. 15).





French Left Gets a Lift From Right
Only weeks ago, French conservatives seemed certain to win next spring's presidential elections.
Now, in a turnaround that could cheer American Democrats after their drubbing last week in mid-term elections, France's Socialists again have a chance.
Strangely, the Socialists themselves did little to achieve this.
Rather, in what might also sound a warning to American Republicans, the Socialists have bounced back because French voters are now beginning to blame the right for what is wrong with France.


Diner's Journal
A Touch of Austria
Not so long ago New York City had dozens of restaurants like Lipizzana.
Courtly waiters described specials like saddle of venison with red cabbage, bread dumplings and lingonberries, or pheasant consomme with truffle shavings and duck-liver dumplings, "the lightest imaginable," in mouth-watering detail.
Alas, times have changed and Austrian restaurants are scarce.
That must be why Lipizzana is filled most nights with people who look around them with a very proprietary air.
At one table a woman called Elsie is being loudly serenaded by a group of young people on her 80th birthday; at another, three carefully dressed white-haired women discuss the menu in slow and elegant French.
They consider the Viennese goulash served with a fried egg, weisswurst and spatzle.
They discuss the merits of grilled salmon with braised cabbage.
In the end, however, they all choose the same thing: Wiener schnitzel.
It arrives just as a large man with spectacular wattles and a tiny woman dressed in an ornately embroidered Chinese jacket are inching their way to the neighboring table.
The pair examine the schnitzels with interest and decide that they, too, will order the veal.


Nationwide Cellular Service Inc.(NCEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Truly glum days at Spectrum, where executives fear to tread.
JOBS may be hard to come by in some quarters, but at Spectrum Information Technologies, even the top spots are going begging.
Spectrum, a wireless-cable company in Manhasset, L.I., could be announcing its earnings for the fiscal second quarter ending Sept. 30 as early as today.
And its investors could use some relief: Shares of the troubled company have traded in a lifeless range of 311/16 down to 17/16 since mid-February.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 5
An unusual number of excellent Mahler performances have been recorded in concert.
More is at stake in public than in private, with no opportunity to turn back, no temptation to rationalize, refine or second-guess.
This symphony in particular, lacking an explicit program, should unfold as if it were a grand interior monologue spontaneously produced by conductor and orchestra, a live event that cannot be replicated.


Sony Electronics Review Is Narrowed
The Sony Electronics unit of the Sony Corporation of America named five finalists yesterday to compete in the review for its estimated $50 million account.
Most of the account had been handled from May 1991 until September by the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, which resigned rather than participate in the review.
Rick Clancy, a spokesman for Sony Electronics in Park Ridge, N.J., identified the finalists as Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco and the New York offices of four agencies: Chiat/Day, DDB Needham, Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 4
Mahler hated to say goodbye.
A composer of infinitely extended farewells, he was a great man in search of an editor.
The Fourth Symphony, an anomaly, is relatively succinct, filled with sunlight, even sweetness.


World News Briefs; German Spy at NATO Sentenced to 12 Years
A western German who provided NATO secrets to East Germany for more than a decade was sentenced today to 12 years in prison for treason.
The spy, Rainer Rupp, who worked at NATO headquarters in Brussels, had been convicted of passing thousands of documents to the East German security service, the Stasi, between 1977 and 1989.


Group Technologies Inc.(GRTK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WHITE HOUSE TRIES TO CLARIFY STAND ON SCHOOL PRAYER
White House officials today sought to clarify President Clinton's position on school prayer but instead sent mixed signals that only intensified complaints among some Democrats that the President was too prone to shifting his positions.
The issue arose on Tuesday, when Mr.
Clinton said he would not rule out backing a constitutional amendment on prayer that Republican leaders said they would pursue.
But stung by attacks from Democrats and civil liberties groups, who denounced the President's remarks as an "instant cave-in," White House officials today sought to recast the President's position.


St. John's Faces Rutgers For Area Bragging Rights
St.
John's and Rutgers will play for local honors tomorrow night when the Red Storm visits the Scarlet Knights in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I soccer tournament.
St.
John's (14-4-3) and Rutgers (11-9-3) are the only teams from New York and New Jersey to make this year's 32-team tournament, which gets under way tonight with Robert Morris (15-6-1) visiting Penn State (15-5-1).
Maryland (13-5-1) will be at Georgetown (18-3-0) and San Diego (13-5-0) will visit Fullerton State (12-6-2) in two other games tomorrow afternoon.


No Headline
"We flashed the flashlight on people with blankets, sleeping bags, like a campsite. One of the fellows could hardly speak for scratching his body and he described living with the rats and the lice. The subways are not safe for people to live in and we all ought to be ashamed that there are Americans that have no better place to live than with filth and 100-year-old dust." HENRY G. CISNEROS, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.  [ B1:4. ]


The Spoken Word
EDWARD ALBEE, Pace University, Downtown Theater, Schimmel Center for the Arts, Spruce and Gold Streets, Lower Manhattan.
The playwright is to discuss "The Playwright Versus the Theater." Today at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 346-1417.
HAROLD BLOOM, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The author and critic is to speak.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Oshkosh Truck Corp.(OTRKB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Time for War, and a Time for Play


Owners Offer A Tax System Or Stricter Cap
Major league baseball owners made an expected move today when they presented a new proposal to the striking players based on a tax system on team payrolls.
The owners also made a shrewd and logical new move, revising but not withdrawing the salary cap proposal they've stood fast by for five months, making it more possible to implement if they so desire.
The owners, still holding the cap as a kind of stick to the tax "carrot," are believed to have made the cap less palatable for the players and more feasible for themselves by doing away with the $1 billion-a-year guarantee for players' salaries that had previously accompanied it.
They also reportedly fixed the costs of salaries on first- through four-year players in lieu of salary arbitration.


Mexican Party Is Accused in Assassination
In one of the worst political scandals of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's last year in office, a top law enforcement official has publicly accused Mexico's governing party of hindering the investigation into the killing of the party's secretary general in September.
Party leaders have lashed back at the official, Mario Ruiz Massieu, the Deputy Attorney General, accusing him of conducting a witch hunt that has implicated without proof many top-ranking members of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, which has governed for 65 years.


A New Movie Multiplex Near Lincoln Center
New York has a new showplace: the Sony Theaters Lincoln Square complex in Manhattan, opening today and setting a new standard for the multiplex movie house.
From computerized ticket machines in the ground-floor lobby to the wonders of an 80-by-100-foot IMAX screen upstairs, this new complex boasts impressive wonders of the high-tech world.
Yet its theater design is also gratifyingly nostalgic, a welcome homage to the grand Loews movie palaces of the past.
Among the nine regular theaters opening today (there will eventually be 12), foremost is a 900-seat space with a luxuriously retro look: proscenium arch, red-and-gold color scheme, a frieze featuring a line of elephants and a large gold curtain.
Outside, the lobby is sleekly efficient, but its decorative palm trees summon memories of movie exhibition's glory days.
Theaters opening off this lobby have playfully framed doorways with Hollywood-international motifs (Chinese, Egyptian, etc.) and bear great, familiar names: Paradise, State, Capitol and Avalon are among them.
Sony's acquisition of the Loews chain has taken the form of a charming tribute.


Unfettered By Party, He's Set To Govern
Maybe it was his insistence that he didn't "need to be governor" that most endeared Angus King to Maine voters.
This is a state, after all, with a fondness for mavericks, and this was a political season that favored outsiders.


Art in Review
Gjon Mili
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 3
From the 1930's to the 50's, Gjon Mili was one of the star photographers of Life magazine, specializing in pictures that used stroboscopic flash to freeze action.
Mili became famous for his distinctive photographs of sports stars, dancers and the like, all captured while leaping or twirling, turned by the strobe into chiseled statues.


Back Home, Navy Helps Restore House for Homeless


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for Year to Oct 1


Bias in Immigration Agency Is Subject of House Hearing
Representative John Conyers Jr. gave the nation's immigration chief what he called a "public spanking" today during a hearing before the House Government Operations Committee that detailed accusations of widespread discrimination against black employees of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Doris M. Meissner, the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, promised that she would work to correct employment problems at the agency.
She pledged to hire and promote more minority members and to train the agency's executives, almost all of whom are white, to be more openminded.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  TESTING SOUTH AFRICA DEMOCRACY  South Africa's newest and highest judicial body will have the power to overrule the Government on questions of constitutional law.
A1  ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
AND MISTRUST  News analysis: Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization are struggling to keep their peace talks alive against a backdrop of growing mistrust and rancor.A3


Wisconsin's Moss Gets Two Years' Probation
Wisconsin tailback BRENT MOSS, the most valuable player in the 1994 Rose Bowl game, pleaded guilty yesterday in Madison, Wis., to a charge of misdemeanor possession of cocaine and was placed on two years' probation.
GERRICK B. HAWKINS, who was arrested Nov. 9 with Moss, also pleaded guilty to possession and was given the same sentence by Dane County Circuit Judge JACK AULIK.
The judge told Moss that he was not getting preferential treatment and that the two cases were similar to 95 percent of the drug actions in the county's court system.
Moss and Hawkins were fined $250 and were told they could work it off in community service at a rate of $10 an hour.


Moorer to Fight Again
MICHAEL MOORER wants to be heavyweight champion again, and his manager says a rematch with GEORGE FOREMAN is signed.
On Tuesday, Moorer said on WJR-AM in Detroit that he would not fight again and, instead, would pursue a career in law enforcement.
He told The Associated Press in a telephone interview yesterday: "I'm going to fight again. I want to be the fifth man to regain the heavyweight title."


At the Bar; For Clinton, the Supreme Court's docket is a mine field of politically sensitive cases.
The House of Representatives and the Senate are not the only institutions in town in a position to give the Clinton Administration a major headache in the post-election era.
The Administration's remarkable about-face in a recent child pornography case before the Supreme Court underscored yet another unpleasant new fact of life: how perilous the Court's docket has become for the White House.
The docket is a virtual mine field of politically unpalatable cases waiting to explode as the Administration files briefs and argues its positions on subjects like minority set-asides in Federal contracting, school desegregation and state limitations on welfare benefits.


Brooke Group Ltd. (BGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. to Offer Housing Vouchers To Lure Homeless From the Subways
In an effort to move hundreds of homeless New Yorkers out of the subway system, where they live in rat-infested utility rooms and narrow passageways between tracks, the Federal Government announced yesterday that they would be offered Federal housing vouchers.
Under a pilot program to begin immediately, seven local nonprofit agencies will be given a total of 250 vouchers to distribute to the homeless, who are often too fearful to go to the city's shelters.
Transit police estimate that as many as 1,500 people live in the subway's underground tunnels.


Accounts
*
IBM PC Co., Somers, N.Y., to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, New York, to handle various assignments in its direct marketing account, with total billings estimated by Advertising Age at $70 million.
One assignment, the PC Direct catalogue account, was previously handled by Grey Direct, New York.


2 Parallel Renaissance Trajectories
Why mince words?
"Painting and Illumination in Early Renaissance Florence: 1300-1450," which opens today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is a quiet exhibition that simply has it all: spectacular and little-studied material, fresh art historical perspectives, and as careful and loving a presentation as one could hope for.
The real wonder is that the show's subject has not been dealt with in depth before.
As Florentine panel and fresco painting of the 14th and early 15th centuries was paving the way for the classical Renaissance moment, illuminated manuscript production was also in full swing, turning out extraordinary liturgical and devotional books.
Such books have been given comparatively little scholarly attention, and it is seldom acknowledged that many of the period's most ambitious and versatile painters were also illuminators, developing some of their most inventive ideas in miniature form.


Irish Premier Quits in Split Of Coalition
Abandoned by his Labor Party partners in Government, Albert Reynolds resigned today as Prime Minister.
But in a move designed to keep his Fianna Fail party in power, Mr.
Reynolds did not ask President Mary Robinson to dissolve Parliament, and this left Irish politics in turmoil.
Mr.
Reynolds ended the 22-month coalition with Labor after Labor's leader, Dick Spring, refused to support him in a vote of confidence.
Mr.
Spring had attacked Mr.
Reynolds over his handling of a much-publicized case involving extradition of a Roman Catholic priest accused, and later convicted in Northern Ireland, of child molesting.
Together, the two parties, with 99 seats, had controlled the 166-member Parliament with the largest majority, 37 votes, in the 74-year history of the state.


Abroad at Home; The King Must Die
"Why do we want to kill our Presidents?" A doctor asked me that the other day, and left me wondering whether there is something about the American system, or the American psyche, that now makes the Presidency a hopelessly vulnerable institution.
"With the exception of Reagan, who was sui generis," he said, "we have cut off every President for nearly 30 years: Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Bush. Now it looks as if the same will happen to Clinton.


Art in Review
Arthur Rothstein
International Center for  Photography Midtown  1133 Avenue of the Americas,  at 43d Street  Through Dec. 4
In 1935 Arthur Rothstein, a young Columbia University graduate, was the first photographer hired for the pioneering documentary project of what became the Farm Security Administration.
While with the agency, he made some classic images of the Depression, including a 1936 shot of an Oklahoma farmer and his sons scurrying for shelter from a dust storm.


Campbell Soup Co. (CPB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Leonardo's Hand Reflects a Questing Mind
To the Editor:
Re "Leonardo Notebook Sells for $30.8 Million" (front page, Nov. 12):
While Leonardo da Vinci remains one of history's most intriguing individuals, his "backward" handwriting should not continue to be a puzzle.
You repeat traditional lore in writing that Leonardo's "handwriting is backward because the artist, who was left-handed and loved optical tricks, wrote from right to left using a mirror, apparently to help disguise his theories."


Aristide Ousts Acting Army Chief
After allegations of corruption against him by officers under his command, the acting Commander in Chief of the Haitian Armed Forces, Maj.
Gen.
Jean-Claude Duperval, was dismissed today, barely a month after he was appointed.
To replace him, Haiti's civilian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, selected Brig.
Gen.
Bernardin Poisson.
Until he was promoted to the army high command and made a general last month, General Poisson, 46, had served for six years as chief of the Haitian Fire Department, which is part of the Haitian military but regarded as its least prestigious branch.


Corrections
The Key Rates table on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday misstated the prime rate for Wednesday.
It was 8.50 percent, not 7.75 percent.


Cable Giant Plans Shift Into 4 Units
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable television operator, said yesterday that it planned to reorganize itself into four separate business groups, issuing stock in each of them.
The parent company would continue to exist as a holding company with interests in each division after spinning them off.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KEPTEL CORP., Tinton Falls, N.J., a maker of telecommunications equipment, said its shareholders had approved its acquisition by Antec Corp., Rolling Meadows, Ill., in a transaction valued at $83.7 million.


Rodney Colin Campbell; Journalist, 70
Rodney Colin Campbell, a retired journalist and editor, died on Oct. 28 while visiting his daughter in London.
He was 70 and lived in Los Angeles and La Jolla, Calif.
The cause was an aortic aneurysm, his family said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ELAINE DE KOONING: ARTISTS AND WRITERS, 1940's and 1950's," Washburn Gallery, 20 West 57th Street.
Eleven paintings and drawings.
Through Saturday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 397-6780.


South Africa Keystone Is Set: A Court Can Test Democracy
Pius Langa's first close insights into the machinery of South African justice came when he worked as a lowly interpreter in the rural courts of the Zulu countryside.
He remembers, for instance, the interrogation of a black farmworker arrested for deserting his white employer.
"Why did you leave the farm?" the judge asked.


Restaurants
The rude voice on the telephone.
The wait at the door.
The disappearing reservation.
New Yorkers have steeled themselves against finding good food seasoned with a pinch of attitude.
We're so used to all these things that we barely pay them any mind.
Until they go away.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.(PVH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Whitman Rebukes Bob Grant on the Air
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman went back on the Bob Grant radio talk show this evening to politely lecture the talk show host on his responsibility to avoid the sometimes "troubling" racial comments that occasionally come from him and his callers.
Mr.
Grant maintains that his comments about blacks, relayed to Mrs.
Whitman by a coalition of black clergymen during the recent Senate campaign in New Jersey, were "edited" and taken out of context.


A Return to Network TV With Series of Five Meets
Ollan Cassell, executive director of USA Track and Field, the sport's governing body in the United States, announced yesterday the formation of a five-meet series of indoor track telecasts on NBC in February and March.
The series, which will be shown on successive Saturday afternoons, was developed with International Management Group and its television division, Trans World International.
It will be the first American track and field series to be shown on network television since 1975.
It is also the first time that USA Track and Field has taken a direct hand, and made a direct investment, in the promotion of the sport.


Executive Changes
BEAR, STEARNS &amp; CO., New York, named Frank McDonogh managing director of the brokerage firm's public finance department.
CURRAN &amp; CONNORS INC., Hauppauge, L.I., a producer of corporate annual reports, promoted Scott Greenberg, its senior vice president and chief operating officer, to president.
He will retain the title of chief operating officer.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 3
More than any of his other symphonies, Mahler's Third meets his stated criterion that "a symphony must be like the world" and embrace everything.
"The whole of nature finds its voice in it," Mahler wrote plausibly of the Third.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Sony is taking $3.2 billion in losses on its Hollywood studios, Columbia and Tristar.
The loss is one of the largest reported by a Japanese company and is emblematic of the problems the Japanese have had with landmark American investments.  [ Page A1. ]
Tele-Communications reorganized into four business groups and planned to issue stock in each of them.
In effect, Tele-Communications is creating separate securities that will rise and fall based on the performance of each of the four individual units.  [ D1. ]


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDXA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 4


Absurdist Spoof of Nazism
If a Keystone Kops film were written by William S. Burroughs, peopled with characters from George Grosz by way of Russ Meyer and directed in a style that suggests Jean-Luc Godard on speed, you would have a movie with the style and mood of "Terror 2000."
This slam-bang comedy lampooning neo-Nazism and xenophobia in contemporary Germany wallows in ridiculously fake gore and grotesque sexual couplings.
The director Christoph Schlingensief's idea of how to film a shooting is to show a gun aimed at someone's face and a moment later to have that face doused with a bucket of entrails.


Neiman-Marcus Group (NMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Fed Survey Helps Push Bonds Lower
Prices of Treasury securities fell modestly yesterday, as the Commerce Department's report that housing starts were down for the month of October failed to soothe investor concern about faster growth and accelerating inflation.
A weaker dollar also weighed on the market.
Bonds initially made modest gains on the housing report, but the potential for gains was limited as a survey by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve of general business conditions in its region showed continued strength in economic growth.


Pursuing the Sublime in Mahler
Here are comments by Times critics on their favorite recordings of Mahler's 10 symphonies and "Das Lied von der Erde" ("Song of the Earth").
Prices range from $8 to $17 for a single CD, $22 to $25 for a two-CD set and $33.98 for a three-CD set. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Symphony No. 6
Although teeming with inescapable portents, Mahler's Sixth Symphony, often called "Tragic," is among his most straightforward creations formally.
Taut and terse for all its 80 minutes or so, it is essentially a huge Classical symphony, just an eventful century removed from Haydn.
As such, it lends itself well to abstraction and can have the greatest impact in a reading that is animated, steady, clear-eyed and cool verging on white hot.


U.S. Presses Guatemala on Missing Husband
To the Editor:
"Guatemala: Change the Message" (editorial, Nov. 9) rightly calls attention to the case of Jennifer Harbury, a United States citizen searching for her husband, a Guatemalan guerrilla commander missing since 1992.
Ms.
Harbury's monthlong hunger strike, which she ended Friday, Nov. 11, was an act of conscience that must move any feeling person.


Pursuing The Sublime in Mahler
YES, Gustav Mahler predicted that his time would come, and yes, it did.
But what happens next?
It is unlikely, now that his symphonies have been plumbed to their astounding depths and widely acknowledged as epochal landmarks, that his standing will ebb and flow on the tide of opinion the way, say, Sibelius's and Rachmaninoff's always seem to do.
But it can feel at times that the quantity of Mahler performances and recordings stands in a problematic, if not necessarily inverse, relationship to quality.
The specialness of performances led by Leonard Bernstein in the nascent Mahler boom of the 1960's, let alone earlier ones by the likes of Bruno Walter and Dmitri Mitropoulos, is an increasingly dim memory.
Mahler taken for granted is simply not Mahler.


Seoul Journal; A Crisis of Faith: Is the New Korea Jerry-Built?
As part of his response to the collapse of a major commuter bridge in October, President Kim Young Sam took Korean reporters to a remote spot behind his official residence and showed them that the large stone statue of Buddha was still there.
President Kim offered the tour to dispel the rumor that he, a Presbyterian, had removed the statue from the presidential garden and was therefore somehow responsible for the collapse of the Songsu Bridge, as well as for the boat accidents, train derailments and air crashes that seem to have afflicted this nation all at once.


CHRONICLE
The Council of Fashion Designers of America has announced the winners of its 1994 C.F.D.A.
Awards, which are to be presented at a dinner on Jan. 30 at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
RICHARD TYLER has been named women's wear designer of the year.
VICTOR ALFARO, CYNTHIA ROWLEY and ROBERT MASSIMO FREDA won the Perry Ellis Award for New Fashion Talent.
ROBERT LEE MORRIS and GENE MAYER are to be cited for accessories.


Critic's Choice/Film; Calling All Fans of the BBC
You've seen Ralph Fiennes as a Nazi commandant in "Schindler's List" and as a patrician intellectual in "Quiz Show," but you haven't seen him in what may have been a bigger acting challenge: playing a love scene with a bird.
He does that in "The Cormorant," a recent film made for the BBC.
It will be shown at the Joseph Papp Public Theater on Dec. 2, 3 and 4 as part of a series that opens today, "Against the Odds: BBC Drama, 1975-1994."
Mr.
Fiennes plays a writer who inherits a cormorant, a gull-like bird that seems to have a malevolent personality.
The underlying sense of evil never materializes fully, but the film is worth seeing for Mr.
Fiennes, who looks great, is convincingly smitten with his malicious bird and even has a brief comic scene in a bubble bath with his son's Donald Duck toy.


AT&amp;T Seeks A Stake in Groupe Bull
The AT&amp;T Corporation is trying to buy part of Groupe Bull, the financially troubled computer manufacturer owned by the French Government, in an apparent effort to break into the protected French telecommunications market.
The move comes at a time when AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint are all trying to forge global alliances that provide advanced voice and data communications to multinational corporations.


CHRONICLE
The administrators of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice had good cause to celebrate last night when they unveiled two paintings by SANDRO CHIA.
What had begun as a commission for the City University college's 30th anniversary turned into a gift from the Italian Neo-Expressionist painter.
"I decided that it would be a good donation to the college, a way of giving something back to New York, which has been so good for me," Mr.
Chia said yesterday.


What Do You Say, Virginia?
You could build a good case for remaking "Miracle on 34th Street." Though the 1947 original remains as charming as ever, the story seems perfect for the 90's.
There is the divorced mother (Maureen O'Hara in the original), the daughter who doesn't believe in Santa (the very young Natalie Wood) and a Macy's Santa (Edmund Gwenn) who insists he is the real Kriss Kringle and proves it in court.
He restores the child's faith in magic and even sends shoppers down the street to Gimbel's, ideas that seem ripe for a time when Christmas has become dizzyingly commercial and many children are in nontraditional families.
Well, the perfect Santa movie for children of divorce has arrived, but it turned up last week as "The Santa Clause," starring Tim Allen.
The new "Miracle on 34th Street," produced by John Hughes (the mastermind behind shrewd hits like "Home Alone") and written by him with George Seaton, is a dull project that makes only cosmetic changes in the original.
It loses the warmth and nostalgia of the old movie, but is too timid to give the story the sharp, contemporary spin it needs.


Gay Worker Accuses Male Of Harassing Him Sexually
In an unusual twist to a common workplace problem, a gay employee of a Philadelphia restaurant has complained to a state agency that his male boss sexually harassed him.
By filing a complaint last week with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission, Warren J. Swage Jr. became one of only a handful of homosexuals who have sought a legal remedy for behavior more commonly identified with heterosexuals.


Home Video
In the beginning, the movie came first, followed by its video game.
Now, though, studios have their own game production units, and some games and movies are arriving together.
On Wednesday, cartridge and CD-ROM games based on the film "Pagemaster" are to be released on the same day that the movie, starring Macaulay Culkin, opens in theaters.
Another recent film-game pairing was "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein," with the Sega CD arriving along with the movie on Nov. 4.


U.S. Proposes Exclusion Zone In Bosnia Town
Concerned by the Serbian advance on Bihac in northern Bosnia, the United States is proposing that a weapons exclusion zone be established around the embattled town, Administration officials said today.
The United Nations force in Bosnia has already outlined a "safe area" around Bihac that is supposed to be free from attack.
But British officials have been skeptical of the idea, adding new strains within NATO at a time when the allies are still smarting over the American decision not to enforce an arms embargo in the region.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing  Ppg indy car world series
PACWEST RACING GROUP -- Named Danny Sullivan, driver, for the 1995 season.


Peacemaker Whitman?
A New Jersey Democratic leader suggested today that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman volunteer to make peace between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City and New York's Governor-elect, George E. Pataki.
In an act that smacked of political mischief-making, Joseph V. Doria, the Democratic Assembly leader, asked that the Governor use her influence "as an emerging force in the national G.O.P. affairs" to settle the standoff.


They Said She Was D.O.A., But Then the Body Bag Moved
The old woman was sprawled on her living room floor, cold and motionless, and the apartment manager who found her on Wednesday was sure she was gone.
Paramedics and the Albany County Coroner, Philip Furie, found no heartbeat, no pulse, no breath or other signs of life, and the coroner declared her officially dead.
They zipped Mildred C. Clarke, 86, into a body bag, took her to the morgue at the Albany Medical Center Hospital and left her in a room where corpses are kept at 40 degrees, pending autopsies or funerals.
About 90 minutes later, the chief morgue attendant went in to transfer her to a funeral home.


Corrections
The headline of a brief report yesterday about a pledge of aid to Vietnam misstated the amount.
As noted in the article, it is $2 billion, not $12 billion.


Bronx Tower Can Rise, But a Little to the Right
What a difference 25 feet -- 10 paces at a gunslingers' shootout -- could make.
The New York City Buildings Department, which ordered a halt to construction of a new radio tower at Fordham University several months ago, ruled yesterday that the big steel skeleton can be built after all -- 25 feet from where the uncompleted tower now stands.


Sign Him, Trade Him: Webber Becomes Bullet
Completing a major deal forced by a conflict between a player and a coach, the Golden State Warriors traded their unhappy star forward Chris Webber to the Washington Bullets today.
In exchange, they received the third-year forward Tom Gugliotta and first-round draft picks in 1996, 1998 and 2000.
Webber, one of the National Basketball Association's most talented young players, leaves Golden State after only one season -- a season in which he was voted the league's rookie of the year.
But a personality clash between Webber and Don Nelson, the Warriors' coach and general manager, triggered today's deal, which could have a dramatic impact on both franchises.


The Worlds of Islam
"Allah o akbar" -- "God is great" -- begins the call to prayer resonating from mosques in cities and villages from China to Morroco, from New York City to Timbuktu.
It is also the war cry of Islamic militants throughout the Umma, the lands of the faithful.
As an Iranian transplanted in the West, I have long sought to understand the tensions in Muslim societies.
For more than seven years, I traveled to the Muslim world -- 29 countries in all -- to photograph the conflict between the people's desire for modernization and the rising political movement seeking inspiration from a mythical past.
In Egypt, I saw a female student, fully covered by veil, gloves and glasses, peering into a microscope.
When I photographed Shiites rhythmically beating their bare chests during the mourning period of Ashura, only the tall buildings hovering over made me aware that I was on Seventh Avenue in New York City.
By taking readers on a journey through the Muslim world, I hope to help them understand why we are witnessing a resurgence of Islam, traditional and militant, in Western as well as Eastern societies.
-- ABBAS, a Paris-based photojournalist with Magnum Photos and author of the forthcoming "Allah O Akbar: A Journey Through Militant Islam."


General Motors Cries Foul On Hearing Over Trucks
With a bruising legal complaint attacking the Transportation Secretary's credentials and judgment, the General Motors Corporation today filed suit to bar the Government from pursuing his claim that up to six million G.M. pickup trucks may pose an unreasonable risk of killing their drivers and passengers.
G.M. lawyers are also weighing whether to seek a preliminary injunction, based on the suit, to block the Transportation Department from holding a public hearing on the pickup trucks.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the sale of fitness-gear subsidiaries of Weider Health and Fitness referred incorrectly to two investors in Icon Health and Fitness Inc., which acquired the businesses.
A minority stake will be held by the Weider brothers -- Joe and Ben -- not the Bain brothers. (Bain Capital is the parent of Icon.)


Correction Chief Declares Rikers Island Under Control
Despite three days of food and work strikes by thousands of inmates at Rikers Island, the city's Correction Commissioner said yesterday that "we're not losing control" and insisted that the Giuliani administration's plan to cut the number of correction officers by 900 would not risk the safety of officers or inmates.
The Commissioner, Anthony J.  Schembri, told members of the City Council that while the $31.6 million in new budget cuts planned for his department were "significant reductions," the impression that Rikers Island was on the brink of a crisis was being whipped up by department employees, inmates and the news media.


Good and Bad Gingrich
Watching the first days of Speaker-in-waiting Newt Gingrich is a little like watching the start of a buffalo stampede.
There is a lot of dust in the air, but it is impossible to tell exactly what is going to get trampled.
In his initial instructions to his followers in the House of Representatives, Mr.
Gingrich unveiled some ideas that could earn him a place as a historic reformer and some others that would put him alongside the worst of the Democratic hacks he helped defeat.
His instincts on committees and committee chairmanships seem basically sound.
He passed over some seasoned time-servers in favor of more vigorous junior members.
That is a healthy precedent and shows a willingness to overturn the Democratic habit of rewarding Congressional survivalists with power out of proportion to their talents.


No-Webber Warriors No Solace For Knicks
The Knicks ended a disappointing trip with a frustrating loss.
Unnerved by foul trouble in the fourth quarter, the Knicks dropped a 109-100 decision to the Golden State Warriors tonight at the Oakland Coliseum, sending them home with three loses on their four-game trip.


Cato Corp.(CACOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 22


A Scientist Says He Has Isolated Dinosaur DNA
After two years of painstaking analysis and hundreds of unsuccessful attempts, a scientist at Brigham Young University has extracted the genetic material DNA from what he thinks are bone fragments of 80-million-year-old dinosaurs.
The surprise was that the recovered DNA bore little or no resemblance to that of any modern animals.
It is "like nothing we've ever seen before," said Dr.
Scott R. Woodward, an associate professor of microbiology at the university in Provo, Utah, who directed the study.


Bacardi to Drop Burson-Marsteller
Bacardi Imports will not renew a multimillion-dollar public relations contract with Burson-Marsteller after two executives at the public relations firm made remarks opposing the United States embargo of Cuba.
Jose Argamasilla Bacardi, a spokesman for Bacardi in Miami, said, "They have a different business philosophy than we do." He added that the conflict was not with Burson-Marsteller but with two executives in its Washington office, Kirby Jones and Pierre Salinger, who made the remarks.


Underwhelming Nets Top Understaffed Foe
The revival continued for a second straight game because the Nets were not terribly erratic.
The return of their stellar shooting, which has routinely been absent, was refreshing for long spells.
The Nets won again.
Really.
They made it arduous on themselves again.
Really.
Piecing together intense back-to-back efforts for the first time this season, the Nets barely subdued the confused and undermanned Washington Bullets, 111-103, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


New Status Puts Dole in Crosscurrents on GATT
The phone is ringing endlessly at Senator Bob Dole's offices in Kansas and on Capitol Hill, but not just with congratulations for his new status as majority-leader-in-waiting.
Barely nine days after he was swept to a victory even he did not predict, he is caught in the cross-currents as Republican party leader and nascent statesman, as potential Presidential candidate and as a free-trader with second thoughts about the popularity of free trade.


It's Cheaper in Queens: Mets Don't Raise Prices
In an effort to woo back fans following the strike-shortened 1994 season, the Mets announced yesterday that they would not raise ticket prices in 1995 and took steps to make season-ticket and ticket-plan purchases more convenient for their fans.
For the fourth straight year, Shea Stadium ticket prices will remain at $15 for field, loge and mezzanine boxes, $12 for upper level boxes and reserved seats on the loge and mezzanine levels and $6.50 for seats in the upper deck.


Palacio Enters Plea
The former featherweight champion RUBEN PALACIO of Colombia entered a not guilty plea to heroin charges yesterday through his attorney in Miami.
Palacio was arrested Nov. 6 at Miami International Airport.
A Federal grand jury's two-count indictment charged him with importation of heroin and possession with intent to distribute heroin. (AP)


Confession Rehearsed, Suspect Says
The defendant in the Rockland County murder and carjacking trial said today that he was "rehearsed and coached" by two detectives into giving a 49-page confession to an assistant district attorney just hours after the crime.
But prosecutors said Edward L. Summers, the 23-year-old premedical student charged with the crime, was so specific in his statement to Anita Giannico Conklin, the assistant district attorney, down to casual conversations with the victims and the complex directions to reach the deserted field where the driver of a stolen Jeep was fatally shot, that it might be difficult to convince the jury that the statement was not authentic.


Five Shows Focus on World War II Generation
One benefit of the dense gallery scene in Manhattan is the frequency with which individual exhibitions serendipitously intersect and overlap, their separate beams coalescing to spotlight a certain period or generation.
Perhaps because of the big museum shows -- Cy Twombly at the Museum of Modern Art, the Italians at the Guggenheim Museum and, especially, Willem de Kooning at the Metropolitan Museum of Art -- the generation of the moment is the one that emerged during or directly after World War II.
A show of Barnett Newman's early work at Pace Gallery and the mini-retrospective of Alberto Giacometti at Acquavella are just two examples.
This weekend brings five more solo shows to uptown galleries that feature painters from this fertile period.
Two of these shed further light on Abstract Expressionism: Mr. de Kooning's achievement is the subject of one effort while another presents the gestural portraits produced by Elaine de Kooning, his wife, in the mid-1950's.
But luckily, the remaining shows are devoted to Mark Tobey and Steve Wheeler, two maverick, less routinely visible sensibilities, and to the young Richard Diebenkorn; these serve as important reminders that even in its heyday, Abstract Expressionism was not the only game around.


Jenkins a Cubs Coach
FERGUSON JENKINS, a 20-game winner for six straight seasons with the Chicago Cubs from 1967 to 1972, will join the Cubs as pitching coach, the team said yesterday.
It will be his first such assignment on the major league level.
Jenkins, who spent 19 seasons with four teams in the majors and was a 20-game winner seven times, has spent the last two years as a roving instructor in the Cincinnati Reds' minor league system.
He also spent two seasons as pitching coach with Texas' Class AAA affiliate at Oklahoma City.


Scotts Co.(SCTT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Therapy For Menopause Reduces Risks
A three-year study of nearly 900 women may result in a significant refinement in hormone replacement therapy after menopause.
The study found that a mixture of the two hormones estrogen and progestin is better than estrogen alone, protecting women not only against the risk of uterine cancer but heart attacks as well.
The findings, described yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Dallas, should help resolve a vexing issue facing the more than 40 million American women past menopause.
While estrogen alone was known to significantly reduce a postmenopausal woman's risk of cardiovascular disease, it also increased her risk of uterine cancer.


Israeli-P.L.O. Talks: A Growing Mistrust
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization are struggling to keep their peace talks alive against a backdrop of growing mistrust and rancor.
Barely a week ago, Israel agreed to procedural changes in the negotiations to give a boost to the faltering P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat.
But such a gesture did not put an end to underlying suspicions and charges of bad faith.


A Major Star Date In Enterprise History
Thirteen "Star Trek" books are sold every minute, and that's just on the planet Earth.
The Trekkie phenomenon is so indefatigable that there's even a volume ("Trek: The Lost Years," by Edward Gross) about a time period when the television show was off the air.
In the face of such enthusiasm, a "Star Trek" film needn't do more than exist to generate sighs of contentment among die-hard fans.
But a couple of them ("II" and "IV") have had legitimate crossover potential, bridging the entertainment gap between the Starship Enterprise and the real world.
"Star Trek Generations" is the series' most ambitious film, if only because it mixes the casts of two "Star Trek" television series with the help of "some sort of a temporal flux." For readers who find it baffling that there even are two television series (actually there are three, with a fourth on the way), the question is obvious.
How much interest does this new installment hold for general audiences, for "Trek"-resistant moviegoers who turn elsewhere for their religious experiences and wouldn't know a main deflector shield from a satellite dish?
What can "Generations" really say to the jargon-impaired?


11th Police Suicide Leaves A Void, and Questions
Monday, the day Officer Daniel Atkinson killed himself, had seemed like an ordinary day.
He drove the congested streets of downtown Brooklyn and Brooklyn Heights giving out tickets to double-parked cars and vehicles blocking intersections.
For five years in the 84th Precinct, he had done pretty much the same thing.


Russians Grouse (at U.S. Embassy)
Russians are once again complaining about long lines, red tape and bone-chilling rudeness from petty bureaucrats.
Only now they maintain that such typical Soviet-era indignities are rampant in the consular section of the American Embassy.


Whitman: 'Can't Back Off'
When Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman appeared on Bob Grant's talk show yesterday, the topic -- not unexpectedly -- was her decision not to appear on his show except to discuss intolerance.
These are excerpts.
WHITMAN: It was never about you and me and I tried to make that clear from the very beginning.
It was about my concern of the kind of dialogue that has been happening -- it's happening more and more.
It's not just happening here, it's happening on a lot of shows, but particularly because you have been a supporter of mine, you and I agree on a lot of issues -- on the tax issues, on government issues, on a lot of criminal justice issues -- that it became even more important that I show that I am consistent.
I have spoken out whether it was Khalid Abdul Mohammed, who said things that I felt were divisive.
I need to speak out on that because language affects behavior and I know that you have a great deal of influence, you have a very loyal listenership many of whom believe in what's said on the air and they -- they take it to heart.
And the problem that I have that -- where you're starting to get into more and more, and again it's happening on a lot of different airwaves, that's troubling to me is that we allow that talk -- some of it very divisive by categorizing groups of people because of who they are: race, religion, age, and then thinking that when the radio's turned off somehow that -- all that's forgotten.
And my concern is that it's not, that people take that home with them and it makes it very difficult for them to work and live in a multicultural, multiracial society that we have today.


Corrections
An obituary on Nov. 10 about John Hadley, an investor of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., misstated the location of the boarding school from which his wife, Robin Tieken Hadley, was graduated.
The school, Chatham Hall, is in Chatham, Va., not Massachusetts.


I.Q. Tests Serve to Keep Us All in Our Places
To the Editor:
Richard A. Gardner's name for "intelligence tests" -- "Tests That Predict Success or Failure in the School System From Which the Questions Have Been Derived" (letter, Nov. 12) -- mirrors the circular method that produced them.
While Dr.
Gardner appears to dismiss I.Q. tests as measures of intelligence, his criticism is merely semantic.


Juggling Scimitars and Identities
As fearless as they are foolhardy, the Flying Karamazov Brothers have juggled everything from scimitars to Shakespeare, but these faux Russian zanies are irrepressibly iconoclastic, even about the art of the juggle.
Looking back at the beginning of their careers, Howard Jay Patterson, the most daring of the Karamazovs, said: "Basically, juggling was an excuse to get people to stop and look at us while we talked. And we found that juggling sharp things was a really good excuse." In their new Broadway show, "The Flying Karamazov Brothers Do the Impossible" (opening tomorrow at the Helen Hayes Theater), "there are battleaxes and swords and sickles and hatchets and -- we kill ourselves," he said.
"Every single night!"


What Turkey Gives in Return for U.S. Military and Foreign Aid
To the Editor:
"Deadly Gifts to Greece and Turkey" (editorial, Nov. 13) offers outright misperceptions and distortions about Turkey.


Unlimited Monthly Subway Pass With Free Transfers Is Proposed
After 90 years of charging a single flat fare for every ride, transit officials yesterday proposed a new system that would allow New Yorkers to buy monthly passes with unlimited trips and permit free transfers between buses and subways.
To pay for the discounts, the basic $1.25 fare would rise by 10 cents.
But the future of the long-awaited proposals is likely to be caught in the crosscurrents of state politics and may hinge on the outcome of the political feud between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Governor-elect George E. Pataki.


Russian Emigre Orchestra
The New York Association for New Americans was started last year to help resettle emigres from the former Soviet Union.
And since quite a few of those emigres are musicians, the organization has sponsored the New American Chamber Orchestra, a project meant to keep the players employed in something like the manner to which they were accustomed.
The orchestra, which is conducted by Beth Cohen, presented a wide-ranging program at Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday evening.
As an ensemble, the group has problems with unity and intonation, but it addressed the music with an appealing energy and concentration.


What Turkey Gives in Return for U.S. Military and Foreign Aid; Arming Genocide
To the Editor:
Re "Deadly Gifts to Greece and Turkey" (editorial, Nov. 13):


Davenport And Date Reach Semifinals
It could be a case of beginner's luck, in stereo.
It could be the after-effects of several exhilarating shopping expeditions to Greenwich Village, new territory for 18-year-old Lindsay Davenport, now the highest-ranked and only American-born player in the Top 10.


Some on Right See A Tactical Misstep On School Prayer
The speed with which Representative Newt Gingrich moved to put school prayer at the top of his political agenda this week has both astounded the conservative groups traditionally allied with that cause and left some of them worrying that he is moving too far, too fast.
While generally pleased at the revival of a cause that seemed moribund, many of the leading conservative groups involved with the issue are concerned that in supporting a constitutional amendment that would fundamentally change the Bill of Rights, Mr.
Gingrich may be courting the same sort of political setback that President Clinton incurred when he pushed early in his Administration to overturn the ban on homosexuals in the military.
And they worry that even if successful, a school prayer effort could hand liberal groups an easy target they could use to undermine support on other issues.


Democrats Find Themselves Looking Wistfully in the Window
After 40 years in power, House Democrats began today to get a taste of life in the political wilderness.
At a news conference where they were peppered with questions about the Republicans' plans, Richard A. Gephardt and other Democrats found themselves repeatedly forced to admit that they were in the dark and did not know enough to comment.


McCaughey to Lead A Study of Medicaid
Calling New York's $20.4 billion a year Medicaid program for the poor the "single largest fiscal and social challenge facing state government," Governor-elect George E. Pataki yesterday appointed his incoming Lieutenant Governor, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, to head a 20-member task force to study the problem.
The Federal Government pays for nearly half the Medicaid program in New York, with the state paying 32.3 percent, or $6.6 billion, and New York City 18.9 percent, or $3.9 billion.


A Portrait of the Artist on a City Street


Skoda Gives Its Suppliers a Place in the Auto Plant
Petr Prusa, the foreman in a brightly lit auto parts workshop, appears to be one of thousands of production workers inside an assembly plant for Skoda, the big Czech auto maker.
But Mr.
Prusa is part of a bold experiment by Skoda to improve quality and cut costs.
His group finishes bumpers, dashboards and door panels, but his employer is not Skoda but an independent parts maker that set up shop inside the plant at Skoda's invitation.
It is paying former Skoda workers less money to make parts for Skoda cars.


Chastened, T.W.A. Tries Again
When Trans World Airlines emerged from bankruptcy last fall, it gave travelers free tickets and held "spirit day" rallies for employees around the country.
The celebrations, it seems, were premature.
The airline emerged with a business plan built largely on hope.
It called for revenues to rise 70 percent, to $5.7 billion, in 1997.
Now, just one year out of bankruptcy, the airline says that revenues will be closer to $4 billion, which is almost $1 billion more than it made in 1993.


Dire Warnings for Parliament on State of Russian Army
The beleaguered Russian Defense Minister told a skeptical Parliament today that the Russian military was in disastrous shape -- underequipped, underfinanced and losing its ability to defend the motherland.
"Not a single army in the world is in such a catastrophic state," said the Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev.
"I ask you to take this as a warning."


Contemporary, Yet Age-Old
The Contemporary Dance Theater of El Salvador was founded just this year.
In the best possible way, however, there was nothing new about the five-member group or what it presented on Thursday night at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, in a program that will be repeated tonight.
Compelling simplicity and freshness were keynotes of the company's style.
And what it presented was both of the late 20th century and an age-old culture.
Wound through the mostly modern music were ghostlike echoes of human cries and ancient musical instruments.
And the directness of the dancing and much of the choreography evoked the bold intensity of folk art.


Making That First Mutual Fund Purchase
Dina Deflerios, 25, wanted to get on the right track financially.
So she asked a family friend who works at Smith Barney to help her create a saving and investing plan.
"I considered doing it myself beginning in the summer of 1993, but I wasn't knowledgable enough to do it," she said.
"I needed that extra push."


The Shrinking Governor
So Governor-elect Pataki has time to buy a farm and appear on David Letterman, but he cannot find a moment for a one-on-one meeting with the Mayor of New York City.
Perhaps it goes to show that he is better at getting votes than acquiring noblesse.
Or maybe he is confused about his political cliches and thinks he is supposed to be petty, rather than gracious, in victory.
Or maybe, as Mayor Giuliani said in the campaign, Mr.
Pataki is not willing to meet unless one of his minders is around to report back to Alfonse D'Amato.
Whatever.
The point is that Mr.
Pataki's insistence on treating Rudolph Giuliani with contempt is also a sign of contempt for the city's 7.5 million citizens.
If he wants to be the Governor of upstate, Long Island and Staten Island, he ran for the wrong office.


Young Knows Losing Reflects on Him, Too
As the Giants struggle, George Young can only laugh at how last season, when the Giants were 11-5, people called him a genius.
If you believe what people say now, Young has gone from Albert Einstein to Bart Simpson.
"That's the nature of the business," said Young.
"This year's genius is next year's fool."


Amelia Lewis, 91, Victor in Case That Changed Juvenile Justice
Amelia Dietrich Lewis, a lawyer who helped reshape the American juvenile justice system, died on Wednesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Phoenix.
She was 91 and lived in nearby Scottsdale.
She had suffered a brief illness, her family said.


Trust Officers' Mission Broadened by New Law
IN literature, as in life, trust officers have been characterized as the most conservative of creatures, unwilling to take even minor risks with the money they manage.
Tales abound of family assets that were depleted by inflation or of investments that far underperformed the financial markets.
In their defense, trustees have long said that they are hamstrung.
A large body of law makes preservation of capital -- and thus risk avoidance -- their primary objective, explained Isabel Miranda, director of the trusts and estates department at Citibank in New York.


Jets Expect Vikings To Enter Hitting
This is how nasty the Vikings' defense is early in a game:
"I'm not gonna be surprised if I'm in a fight back there after five minutes," Boomer Esiason said today.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Mark Lee, pitcher, and Rod Robertson, infielder, to minor-league contracts.
Purchased the contracts of Joe Borowski, Jimmy Haynes and Brian Sackinsky, pitchers, and Curtis Goodwin, outfielder, from Bowie of the Eastern League; and Billy Percipal from Rochester of the International League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Purchased the contracts of Frank Rodriguez, Joel Bennett and Mike Sullivan, pitchers; and Steve Rodriguez and Bill Selby, infielders, from Pawtucket of the International League; and Joe Hudson, pitcher, from Trenton of the Eastern League.
Claimed Bill Wertz, pitcher, off waivers from Cleveland.
Sent Jeff McNeely, outfielder, outright to Pawtucket.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Designated Joe Grahe, pitcher, for assignment.
Purchased the contract of Mark Ratekin, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Willie Smith, pitcher.
Purchased the contracts of Brian Giles, outfielder, from Charlotte of the International League; Tony Mitchell, outfielder, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League; Einar Diaz, catcher, from Columbus of the South Atlantic League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Purchased the contracts of Tim Unroe and West Weger, infielders; Sid Roberson and Scott Karl, pitchers; and Danny Perez, outfielder, from El Paso of the Texas League and Ken Felder, outfielder, and Bobby Hughes, catcher, from Stockton of the California League.
Assigned Charlie Rogers, pitcher, to New Orleans of the American Association.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Released Shawn Boskie, pitcher, and Ruben Santana, infielder.
Sent Craig Clayton, George Glinatsis and Jeff Williams, pitchers; and Brian Turang, infielder, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Chris Nichting, pitcher.
Sent James Hurst, pitcher, and Desi Wilson, outfielder, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Traded Eddie Zosky, infielder, to the Florida Marlins for a player to be named.
Purchased the contracts of Tim Crabtree, pitcher, from Syracuse of the International League; Felipe Crespo and Chris Stynes, infielders, and Ricardo Jordan, Jose Silva and Jeff Ware, pitchers, from Knoxville of the Southern League; Lonell Roberts, outfielder, from Dunedin of the Florida State League; and Edwin Hurtado, pitcher, from Hagerstown of the South Atlantic League.
Sent Huck Flener, pitcher, outright to Syracuse of the International League.
Designated Willie Canate, outfielder, for assignment.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Designated Ramon Caraballo, infielder; Jerry Koller, Matt Murray, Brian Bark, pitchers; and Troy Hughes, outfielder, for assignment.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Tony Gamboa minor-league field coordinator and Ron Clark manager of Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Claimed Larry Luebbers, pitcher, off waivers from the Chicago Cubs.
Signed Kurt Stillwell, infielder, and Scott Scudder, pitcher, to minor-league contracts.
Reclaimed Jamie Dismuke, first baseman, off waivers from the Los Angeles Dodgers and designated him for assignment.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contracts of Steve Decker, catcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League and Stan Spencer and Vic Darensbourg, pitchers, from Portland of the Eastern League.
Sent Greg O'Halloran, catcher, outright to Charlotte of the International League.
NEW YORK METS -- Traded Jeromy Burnitz, outfielder, and Joe Roa, pitcher, to the Cleveland Indians for Dave Mlicki, Jerry DiPoto and Paul Byrd, pitchers, and a player to be named.
Purchased the contracts of Robert Person, pitcher; Ed Alfonzo, infielder; and Ricky Otero, outfielder, from Binghamton of the Eastern League; Hector Ramirez, pitcher, from St.
Lucie of the Florida State League; and Omar Garcia, first baseman, from Norfolk of the International League.


White House Warns of Market Jolt if Trade Pact Is Defeated
Raising the stakes in the Administration's effort to round up votes for a world trade agreement, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen warned today that its defeat could have "a very negative effect on the financial markets of this country."
The prediction was a high-risk strategy for the White House: it sets up a prophecy that could become self-fulfilling if the 123-nation trade accord fails to get through Congress.


Feinstein Claims Victory in Senate Race
After a drawn-out count of absentee ballots, Senator Dianne Feinstein declared victory today over Representative Michael Huffington in a re-election race that was the costliest Congressional election ever.
"The vote clearly indicates that I shall continue to represent California," Ms.
Feinstein said in her victory statement, releasing statistics from state election officials that indicated the count of the absentee ballots had placed her 147,404 votes ahead of her challenger, with only 156,210 ballots left to count.


Yonkers Mayor And Wife Sued Over the Loss Of a Contract
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski and his wife, Lynn, have been sued by the owner of a small public relations company, who charged that he lost his advertising contract with the city last spring after he failed to find a publisher for a children's book written by the Mayor's wife.
Ralph Newman, the owner of the Yonkers company TBE Associates, said in the lawsuit that he worked hard to try to place the Mayor's wife's book but that it was rejected by 37 publishers.
He said in the suit that she was disappointed by his lack of success and that she called him at 7:30 one morning a year ago and said to him "in a screaming monologue" that "TBE and Ralph Newman would never again get another dime from Yonkers."


Peter McKean, 50, Audio Store Founder
Peter Thomas McKean, a pioneer in the development of the all-electronics department store, died on Tuesday while returning from a business trip to Nevada.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan, Southhampton, L.I., and West Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was a heart attack, according to his companion, Justin Baxter.


In Performance: POP; A Simple Structure For Be-Bop Improvisation
Smalls
Spike Wilner's sextet knew exactly what it was doing on Tuesday and how to do it.
Mr.
Wilner, a pianist best known for leading several jam-session bands around town, made fairly simple structural demands on his group, and he and his musicians turned the small-group be-bop rules into a playground for improvisation.


Charlotte N. Montgomery Consumer Writer, 90
Charlotte N. Montgomery, a pioneering consumer writer, died on Nov. 10 in Amherst Nursing Home in Amherst, Mass., where she had lived since April.
She was 90 and had lived in Westfield, N.J., for most of her life.
She died of pneumonia, said her daughter, Sarah Montgomery of South Hadley, Mass.


In Performance: POP; Updating Gospel Music, Or at Least Trying
Beacon Theater
Jesus may have warned his followers to beware of wolves in sheep's clothing in the Book of Matthew, but what about sheep in wolves' clothing?
That's what gospel music has become, dressing its message up in contemporary secular styles.
One such disguise is the club-music-informed, urban-contemporary gospel of Grammy-winning acts like the siblings BeBe and CeCe Winans and the Sounds of Blackness choir, who performed on Tuesday night.


I.Q. Tests Serve to Keep Us All in Our Places; Measuring Intelligence
To the Editor:
"What Do I.Q. Tests Measure? Not Intelligence" by Richard A. Gardner (letter, Nov. 12) is such a collection of half-truths, distortions and inaccuracies that it takes a place toward the bottom among the heated attacks made against the book "The Bell Curve," by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.


Janet Ahlberg, 50, Children's Illustrator
Janet Ahlberg, who created the illustrations for a series of memorable children's books written by her husband, Allan, died on Tuesday in Leicester, England.
She was 50.
The cause was cancer, said a statement from the Ahlbergs' publisher, Little, Brown &amp; Company.


Executive Changes
CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE, Toronto, appointed J. Matthew Singleton executive vice president.
He will be based in New York.
INTERNATIONAL RETAIL SYSTEMS INC., Irving, Tex., named Roger Bryant president and chief executive, succeeding Dwight Romanica, who continues as chairman.


Remembering the Player They Called Spider
He was first to study hall, last to leave.
He fit three jobs into his day, sent his spare change to his mother in Brooklyn and wrote reggae lyrics on paper napkins.
Richard Saunders is the latest college basketball player to die young, and the San Francisco State campus reacted tonight with a moment of silence.
But only a brief one because the player they called Spider was rarely quiet himself.
Students here lovingly recalled him as an extrovert, a loud dresser who wore eight rings at a time, baggy pants and a glow-in-the-dark junior college state championship jacket.


Messier Joins Gretzky's Tour
Mike Barnett, the agent for Wayne Gretzky, said yesterday that a Gretzky-sponsored touring team will leave for Europe after one exhibition hockey game in North America.
The game will be on Dec. 1 against the Detroit Vipers of the International Hockey League at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
One of Gretzky's touring teammates will be Mark Messier, captain of the Rangers and a longtime friend of The Great One.
"I am sure I'll be on board," Messier said yesterday by telephone from his home in Hilton Head, S.C.


Vampires More Verbal Than Oral
They may not be as decorative as Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt, but the vampires who inhabit "Swoop," a diverting bit of intellectual vaudeville at the SoHo Repertory Theater, certainly have more impressive vocabularies.
That's because they are the creations of Mac Wellman, a playwright whose approach to a subject seems to involve throwing a crazy salad of words at it and seeing which ones stick.
His neck-biters say things like, "The lack of that adamant is my mitigating modality." Clearly, this is not Bela Lugosi speaking.
"Swoop" is an antic, meditative postscript to Mr.
Wellman's "Dracula," one of the high points of the last fringe-theater season, in which he used the framework of Bram Stoker's tale to explore the decline of the Victorian era.
Here he has taken a trio of undead souls (played by four actors, since one of the characters is split into ego and id) from the earlier play and transplanted them to the present, where they hover over the New York metropolitan area contemplating the "world of blur" beneath them in a quartet of monologues.





Carjacking Murder Suspect and Cross-Examiner Icily Argue
Under an intense cross-examination, Edward L. Summers today clung to his story that a flamboyant Bronx drug dealer shot two Rockland County teen-agers during a carjacking last January and that he himself only drove the stolen Jeep back to the Bronx.
District Attorney Kenneth Gribetz tried repeatedly to rattle Mr.
Summers, first by hopscotching wildly through Mr.
Summers's narrative of the crime, then by mocking the existence of the purported drug dealer, known only as Dino.
Mr.
Gribetz contends Dino is a fictional character created by Mr.
Summers as part of an intricate tale to cover up Mr.
Summers's killing of one of the youths, Michael Falcone, and wounding of the second, Scott Nappi.


Frank R. Thoms Jr., Athletic Director, 85
Frank R. Thoms Jr., who served as director of athletics at Williams College from 1950 to 1971, died on Monday at Geisinger Medical Center in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
He was 85.
His family said he was stricken with viral pneumonia during a trip from his home in East Boothbay, Me.


Abidjan Journal; The Little Railroad That Couldn't Goes Private
In the 14 years that Kouassi Kouadio has been riding the railroad that links the skyscrapers of Abidjan and Ouagadougou, the dusty capital of neighboring Burkina Faso, expectations of an ever-quickening world delivered by modern transportation seem to have been cruelly thrown into reverse.
While reports from far away speak of trains growing ever more competitive with air travel, the tracks that bear Mr.
Kouadio on the 704-mile route have grown rusted and bent, making what was once a zippy 24-hour trip an aggravating three-day journey.


Hurricane Gordon Weakens Suddenly
A deadly Hurricane Gordon that had lingered menacingly for much of the day off the Outer Banks of North Carolina weakened suddenly this afternoon to a tropical storm and doubled back toward Florida and the Caribbean, where it began almost 10 days ago.
But given its zigzagging path so far, hurricane forecasters were not certain that the storm would not change course again.


Trying to Make the Numbers Add Up
Bargaining representatives for major league baseball players continued to crunch numbers today and into the night to see if there is any room for negotiations on a new tax system team owners have proposed in hopes of ending a strike that has shut down the game for more than three months.
The union said the numbers in the owners' proposal were too punitive, but that they would continue to study the framework of the plan to see if there was room for discussion.
For their part, the owners said they believe they are moving closer to the players' desires by tabling the concept of a "hard" salary cap, meaning a rigid one that would, according to the union, artificially limit salaries.


Symphonies That Rumble and Buzz
At the Kitchen on Wednesday night, Glenn Branca conducted the world premiere of his Symphony No. 8 ("The Mystery") with a clenched fist.
The posture was right for the music, a continuous, evolving gale created by eight electric guitars, bass and drums.
The two-movement symphony and its companion work, Symphony No. 10 ("The Mystery Part 2"), which will be performed at the Kitchen through Sunday, filled the room with tingling, blaring, buzzing, rumbling, crackling overtones and a mixture of coiled tension and annunciatory zeal.
Mr.
Branca is a godfather of alternative rock.
His early-1980's works for massed, retuned guitars, lingering over structures as elemental as a sustained E major chord, revealed new possibilities for guitar ensembles.
Members of Sonic Youth performed with Mr.
Branca, and the first Sonic Youth recordings, which meshed punk-rock songs with Branca-like tremolo guitars, appeared on Mr.
Branca's Neutral Records.
Through Sonic Youth, innumerable other bands discovered the unpredictable beauties of electric-guitar overtones.


Macy to Close I. Magnin Specialty Chain
Getting ready for its merger with Federated Department Stores next month, R. H. Macy &amp; Company said today that it would close the venerable I. Magnin specialty chain by putting nine of its stores up for sale and converting the remaining four into either Macy's or Bullock's outlets.
Federated apparently rejected an 11th-hour $40 million bid for the entire chain from Jerry A. Magnin, whose great-grandmother founded the flagship store in San Francisco in 1876.
That store is one of the nine to be sold.


Murder Defendant Says He Felt Rejected
A Larchmont carpenter took the witness stand at his trial for the murders of the couple who bought his childhood home, and he described feeling rejected by his family and an alcohol problem that began in the sixth grade.


Market Loses Ground; G.M. at 52-Week Low
The stock market drifted lower yesterday with trading distorted by the expiration of options, known as "double witching." General Motors, a leading stock, also drifted lower and established a new 52-week low, capping a nearly monthlong decline.
But bond prices were stable, and the dollar rose, helped by news of a narrowing of the United States' trade deficit with Japan.


Corrections
An obituary headline on Wednesday about the writer and scholar J. I. M. Stewart, who wrote mysteries under the name Michael Innes, misstated his age in some copies.
He was 88.


For the Young, Bright and Bored; Long Island School Rescues Youngsters in Academic Limbo
Barbara Reiser felt pleased with her son Brian's new school after a teacher called last month with the results of the boy's first math test.
He had failed.
"Brian had never really been challenged in school before," Mrs.
Reiser said.
"But now he can't coast. It's a great learning experience for Brian. I expected him to be beside himself. But he handled it really well."


In the Zion Case, a Doctor And Profession on the Stand
It was around 1 A.M., during the 17th hour of her shift at New York Hospital, that Dr.
Luise L. Weinstein, then a first-year postgraduate medical student, took her first look at a new patient named Libby Zion, 18.
In the more than 10 years since that March night, and in two days of questioning in a Manhattan courtroom this week, everything Dr.
Weinstein did in those hours -- the directions she gave, her discussions with colleagues, thoughts she had expressed to no one -- have been dissected.


The Wide Universe Of Pina Bausch
A man wearing flippers and underpants immerses himself in a water-filled aquarium.
Another tries to turn an egg with feathers attached into a glider; it crashes to the ground, yolk and all.
In a brilliantly choreographed sequence, four seated couples propel themselves across the floor like rowers in a boat and bunch up against a wall.
She's back.
Pina Bausch's latest United States premiere is a typical collage of human aspirations and failures.
But it is also surprisingly lighthearted in tone and successfully so.


Bridge
The Fall Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League began here this afternoon, with some 4,000 players looking forward to 10 days of play.
There will be seven major championships, and the most significant will be the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams, starting a week from today.
The captain of one contending team will be Michael Becker of Teaneck, N.J., who held the West cards on the diagramed deal in the Spingold Knockout Teams in July, at the Summer Nationals in San Diego.
He opened the bidding with one diamond, then found himself defending four hearts after a take-out double by North.


In Performance: POP; Another Style Change, For a Major Pianist
Village Vanguard
Geri Allen's career has been marked by abrupt shifts in direction that have sometimes obscured her status as one of the more imposing pianists of her generation.
During the early 1980's, she wrote pieces that allowed her to use her percussive abilities, pieces that worked on ostinatos and incorporated world music and pop.
On Tuesday night, celebrating the release of a fine new album, "21" (Blue Note), she brought two musicians who reflected a radically different sensibility, one that adhered strictly to the mainstream.


Helms Voices Doubts on Clinton as Commander
Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is in line to head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said today that President Clinton was not up to the job of being Commander in Chief.
Two days after the Clinton Administration rejected his call to delay a vote on a world trade agreement, Senator Helms made a number of caustic comments about the President's policies and Mr.
Clinton personally.


Arnold Swenson, 90, Bookseller To College Students for 48 Years
Arnold H. Swenson, who sold books to five decades of students at Columbia, Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Tuesday in South Yarmouth, Mass., where he had lived for the last three years.
He was 90 and had been a resident of Mashpee, Mass., since his retirement in 1977.
He suffered a short illness, said his son Peter, also of Mashpee.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International The United States trade deficit widened by 4.6 percent in September.
Imports increased for the fifth consecutive month.
But the deficit with Japan -- which accounts for more than half of the overall deficit -- narrowed by 7.4 percent.  [ Page 41. ] Skoda is trying a bold experiment in auto production in an effort to improve quality and cut costs.
The Czech company is giving suppliers their own place inside the assembly plant.
The method takes the "just in time" system, which is widely used in auto assembly plants in Japan and the West, a leap forward.  [ 41. ] Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen warned that the defeat of the world trade agreement known as GATT could have "a very negative effect on the financial markets of this country."  [ 11. ] Companies T.W.A. failed to fix itself during a 19-month bankruptcy, emerging with a business plan built largely on hope.
Many current and former employees say the airline continues to suffer from a number of bad decisions -- or indecision -- by its owners.  [ 41. ] Amgen plans to buy a biotechnology rival for $240 million.
The deal for Synergen reflects a consolidation in the industry.  [ 41. ] Chase Manhattan will buy U.S.
Trust's securities processing business in a stock swap valued at $363.5 million.  [ 44. ] British Aerospace sweetened its offer for VSEL to $905 million, seeking to defeat G.E.C. in the takeover battle.  [ 44. ] R. H. Macy will close the venerable I. Magnin specialty chain ahead of its merger with Federated Department stores.
Nine of the Magnin stores will be put up for sale and the rest will be converted into either Macy's or Bullock's outlets.  [ 44. ] Merry-Go-Round Enterprises is hiring a turnaround firm to guide it out of bankruptcy.
The president of the firm, Meridian Ventures, will be named chief executive of the retailer.  [ 44. ] Viacom plans to expand its headquarters in Manhattan, after a promise of $15 million in tax incentives from the city.  [ 27. ] The Economy Curbs on certain derivatives are being prepared by regulators from the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
The regulations would be the first to require certain sellers of derivatives to determine whether these potentially volatile financial securities are suitable for their customers.  [ 41. ] Markets Stocks faded as options expired and shares of General Motors fell to a 52-week low.
The S.&amp; P. 500 index dropped 2.09 points.  [ 42. ] The price of the 30-year Treasury bond was unchanged.
Bonds were helped by the dollar but were hurt by concerns over a large supply of new notes coming to market next week.  [ 45. ]
The dollar strengthened against other currencies, bolstered by the narrowing of the United States' trade deficit with Japan.  [ 53. ] Crude oil prices declined ahead of an OPEC meeting next week.
Analysts expect the meeting will not lead to a reduction in global supplies.
Coffee prices fell, while sugar climbed.  [ 53. ] Your Money Flexible spending accounts have survived, remaining a way for the typical family to save hundreds or even thousands of dollars.
Some employers had feared the accounts would be eliminated in an overhaul of the nation's health care system.  [ 38. ] Faced with bewildering choices in employee medical plans?
Benefit specialists provide some basic guidelines.  [ 38. ] Foreign bonds can offer very attractive returns.
But there are risks, particularly political and currency-exchange perils.  [ 38. ] The mission of trust officers will be broadened beyond capital preservation under a new New York State law.  [ 40. ]


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about physician-assisted suicide referred incorrectly to a case before Michigan's Supreme Court.
The court is weighing an appeal of a lower court's ruling that Dr.
Jack Kevorkian could be prosecuted for murder.
He has never been convicted of aiding in a suicide.


Mets Trade Burnitz to Indians for Pitching
Jeromy Burnitz spent most the 1994 season in Dallas Green's doghouse.
He was criticized -- harshly at times -- by the Mets' manager for his lack of discipline at the plate and poor performances in right field and on the bases.
Burnitz won't be back in right field for the Mets in 1995.
He will be in Cleveland, his new home as of yesterday after being traded to the Indians.
And the Mets' new right fielder just might be the Mets' former right fielder, Bobby Bonilla, who moved to third base last spring and said near the close of the strike-shortened season that he wanted to remain at that position next year.


Jeff Wadlington Memorial
A memorial service for Jeff Wadlington, a dancer with the Paul Taylor Dance Company who died in September, will be held on Monday at 6:30 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
The Taylor company will perform excerpts from dances in which Mr.
Wadlington was featured, including "Company B," "Musical Offering" and "Esplanade." Information: 431-5562.





Harold R. Kay, Heart Surgeon, 47
Dr.
Harold R. Kay, who helped develop surgical procedures to treat electrical disturbances in the heart, died on Nov. 12 at his home in Wynnewood, Pa.
He was 47.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Cindy Zeidman Kay.


I.B.M.'s Consulting Changes
Robert M. Howe, general manager of the fast-growing information technology consulting business at I.B.M., has stepped down to take over as general manager of the company's North American finance industry practice.
Under Mr.
Howe, the I.B.M.
Consulting Group grew from a standing start to nearly $400 million in revenues and 3,500 employees in fewer than five years.
But in July, the International Business Machines Corporation was reorganized into 12 industry specialities like finance, manufacturing, health and telecommunications.


From Totems to Taboos, The Glories of Polynesia
Although calling anyplace "paradise," as George Page finds himself doing as narrator of "Nomads of the Wind," is not stunningly original, the lusciously photographed beauty of Polynesia almost excuses the lapse.
This five-part series, presented by "Nature," sweeps across the Pacific, from Tahiti to Fiji to Easter Island to Hawaii and New Zealand, with visual pleasures all the way.
The opening episode, tomorrow, goes back 2,000 years to the venturesome people who first settled Tahiti and the Marquesas Islands.
By comparison with their journeys across the Pacific Ocean, Columbus was a stay-at-home.
Their discoveries are simulated by dramatizations, which are not always enhanced by a narration that owes something to come-to-the-islands brochures: "Each one like a jewel rises from the sea, each a possibility for a new beginning."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
5.50-6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.51
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.33
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.77
3.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
8.00
5.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.12
8.12
6.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.94
7.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.35
7.33
5.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 5


Editorial Notebook: The Iron Bowl Cometh; The Impossible Task Of Ceasing to Care
Yes, we are indisputably in the season of what the boys at ABC and ESPN call the "traditional rivalry." Soon enough now, the mellow voice of Keith Jackson will be heard in the land, coming to me from Birmingham's Legion Field, the Football Capital of the South.
Keith will speak once again the mindless but well-loved cliches that I know as well as some people know the mass.
Keith (I always think of him as Keith, not Mr. Jackson) will tell me that the Crimson Tide wins ugly behind the comeback skills of Jay Barker, the winningest quarterback in Alabama history.
And that's saying a lot because they've had some good ones down here -- Joe Namath, Ken Stabler, Bart Starr.
Keith will say that Auburn is on probation and out of the national championship chase, so it is playing for bragging rights in the game that folks in Alabama call the Iron Bowl.


12 Die as Arafat's Police Fire on Palestinian Militants
Yasir Arafat's police force opened fire for the first time on Palestinian protesters today, killing at least 12 people and wounding as many as 200 in street battles that raged for hours across the Gaza Strip's main city.
The police said an officer was also killed and 10 others were wounded when two police cars were set on fire.


U.N. Considers Allowing NATO To Retaliate for Serbian Attacks
The Security Council strongly condemned tonight a Serbian air attack in northern Bosnia and began considering a resolution that would allow NATO to attack airfields in neighboring Croatia from which such attacks come.
The condemnation came in a statement by the Security Council president, Madeleine K. Albright of the United States, who said the air raid on Bihac was "a clear violation of Bihac's status as a safe area."


Sperm Donor Is Awarded Standing as Girl's Father
A gay man in San Francisco, who donated his sperm 13 years ago so that a lesbian couple could have a child, has been granted legal standing as the father of the child, who lives with her mother and her mother's companion in New York City.
The 3-to-2 decision by the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan came after four years of legal battling over visiting rights between the father, Thomas Steel, and the mother, Robin Young, and Ms.
Young's partner, Sandra Russo.


Bob Carroll, Actor In Many Roles, 76
Bob Carroll, a veteran film and stage actor, died last Saturday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 76 and lived in Port Washington, L.I.
He died after a long illness, said Earl Kirmser, a friend.


For Some Urban Pioneers, The Future Grows Darker
FOR the 23 renters living in four adjoining walk-up tenements on Columbus Avenue and 67th Street, the Millenia have come too soon.
"Look at them," said Tom McCracken, standing on the roof and pointing to the huge hulking shapes dwarfing the house at 148 Columbus, where he has lived for 17 years in a rent-stabilized apartment.


CHRONICLE
The actress MARY TYLER MOORE offered a $1,000 "ransom" yesterday to a Malibu restaurant that is keeping a 65-year-old lobster in a tank.
The lobster, christened "Spike," is the star attraction at "Gladstones 4 Fish" restaurant.


Public &amp; Private; The High Cost of Death
In the summer of 1963 Eddie Lee Mays was executed for the murder of a woman during a robbery at the Friendly Tavern in Harlem.
The robbery netted $275 and, in a small way, gave Eddie Mays a place in history.
When he was buckled into the electric chair at Sing Sing, he became the last person executed by the State of New York.
Until now.
Until now, for in January New York will have, for the first time in many years, both legislators inclined to restore the death penalty and a Governor determined to sign the bill.
In this they would join a coterie of politicians in 37 states who have answered what they believe is the blood lust of a terrified and angry electorate with the ultimate illusory sop to violent crime.


Suspect Says Mind Blank On Slayings
Describing feelings of rejection by his wealthy family and an alcohol problem that began in sixth grade, a Larchmont carpenter took the witness stand today at his trial for the murders of the couple who bought his childhood home.
The carpenter, Paul Cox, 27, who was arrested in 1993, four and a half years after the crime, based on statements he made in confidence to fellow members of Alcoholics Anonymous, testified today that he was relieved when he was finally caught.


METRO DIGEST
BRATTON TRIES TO MODERNIZE N.Y.P.D.
For 11 months, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton has beseeched, cajoled and threatened his 31,000 officers to shake off what he views as their lethargy in fighting crime.
At a time when crime has emerged as a dominant concern of the American people, Mr.
Bratton has set out to overhaul one of the city's most legendary organizational cultures.
Page 1.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about Governor-elect George E. Pataki and his advisers misstated the given name of the Assembly's Republican leader.
He is Clarence D. Rappleyea, not Charles.


Napalm and Cluster Bombs Dropped on Bosnian Town
Defying international warnings, two nationalist Serb fighter jets attacked a Muslim town in northwestern Bosnia today with napalm and cluster bombs, United Nations military officials here said.
The bombs did not explode.


From Totems to Taboos, The Glories of Polynesia
Although calling anyplace "paradise," as George Page finds himself doing as narrator of "Nomads of the Wind," is not stunningly original, the lusciously photographed beauty of Polynesia almost excuses the lapse.
This five-part series, presented by "Nature," sweeps across the Pacific, from Tahiti to Fiji to Easter Island to Hawaii and New Zealand, with visual pleasures all the way.
The opening episode, tomorrow, goes back 2,000 years to the venturesome people who first settled Tahiti and the Marquesas Islands.
By comparison with their journeys across the Pacific Ocean, Columbus was a stay-at-home.
Their discoveries are simulated by dramatizations, which are not always enhanced by a narration that owes something to come-to-the-islands brochures: "Each one like a jewel rises from the sea, each a possibility for a new beginning."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about a libel lawsuit filed against the Prodigy Services Company by the investment firm of Stratton Oakmont misstated one term of an agreement reached by Prodigy at a New York State court hearing.
Prodigy agreed to tell the court whether it has the ability to screen and block messages posted on an electronic bulletin board.
It has not agreed to block any messages.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8  PALESTINIAN PROTESTERS KILLED
Yasir Arafat's police opened fire for the first time on Palestinian protesters, killing at least a dozen people and wounding 200 in street battles, and raising fears of a brewing civil war.  1


INSIDE
Bosnian Town Bombarded
Nationalist Serbs bombarded a Bosnian town, United Nations officials said, raising discussion of retaliatory air strikes by NATO.
Page 6.
Russia's Mighty Are Falling
Russia's Defense Minister, on the defensive himself, warned that the military was so underfinanced and weak as to be near collapse.
Page 7.
Latest Salvo in G.O.P.
War
Mayor Giuliani accused Governor-elect Pataki of pursuing a vendetta to embarrass not only him but the institution of the mayoralty.
Page 25.
Capricious Storm
A storm that had stalled off the Carolinas strengthened to a hurricane, then abruptly weakened and headed back toward Florida.
Page 9.


Small-Company Group Can Bounce Around
Mutual funds that specialize in small companies can put some zip in a portfolio, but they can zip in either direction, as shown by the disappointing returns this year of many of the three-year winners.
Given the group's volatility, it may be wise to limit such funds to 10 or 15 percent of a portfolio and buy them for the long term.
Jennifer Newport, a fund analyst with Morningstar Mutual Funds, attributed the winners' strong performance in recent years to two types of holdings.
Technology stocks, which enjoyed a strong run-up in the third quarter, powered several of the funds' growth over the three-year period.
Financial services stocks gave several funds a lift in recent years, but then set them back with this year's rise in interest rates.


Honoring Wilma Rudolph


Users of Computer Operating System Don't Find It Wanting
To the Editor:
I don't consider Stephen Manes's Oct. 25 Personal Computers column, "A Stormy Voyage on OS/2 Warp," to be an objective evaluation of the International Business Machines Corporation's operating system.
It appears that Mr.
Manes only briefly explored the product after his installation problems were solved.
His shallow review does not reflect what six million users know to be the value of OS/2.


British Aerospace Sweetens a Bid
British Aerospace P.L.C. struck back today in one of the biggest takeover fights yet in Britain's military contracting industry, increasing its offer for the submarine maker VSEL P.L.C. in an effort to top a bid by the General Electric Company P.L.C. of Britain.
British Aerospace's new offer gave VSEL's shareholders a choice of exchanging each of their shares for either $:14 cash ($22.12) or 3.3 British Aerospace shares, currently worth $:15.08 ($23.83).


Tax Plan More Stick Than Carrot
The owners' new tax proposal would create a tax collector's dream, but a baseball player's nightmare.
If the system the owners placed on the bargaining table Thursday and discussed with the players today in a Washington suburb had been in full effect in an uninterrupted season this year, 18 clubs would have paid nearly $193 million in taxes.
The Yankees would have served as the collector's most coveted customer, paying $31 million in payroll luxury taxes.
Of the 17 other clubs that would have been taxed, the Mets would have paid the least, $698,072.


Chase to Buy Some Assets Of U.S. Trust
The U.S.
Trust Corporation agreed yesterday to sell its securities processing business to the Chase Manhattan Corporation in a stock swap valued at $363.5 million.
U.S.
Trust, which is based in New York, said the sale would allow it to focus on its core businesses of asset management for individuals, institutions and mutual funds, private banking, special fiduciary services and corporate trust -- areas in which the company has expanded nationally in recent years.


Judge Rules Against System To Subsidize Hospital Care
For the second time this year, a Federal judge has sustained a challenge to Connecticut's system for subsidizing hospital care for poor patients, jeopardizing $150 million in Federal Medicaid grants to the state.
Judge Alfred V. Covello of Federal District Court here ruled Thursday that a 1974 Federal law covering employee benefits programs pre-empts the state system, which taxes hospitals and insured patients to cover the costs of hospital care for the indigent and the uninsured.


After Trip, Knicks Vow To Go on Offensive
The Knicks have returned home, but they are more concerned with a return to winning.
Losing three of four games on their Western trip forced the Knicks to take a hard early-season look at themselves.
After the 109-100 loss to the Golden State Warriors on Thursday, John Starks suggested that the players consider a team meeting to discuss their subpar play.
Derek Harper admitted that the Knicks have not played with the intensity that was habitual last season.
And Coach Pat Riley seemed more perplexed than angry after watching the Knicks commit a season-high 25 turnovers against the Warriors.


Nets Go Down Complaining About Refs' Calls in Orlando
They walked back on the floor with a few minutes remaining tonight, the Nets and Magic, turning a routine early-season encounter into one of those wild weekend games at the park, in which you have to win because everyone on the side is yelling "Next" and there is no telling when you will get on the court again.
Orlando was moments away from seizing control when Kenny Anderson eyeballed an official, Bill Oakes, whom Anderson thought had put Derrick Coleman and himself on the wrong end of a few foul calls.


Sports of The Times; The End Of a Winding Road
SHORTLY before a memorial service for Wilma Rudolph yesterday morning, Mae Faggs Starr, a former Olympic sprinter, pointed to a collection of photographs mounted on a podium that captured Rudolph in various phases of her outstanding track career.
Starr was an original member of the Tennessee State University Tigerbelles.
In 1948, she became the youngest women on the United States Olympic team.
The picture she called attention to yesterday was a 1956 photo of six young women smiling broadly, wearing Olympic track uniforms.


Germs of Sverdlovsk
The Russian city of Sverdlovsk suffered an epidemic of anthrax in 1979 that Soviet-era officials attributed to contaminated meat.
Now there is proof of what Washington long suspected -- that the outbreak was caused by airborne anthrax released from a military microbiology facility.
The report, published by a team of U.S. and Russian scientists in the current Science magazine, traces many of the victims to an area south of the plant.
The obvious surmise is that the installation was manufacturing germ-warfare agents, a violation of the 1972 treaty banning biological weapons.
The findings should accelerate U.S. efforts to strengthen the 1972 ban, which was signed without verification procedures.
True, small quantities of germ warfare agents can easily be concealed, making the ban difficult to verify, but larger amounts in weapon form are harder to hide.
The main impediment to germ warfare remains what it was when the ban was signed -- doubt that germs can be precisely targeted in a militarily useful way.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Bradley Hits a High  Shawn Bradley reached career highs with 28 points and 22 rebounds and had 9 blocked shots last night to lead the Philadelphia 76ers to a 97-83 home victory over the Los Angeles Clippers, the only National Basketball Association team without a victory this season.
The Clippers' eighth straight defeat set a franchise record for consecutive losses at the start of the season.


Political Memo; Neither Pataki Nor Giuliani Will Turn Other Cheek
Sometimes politics is about vengeance more than valor, about pride more than policy, and the nasty feud between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Governor-elect George E. Pataki seems to be one of those times.
Although there might seem to be great political benefit for both men in an instant rapprochement, the bitterness between them now is just too great, according to their aides.
In part, the ill will is being fueled by advisers to both men whose memories of a brutal campaign remain too fresh to give way to constructive compromise.
On Mr.
Pataki's side, many of those aides also have close ties to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who has himself fought fiercely with Mr.
Giuliani for years.
And in the center are two strong-willed politicians who know how to hold a grudge: Mr.
Giuliani, whose quick temper and sometimes biting manner are well known, and Mr.
Pataki, whose genial exterior belies a steely political will.


What to Consider When Making Medical Choices for 1995
The choices in medical and dental plans can be mind boggling for employees, who each year at this time are loaded down with information.
The biggest decision: whether to stay with a traditional medical plan, which reimburses people for a portion of expenses, or to join a network, which covers all visits to a select group of doctors.
To provide some guidance, benefit specialists were asked about changes in medical plans and what tends to trip employees up.
They are David Wilson, managing director of the Apex Group, health actuaries of Princeton, N.J.; Chris Mooney, a partner in the Stamford, Conn., office of Foster Higgins, a benefits firm, and officials of Mobil, Coca-Cola and Betz Laboratories.


An Act of Youthful Savagery Stuns a Suburb
It is barely three miles to Abington Township from Philadelphia.
But in the minds of many of the township's people, the distance is far greater.
It is the distance, real or imagined, between urban violence and suburban serenity.
That space was irreversibly bridged last Friday night when, the police say, as many as two dozen Abington youths armed with baseball bats piled into cars, drove into the Fox Chase neighborhood of Northeast Philadelphia and confronted a group of teen-agers who ran off.


Cowboys Fined for Not Reporting Injury
Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE fined the Dallas Cowboys $10,000 yesterday for violating the National Football League's policy on reporting injuries.
According to the league, the Cowboys failed to follow proper procedures Nov. 11 after quarterback TROY AIKMAN injured his right thumb during practice.
N.F.L. policy requires teams to supply information on all injured players to the league office on Wednesdays and Thursdays for release to the news media.
Guidelines require that if more injuries occur after Thursday, clubs are also obligated to report them. (AP)


'Sesame Street' Readies Them for School
To the Editor:
"Sorry, Ernie. TV Isn't Teaching." (Op-Ed, Nov. 12) by Billy Tashman, attacking "Sesame Street," particularly its preschool education program, or PEP, was a rehash of attacks on technology in teaching our children.


Merton M. Gill, Psychoanalyst, Is Dead at 80
Merton Max Gill, an academic psychoanalyst, died on Sunday at Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.
Dr.
Gill, who lived in Chicago, was 80 years old.
The cause was kidney failure, said Dr.
Boris M. Astrachan, head of the department of psychiatry at the University of Illinois at Chicago.


In a Bad Year for Bonds, A Case for Foreign Debt
THE Fed's big rate rise this week?
Albert D. Friedberg sympathizes with bond investors over it, and over their many other woes.
But he is easily cheered.
He just thinks about his three-month bonds that earned a 31 percent annualized return.
Or his July 1998 government bonds, yielding 10 percent.
The catch: the bonds are foreign, from Turkey and New Zealand, respectively.
To get such enviable returns, Mr.
Friedberg, head of the Friedberg Mercantile Group, had to court political, currency-exchange and other perils that some advisers say should be red flags for all but well-heeled bond buyers.


COMPANY BREIFS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., has acquired three office products dealers with total revenue of about $11.5 million.
REPUBLIC BANCORP INC., Owosso, Mich., will buy from Standard Federal Bank its deposits and offices in Owosso and Flushing, Mich., plus the deposits of Standard Flint Township Bank.
Terms were not disclosed.


Corrections
A front-page article on Friday about President Clinton's views on prayer in schools misstated the view of Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn.
He supports a voluntary moment of silence, not voluntary prayer.


Observer; Why So Pale And Wan?
This is a plea to Democrats.
Many are planning to leave the country.
Others are threatening to open veins.
A few talk of forming survival groups and fleeing to the woods.
Most, however, simply sit around weeping.
To these Democrats I say, Pull yourselves together.
The recent Republican victory is not the worst blow to civilization since Attila the Hun popularized sacking and pillage.
Not at all.
The unterrifying fact is that Republicans are no more inhuman than my Uncle Jack, of whom Aunt Pat used to say, "Jack's not tough, he just needs a shave."
I have known Republicans from my cradle and and have never been bitten, or even sued, by a single one.
Republicans are just like human beings, except for their demented conviction that repealing the capital-gains tax can save the world.
My Uncle Irvey was a Republican.
He was a Southerner, but when Democrats ran the Catholic Al Smith for President in 1928, Uncle Irvey did not terrify neighborhood Protestants with warnings that a victorious Al Smith would move the Pope into the White House.
The local Protestant Democrats did it for him.
Republicans are decent.
One lent me the rent money once without asking collateral.
A Republican is godmother to one of my children and has never sought to corrupt the child's faith by preaching salvation through repealing the capital-gains tax.
Republicans, in short, are not much different from people, so it is silly for Democrats to be terrified.
Think, Democrats, think.
Your party has really been just a rudderless variation on the Republican party since Hubert Humphrey lost to Richard Nixon 25 years ago.
After that the decline of the labor unions left it bereft of ideas, and its only Presidents have been those two old-fashioned Rockefeller Republicans: Carter and Clinton.
For evidence of the Democratic vacuum, how about that Rube Goldberg health-care bill the President offered?
Republicans used to be called "me-tooers" because they couldn't think of much to do except go along with Democratic ideas.
Democrats are the new "me-tooers," which is probably why "me-tooers" are now called "new Democrats." President Clinton is a specimen "new Democrat"; that is, a Democrat who thought Eisenhower had it just about right.
You can tell "new Democrats" by their conviction that "liberalism" is their deadliest enemy and their lack of any ideas not likely to be approved by the better class of Republicans.
With Democrats now residing in the abandoned tents of the old Eisenhower Republicanism, why this Democratic panic about Republicans running Congress?
Well, it's the triumph of the Republican mossbacks of course: Gingrich, Helms, the Western right-wingers of the cowboy welfare states, all those Dixiecrats who used to be Democrats until Republicans became the white man's party.
It's the same crowd that couldn't abide Nelson Rockefeller and would have chucked Eisenhower if he hadn't had such a way with the voters.
Newt Gingrich is the Republican who makes Democrats think of Walpurgis Night.
With everybody talking about Gingrich's "first hundred days," you might think he is the new Franklin Roosevelt risen out of Georgia to rebuild a stricken nation.
The unreality is intensified by Gingrich's announcement that he will not compromise in dealing with that lesser fellow who calls himself President.
This is harmless nonsense, except that people who should know better take it seriously.
Gingrich, whose skill at mischief-making is considerable but whose talents for governance have not been tested, is doubtless blustering to cover the natural insecurity of a youngish gent in charge of a crew that hasn't sailed a ship for 40 years.
Democrats should allow the possibility that he is playing bad Captain Bligh just now, largely because he is shocked and maybe a bit scared to find himself in command.
What else explains his "no-compromise" declaration?
It's institutionally impossible for Congress to lead.
House members who desire the slightest accomplishment absolutely must compromise, and not just with Presidents, but also with Senates.
I should like to assure the Democrats that they have nothing to fear but fear-of-Newt itself, but that would mislead them.
A party that doesn't stand for much has plenty to fear from one that stands for plenty, even when, as now, it looks like plenty of nothing.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about problems in the computer modem industry misstated the financial condition of Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc. in some copies.
Although Hayes has sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, the company's founder says its assets exceed its liabilities.


Woman Says She Was Raped In a Carjacking
A 57-year-old woman reported that a man commandeered her car at gunpoint in Flushing, Queens, and forced her to drive to a motel, where he raped her, the police said yesterday.
Investigators are looking into whether the incident may be part of a series of carjackings and rapes in northeastern Queens.
The woman told the police that the man approached her about 10 A.M. yesterday at the corner of 153d Street and 76th Road as she was getting into her car to go to work, said Capt.
Robert Cea, of the Queens Detective Bureau.


Beliefs
Having gambled $6 million on the popularity of Pope John Paul II's new book, what did the editors at Alfred A. Knopf think when they discovered their eminent author tossing in references to "the early and the late works of Ludwig Wittgenstein" or to "contemporary hermeneutics -- examples of which are found in the work of Paul Ricoeur or, from a different perspective, in the work of Emmanuel Levinas"?
Did beads of sweat break out on their foreheads as they read the page on which the Pope explains how Descartes "inaugurated the great anthropocentric shift in philosophy" and brought the world to "the threshold of modern immanentism and subjectivism"?


Another Arkansan Quits White House Staff
William Kennedy 3d, a onetime law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton, has resigned as associate White House counsel and will return to private life in Little Rock, Ark., the White House said today.
Mr.
Kennedy had an occasionally stormy tenure in an office that has itself been controversial during Mr.
Clinton's time in office.
A White House spokeswoman, Ginny Terzano, said Mr.
Kennedy was completing his work today and would return to Arkansas on Sunday.


Feinstein Declares Victory in California
Ten days after the voting booths closed, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, declared victory in her re-election campaign against Representative Michael Huffington, her Republican challenger.
Ms.
Feinstein's declaration came as the counting of absentee ballots neared an end, with Mr.
Huffington virtually eliminated mathematically but refusing to concede.
Article, page 10.


Bratton Builds His Image As He Rebuilds the Police
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton was addressing 50 Queens commanders at a recent strategy meeting, standing as erect as a Prussian general, his left hand dug into the jacket pocket of his double-breasted suit.
"I'm the nicest guy in the world normally, and I'm probably the best damned leader that any of you will ever have," he said.
But, expressing frustration at some detectives who had dropped cases because they misunderstood orders to cut overtime, he added, "If you're not willing to manage under my style, I'll get rid of you!"


CHRONICLE
It is imperative to continue playing the music that was composed in concentration camps during World War II, STEVEN LIPSITT, the conductor of the West Czech Symphonic Orchestra in Marienbad, said yesterday.
"I think the fact that some works have survived speaks loudly and forcefully and we are beholden to get this music performed as much and as well as possible," he said.
Mr.
Lipsitt is conducting "Der Kaiser von Atlantis," a one-act opera; three Yiddish songs, and a string quartet composed in the Terezin concentration camp in Czechoslovakia by Viktor Ullmann.
The Northeastern University Opera Terezin will perform them tonight in Boston at Northeastern University and on Monday in New York at the Merkin Concert Hall.


Kickoff Celebration


The Pataki-Giuliani Feud, Day 10: New Charges, No Solution
Ratcheting up their feud, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani accused Governor-elect George E. Pataki yesterday of carrying out a vendetta to embarrass not only him personally but also the institution of the mayoralty.
And he bluntly warned that the effort would hurt Mr.
Pataki as he turns from campaigning to governing.
A day after Mr.
Pataki's aides invited the Mayor to a meeting on Staten Island on Nov. 28 with nine other elected officials, Mr.
Giuliani said the only purpose of the meeting was to diminish the standing of the Mayor of the state's largest city.


In Performance: POP; A Dutch Band Sounds Like 1960's California
Knitting Factory
Bettie Serveert, a Dutch band active since 1991, could almost be an emissary from California in the 1960's.
The group's name, derived from a tennis-instruction book, means "Bettie served"; its music is steeped in folk-rock and psychedelia.


As Haiti Struggles to Rise Up, Storm Deals Body Blow
After a tropical storm finished battering this sleepy port on Haiti's southern coast early Monday, residents emerged from their ruined houses and began to tally the dead.
Today they were still counting, and wondering if they will ever fully calculate what they have lost.
In the aquamarine waters of the Bay of Jacmel, bodies continued to surface, mostly women and children borne downstream by three rivers that converge here.
On the outskirts of town, a concrete bridge has been washed away, severing the only overland link to the capital, Port-au-Prince.
Relief workers were able to reach the region only by sea or air.


U.S. Open Staying in Queens, Official Says
Despite cost overruns in the planned $180 million renovation of the National Tennis Center in Queens, officials of the United States Tennis Association yesterday denied rumors that they might move the United States Open to Atlanta.
J.
HOWARD (BUMPY) FRAZER, the U.S.T.A.'s president, said: "We have a contract with the city of New York, and we believe it's in the best interests of the tournament, the city and the fans that we stay here."


Amgen to Buy Synergen, a Troubled Rival
Amgen Inc., the most successful biotechnology company, said today that it would buy Synergen Inc., a weakened rival, for $240 million in cash, or $9.25 a share.
Analysts said that this deal, as well as continuing talks between the Chiron Corporation and the Swiss chemical giant Ciba-Geigy, indicated that the long anticipated biotechnology industry consolidation was under way.
But they cautioned that there were few potential acquirers and many potential acquirees because cash-starved biotechnology companies faced huge obstacles in raising money in the public markets.


Ivanisevic Fined and Faces Suspension
While his peers were advancing at the ATP World Championship in Frankfurt, GORAN IVANISEVIC was further bolstering his case for a suspension by incurring a point penalty for verbally abusing a lineswoman early in the second set against PETE SAMPRAS yesterday.
At the Paris Open, Ivanisevic surpassed $10,000 in fines in ATP events for the second straight year, which is supposed to mean a two-month suspension from the tour.
According to Ivanisevic's father, SRDJAN, his son filed an appeal on Nov. 7, the day after the Paris tournament, so he would be eligible to play in Frankfurt.


Rainy Work Where City Meets Long Island


No Longer Israeli, Gaza Police Post Is Still a Target
The Gaza police headquarters, once a hated bastion of Israeli occupation and now the nerve center of Yasir Arafat's security forces, was again the target of Palestinian rage today.
In scenes reminiscent of their uprising against Israel, hundreds of angry youths surged for hours toward the fortress-like building, hurling stones at the compound and at Palestinian policemen who responded with bursts of heavy gunfire.


Chairman Helms
Senator Jesse Helms, chair apparent of the Foreign Relations Committee, is an ideologue distrustful of international trade agreements, arms control treaties, foreign aid, the United Nations and multilateral cooperation in general.
He is also a skilled attention-getter and tactician who knows how to raise the profile of an important committee that has drifted close to irrelevance under its current Democratic chairman, Claiborne Pell.
Will Chairman Helms be a constructive or a destructive force?
The first signs are not encouraging.
On Tuesday, the Senator tried to bully President Clinton into delaying a vote on the Uruguay Round world trade agreement.
Mr.
Clinton's decision on this matter, Senator Helms suggested, would affect his own willingness to give full and fair consideration to the President's entire foreign policy agenda in the next session.


Score a Goal for Optimism At the N.H.L. Negotiations
Both sides reported optimism and progress yesterday in the National Hockey League negotiations in Boston before announcing a two-day break in the the effort to end the lockout that has delayed the start of the regular season by seven weeks.
Talks will resume Monday at an undisclosed location.
"I think they were good working sessions," said Cliff Fletcher, the president and general manager of the Toronto Maple Leafs, who joined the two days of talks.
"There is something there to build on. But I would not underestimate the fact there there is still an awful lot of work to do."


Both Sides in 4-Vote Squeaker Seek 2d Connecticut Recount
Both candidates in the closest Congressional race in the nation asked the Connecticut Supreme Court today for a partial recount, three days after United States Representative Sam Gejdenson was declared the winner by four votes.
His Republican challenger, Edward W. Munster, made several complaints about the way the Nov. 8 vote was tallied, including the treatment of absentee ballots, paper ballots that he said were marked similarly but counted differently and municipalities where he charged that the number of votes cast did not equal the number of votes counted.


Three Federal Agencies Act To Curb Certain Derivatives
Three Federal agencies have decided to prepare rules barring banks from selling certain Government-guaranteed securities that take the form of derivatives to customers who cannot afford the risks involved, Federal regulators said today.
If approved, the regulations would be the first action taken by Federal agencies to require certain sellers of derivatives to determine whether these potentially volatile financial securities are suitable for their customers.


5,000 Workers Agree to Quit Municipal Jobs
With Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to balance the city's budget dependent on cutting municipal jobs, about 5,000 workers have agreed to accept severance packages, city and union officials said yesterday.
But the program fell short of its goal of 7,600 workers, and last night Mr.
Giuliani extended the deadline to apply for two weeks.
The severance program lured 1,800 workers from the Board of Education, many more than the Mayor's office had expected, but it failed to attract enough workers in other agencies for which the Mayor had set goals.
As the three-week period to apply ended at 5 P.M., officials said applications continued to trickle in.


Treasuries End Mixed On Slow Day
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in lackluster trading yesterday.
The bond market received support from strength in the dollar and option expirations, analysts said.
An attractive price of 97 for a December bond option helped underpin a late morning rally that pared the worst losses of the session.


No Headline
"Just think what it will be like to be part of a department that reduces crime 30 to 40 percent. It will be like everybody who participated in D-Day!" -- WILLIAM J. BRATTON, New York City Police Commissioner, addressing his commanders.  [ 1:1. ]


Arrest in Slaying of Haitian Broadcasters
The police here have arrested a man suspected of killing two pro-democracy Haitian radio broadcasters on the same street in Miami's Little Haiti neighborhood within a 25-day period in 1991.
The suspect, Billy Alexander, a 24-year-old Bahamian of Haitian descent who is already imprisoned for another killing, was arrested on Wednesday and is the second man facing charges in the shooting of the broadcasters.


What Turkey Gives in Return for U.S. Military and Foreign Aid; Greece's Role in NATO
To the Editor:
"Deadly Gifts to Greece and Turkey" (editorial, Nov. 13) does not reflect, to say the least, the significance of Greece's stabilizing role as the sole member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union in a region torn by ethnic and religious strife.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Co-op City; A City, Bigger Than Many, Within a City
THE largest co-op housing project in the United States, Co-op City, in the Bronx, is reporting success in cutting a vacancy rate that had risen in recent years as many of the original residents retired and moved to warmer climates.
The Riverbay Corporation, the cooperative that owns the 300-acre site and buildings, reports the lowest vacancy rate in more than a decade.
Of the 15,372 units, 605 are vacant, compared with 1,500 two years ago, said Steven H. Gold, the director of sales and marketing.


Advise and Compensate
To the Editor:
Regarding "Advice for Consultants: Share the Risks" (Viewpoints, Oct. 23), the writer, a recent college graduate, will learn that consultants who price their services on contingency fees face important ethical questions: to what extent will I sacrifice objectivity and honesty to insure the client company will achieve the savings promised?
Will I avoid recommendations that are risky even though high risk may be the only solution?


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Dylan's Children, Without the Sanctimony
ONE OF THE MANY WEIRDO CHARACTERS on Lyle Lovett's new album, "I Love Everybody," is an eccentric misanthrope who natters on about a gold tooth his grandmother left him when she died.
He also claims he is keeping his aged uncle locked in a closet.
Addressing the world at large, he says with defensive pride, "Look around and you will see/ This world is full of creeps like me." The album's other quirky narrators include a man who identifies with fat babies because "they have no pride" and another who is obsessed with penguins because "they are so sensitive."
At the age of 37, Mr.
Lovett is recognized as one of the most gifted inheritors of the singer-songwriter tradition that Bob Dylan virtually invented 30 years ago.
But in the three decades that separate Mr.
Dylan's reign as a pop-culture god and Mr.
Lovett's ascendancy as an admired cult figure, the genre has undergone momentous shifts.


Paula Carleton, George Evans
"FOR some reason, I always thought I'd marry an English guy," said Paula Carleton, an artist and fashion stylist who grew up in Boston.
"I remember sitting around with my sister, reading English novels and listening to the Beatles and wanting to marry an Englishman. Actually, my favorite Beatle was George Harrison, so I guess I wanted to marry an English George."
When Ms.
Carleton, 34, met George Evans, 35, he seemed exactly like the man she had envisioned while reading Jane Austen.
A mutual-fund manager at the Oppenheimer Management Corporation in New York, Mr.
Evans grew up in Lancashire, England, and graduated from Eton College and Oxford University.
He is known for his polished wit, waistcoats, cuff links and manners.


Pulling the Wraps Off Koch Industries
Charles G. Koch likes to keep things simple.
He built his empire on a windswept prairie far from city life: It's a sprawling glass-and-granite office complex, the largest in Kansas, and looks like a black box rising from an empty plain.
Engineers with earnest faces and trim haircuts ply the halls of this diversified energy concern.
There's no executive dining room, just a company cafeteria.
And every day, Mr.
Koch, one of the world's richest men, stands in the lunch line just like any of his 2,000 employees here, and waits patiently to buy his meal.
Hard to tell, but Koch Industries is the nation's second-largest privately held company, after Cargill, the grain merchant.
With $23 billion in sales and 13,000 employees across the globe, Koch (pronounced coke) is an energy gusher of refineries, gas pipelines, oil trading, chemicals, cattle ranches and, increasingly, financial services.
As a supplier of raw commodities, Koch has no retail identity, but its reach is broad -- even the surface of the tennis courts at the U.S.
Open comes from Koch.


INSIDE
The Police Focus on Guns
Police departments in Indianapolis and Kansas City have found a way to keep guns off the streets: searching for illegal guns.
Page 22.
Panel's Empire Carved Up
For 14 years, an important House investigative committee expanded, but now Republicans are dividing the spoils.
Page 24.
Advice to the Govlorn
Dear Lonely in New York: When a relationship goes badly, better turn to the experts, like Ann Landers and a chimpanzee researcher.
Page 49.
Pre-eminent Lawyer Dies
Erwin N. Griswold, the United States Solicitor General under two Presidents and a former dean of the Harvard Law School, was 90.
Page 58.


Fence the Garbage? Rats and Odors Don't Really Mind
Harlem has always had more than its share of problems with garbage: litter on the streets and sidewalks, trash in empty lots and uncared-for buildings and bags of debris sometimes tossed from apartment windows.
And with last month's budget cuts forcing the Department of Sanitation to reduce trash pickups at public housing projects, residents are fearful that their neighborhood will be hit especially hard.
To compensate residents, sanitation and housing officials came up with what they thought was a good solution: building fenced-off enclosures, where garbage and recyclables could be stored in between pickups.
Funding for the project was available through the Department of Sanitation's purchasing fund.


In One Town, Fed Move Brings Some Fear
Sitting in the Chat 'n' Chew Restaurant, Chris Adams and Dennis Price were eating their $3.75 hot turkey dinners and saying today that they were as mystified as anyone in town about the economic direction of the country.
As partners in a year-old home improvement company that has enjoyed a reasonably good start, they now have the latest interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve to think about.
The Fed action, raising the short-term interest rates it controls by three-quarters of a percentage point, was announced on Tuesday as an essential step to contain inflation.
Big banks across the country immediately raised the prime lending rate, a response generally considered bad news for people seeking loans and good news for most investors.


In the Region/Connecticut; Price Slump Energizes the Condominium Market
CONDOMINIUM units in Connecticut, at the bottom of a slump that pushed prices down to as little as half their original value, are now so attractively priced that for the first time in five years they are selling briskly.
A growing population of single men and women, empty-nesters, first-time home buyers and investors seeking an alternative to meager returns elsewhere have set the market on fire.


Arkansas Is Now Awash In Respect
This time last year, members of the University of Arkansas's men's basketball team set out on a noble mission: a quest for respect.
This is hardly an original concept and actually one of the cheaper motivational gimmicks in athletics.
But it works.
The Razorbacks believed in the cause and eagerly turned it into a crusade.
No one gave the Razorbacks credit for being a smart, hard-working and immensely talented team.
Even when Arkansas finally climbed to the top spot in the polls a loss seemed to send them on a greater plummet than other teams.


For Haitian Refugees, Fear Remains
To the Editor:
"U.S. Might Admit Detained Cubans to Help Children" (front page, Nov. 15), you report, to avoid "embarrassing demonstrations by Cuban-Americans when President Clinton meets with Latin American leaders in Miami in early December."


A Film Maker Whose Range Is Wagnerian
Krzysztof Kieslowski IS one of the last of that endangered species, the art-film director.
Unafraid of boring his audience with scenes in which little seems to happen, the Polish director of brooding, haunting films like "The Double Life of Veronique" (1991) and "Decalogue" (1988) deals in emotional nuance and unspoken dialogue in the increasingly marginalized tradition of Robert Bresson and Ingmar Bergman.
Mr.
Kieslowski continues this tradition in "Red," the widely praised finale to his "Three Colors" trilogy, which opens in New York on Wednesday.
Meeting with a group of American journalists during the Cannes Film Festival last May, Mr.
Kieslowski, 53, projected the bookish intensity of an Eastern European auteur.
He sported a buzz cut (perhaps to hide an incipient baldness), glasses and a leather jacket.
Though his English is serviceable, he preferred to speak in Polish, through a translator, in effect adding another protective layer.
He is a director who hates talking about the meaning of his films but will happily discuss technical details at length.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PROSPECT HEIGHTS Great Black Opera Singers Caught Forever on Film  African-American stars of the opera are the subjects of a special two days of films this weekend at the Brooklyn Museum.
It is actually part of a larger film series that continues on weekends through Dec. 18.


From Junkyards to Gardens, and Other Miracles
IT'S one thing to make a garden out of a piece of beautiful fertile land.
It's quite another to turn an abandoned lot full of junked cars and tires, crack vials and broken glass into a place of beauty.
I come upon these miracles in the heat of summer -- in places where it might be easy to give up hope -- and leave refreshed by some bright flower, or bird song or the taste of cilantro on my tongue.
And as the sunflowers turn brown and hang their big heads to the ground, it's a good time to visit "City Farmers: Operation Greenthumb," an exhibition of color photographs by Katherine McGlynn at the Museum of the City of New York, on Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
It captures the essence of some of the city's finest community gardens and the pioneers who, with tears, laughter and plain old dogged persistence, get the corn to come up, the zinnias and roses to bloom.
And there are eloquent words from the hearts of these gardeners to accompany the pictures.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Deals; A Day's Worth
Hey, buddy!
Need a (pick one) blue-chip stock/manuscript/polo horse/Cartier necklace/dime?
Consider this chronicle of just a handful of the deals that went down on one day, October 17, 1994. 2:00 A.M. -- Con Edison sells its metropolitan customers 3,633,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity, worth approximately $500,000, over the next 60 minutes. 3:30 A.M. -- Luna, a horse that just participated in the U.S.
Open polo championships on Long Island, leaves Kennedy Airport for Argentina via cargo jet.
Mersant International Ltd., a Queens-based freight forwarder hired by Luna's owners, clears the horse through Customs and the Department of Agriculture. 6:05 A.M. -- A beat-up box truck loaded with pumpkins, gourds and gooseneck squash pulls up to Gus Theos's U.S.
Evergreen store at 805 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan.
Theos pays about $1,200 for the lot; he'll sell the smaller pumpkins to retailers for about $4 each.
The larger ones, some weighing upward of 100 pounds, will fetch $40 each. 7:45 A.M. -- After three weeks of negotiations, General Electric announces the sale of the troubled investment house Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company to Paine Webber.
G.
E. will receive 21.5 million shares of Paine Webber common voting stock, $100 million in 20-year 6 percent convertible preferred stock, and $250 million in 20-year 9 percent preferred stock.
Total value: approximately $670 million. 8:10 A.M. -- Five Board of Education employees set out from 65 Court Street in Brooklyn to deliver some 97,000 paychecks, two weeks' pay, to schools in Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens and Manhattan. (Staten Island, in a characteristic show of independence, sends its own driver.) Total value: $186,795,574.69. 9:20 A.M. -- An undercover police officer buys one glassine envelope of "Killer Bee" heroin on Suffolk Street in Manhattan.
Price: $10.
Rental price for the week: approximately $3,000. 9:45 A.M. -- A private investor in Manhattan, through his broker in Connecticut, buys 1,000 shares of General Public Utilities at 25-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange. 10:05 A.M. -- Marine Midland Bank announces that it has made a deal with Inner City Press, a South Bronx community group that had challenged the fairness of the bank's lending practices.
Marine Midland promises that over the next three years, it will lend a total of $15 million to borrowers in the South Bronx and Upper Manhattan. 10:30 A.M. -- Thomas Dunne, an executive editor at St.
Martin's Press, purchases the U.S. rights to "The Seventh Scroll," the 25th novel by the South African writer Wilbur Smith, whose previous book, "River God," was a best seller.
The deal is negotiated by Dunne and Charles Pick, Smith's agent in England. 10:35 A.M. -- After a burst of spirited bidding at Christies' East in Manhattan, auctioneer Christopher Hartop awards Lot 50 -- "Victorian Five-Piece Silver Tea and Coffee Service on a Matching Two-Handled Tray" -- to C. &amp; T. Mammon, a London silver dealer who was bidding by phone.
Hammer price: $11,500 11:00 A.M. -- Managed Healthcare Systems, a New York HMO, donates $20,000 to the Minority Scholarship Assistance Program at New York City Technical College. 11:15 A.M. -- The New York City Finance Department opens its mail to find checks totaling $12.93 million in real-estate taxes.
Also, Albany has sent $5.06 million in health aid and $3.7 million in education aid, while the Federal government has sent $37.36 million in welfare and other payments. 11:37 A.M. -- At the We Can redemption center on West 52d Street in Manhattan, John F. exchanges 480 12-ounce cans and 30 1-liter bottles for a voucher.
He cashes the voucher at Freeman Check Cashing, on Ninth Avenue, for $25.50. 11:45 A.M. -- The family of a deceased woman pays Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn $838, covering today's "opening" fee -- for digging a grave and lowering the coffin.
Her ancestors had bought what is now considered a 12-grave plot on August 15, 1899.
These days, a plot that size cost about $48,000. 12:37 P.M. -- Smith Barney "crosses" -- that is, sells from one of its brokerage clients to another -- 250,000 shares of McDonald's stock, at 27-1/2 per share.
Value of the transaction: $6,875,000. 1:50 P.M. -- The Ad Store, on East 30th Street in Manhattan, announces it has won the advertising account for Vagabond Shoes, USA, the new Connecticut-based branch of a Swedish company.
Estimated yearly billings are just over $1 million. 2:30 P.M. -- Gary Hobbib, president of High Noon Management, finishes negotiating a royalty agreement with Columbia Records in Los Angeles.
The agreement concerns "Making Me Sick," a song by the band Bash and Pop, which will appear on the soundtrack of the movie "Clerks." 2:40 P.M. -- Alexandra Stango, a real-estate broker for the Corcoran Group, completes the sale of a seven-room co-op on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The new owners: a stockbroker, his wife and their two children.
Price: $650,000. 2:55 P.M. -- Sixty-one cartons of women's sweaters arrive at Kennedy Airport from China, to be delivered by truck to a wholesaler in Manhattan's garment district.
F.O.B. price: $75,000. 3:00 P.M. -- A Florida collector purchases "Dirty Painting," a 1987 oil-on-canvas painting by the artist Arman, from the Marisa del Re Gallery on East 57th Street in Manhattan.
Price: $120,000. 3:45 P.M. -- At a jewelry sale at Sotheby's, on York Avenue in Manhattan, executive vice president John Block auctions off a Cartier diamond necklace, circa 1930, for $211,500, to an anonymous buyer. 4:15 P.M. -- Allen Gross, president of GFC Capital Resources, completes the sale of Astoria Manor, a defunct catering hall on Astoria Boulevard in Queens.
The cost: $26, billed to a corporate account. 7:05 P.M. -- At a midtown Manhattan office, two matrimonial lawyers, Rona Shays and Bernard Rothman, reach a settlement concerning a Manhattan couple who are filing for divorce.
Both lawyers maintain that the agreement reflects a 50-50 split. 7:20 P.M. -- In the basement of the Transit Authority headquarters on Jay street in Brooklyn, money-room employees finish counting the tokens and cash collected from turnstiles and token booths during the day.
The total: 1,094,025 tokens and $5,659,764 in cash. 8:31 P.M. -- A Los Angeles art consultant, via fax, buys eight Marianne Engberg photographs -- flower abstractions done with a pinhole camera -- from the Staley-Wise Gallery.
Price: $1,000 to $2,000 each. 11:30 P.M. -- In the West 20's, between Tenth and Eleventh Avenues in Manhattan, several men negotiate the price of various sexual acts with several women -- who turn out to be undercover police officers.
"Operation Losing Proposition" will ultimately net 29 suspects, ranging in age from 18 to 52.
Seventeen suspects are taken to Manhattan Community Court, on West 54th Street, for arraignment.


POSTINGS: Buildings Identified by Specialty; A Multicolored Guide To the Fashion District
Color has always been one of fashion's key elements, and now it is being used to help people do business in Manhattan's fashion district.
The colors are part of a new map of the Fashion Center Business Improvement District, created for the Fashion Center by the Identity Map Company.
It identifies, through color coding, each building in the core of New York's rag trade according to the business interests of the preponderance of its tenants, among them apparel, accessories, jewelry, textiles and trimming.


To Make History Here, Make Music
AFTER INTERMISSION AT THE MANN auditorium here recently, I returned to my seat to find what seemed a unit of Israeli security forces peering nervously under the cushion; a small crowd stood at a safe distance.
What had drawn their attention?
An assault on a visiting critic seemed unlikely.
Then, with embarrassment, I saw the cause of the alarm: my books, lying under the seat in a plastic bag.
In Israel, one does not leave bags unattended.
And in this case, fear of an explosion may have been amplified because, for the first time, the Israel Philharmonic was playing music by Richard Strauss at a subscription concert.
Strauss was president of the central musical committee in Nazi Germany, and while his music has never inspired the moral outrage here that Wagner's has, it has long caused discomfort in this Jewish state.


Amid Affluence, Hunger Is at Home
LAST Monday morning, 74-year-old Stefan Szymik arrived at the soup kitchen at Grace Episcopal Church here for his first hot meal in three days.
The former machinist, a homeless man who said he lived meal to meal on Social Security checks, had purchased a package of luncheon meats from the local A.&amp;P. two days before but had eaten little since.
Like many of the 80 or so other people in the dining room -- the elderly, the newly unemployed, homeless and disabled among them -- Mr.
Szymik had come to depend on the bounty of the soup kitchen.


F.Y.I.
'Gimme Shelters'
Q.
On weekends, as I walk down Broadway on the Upper West Side, I see shattered glass from bus shelters every few blocks.
What is the average life span of a bus shelter's glass wall?
What is the budget for replacements?
Is anyone ever caught for breaking the glass?


The Quiet Bridge Burner . . . a Texas Legend
To the Editor:
As one who has long been sustained by dreams of quitting, I enjoyed Evan Harris's article, "Quitting: In Defense of a Maligned Act" (Viewpoints, Oct. 23).
However, I believe he has overlooked an important technique -- simply vanish.
As the name implies, this is a corollary to "fail and disappear" and "achieve and vanish," but the critical difference is that no other action is required.
The quitter just goes, without fanfare, excuse or explanation.


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Friends Share a Spirit of Optimism Amid a Diversity of Styles
HANANIAH HARARI, Anthony Toney and George Kelly are friends exhibiting their paintings together at Nardin Galleries here.
The last time they did this was in 1974, when Nardin was in West Nyack and the space was too small to accommodate all their works.
The scene changes to the galleries' palatial premises here, but the problem remains essentially the same.
This time, however, it is the personalities of the artists that are too big.
"Three Friends," a show that rambles through three galleries, out into the hall and up the stairs, indicates that the artists, all natives of the state, have a certain amount in common, notably a concern with color and good draftsmanship.
But given the temperamental differences implied by their work, it is likely that as often as not they have agreed to disagree.


Shop BIG
THIS was the year the big stores took New York, the year those cavernous, low-margin, high-volume temptoriums that challenge both the old-time department store and the friendly neighborhood bookseller arrived, in critical mass, and began to remake the face of shopping as we know it.
From the Flatiron to upper Broadway, Northern Boulevard to the Grand Concourse, these stores that till now had largely shunned the city as too cramped, too expensive, and perhaps too determined to be hip, are moving in, opening up and proclaiming themselves proud to be big.


Webber Gets Spotlight, but Celtics Get Victory
Celtics 103, Bullets 102
Dee Brown crashed Chris Webber's coming-out party with the Washington Bullets, scoring 22 points and the game-winning free throws with 1.6 seconds left to give the Boston Celtics a 103-102 victory last night in Landover, Md.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Reinvention; At the Corner of Permanence and Change
THE CABLE BUILDING STANDS AT THE JUMbled intersection of Greenwich Village, SoHo and the East Village, a juncture it commands with self-assured stateliness.
Behind its calmly imposing facade, however, is a hive of cultural, entrepreneurial and political activity.
Among the 140 or so tenants renting studios or offices there are the kinds of people who are shaping the post-industrial city: artists and architects and activists, record producers and magazine publishers, set designers and graphic designers and robot designers.
Whit Stillman, the independent film maker, has his office there, as does Charlotte Sheedy, a literary agent whose clients include Lani Guinier and Marilyn French.
What they like about the place is the offbeat tenancy, the communal spirit, the pliant spaces and decent light within, along with the feel of the surrounding neighborhood -- all of which adds up to being in a vital building in a vibrant part of New York at a dynamic time.


SURFACING
Wheels  Blader backlash?
Scraping along on old-fashioned roller skates is the latest way to get around.
They are not taken seriously for distance or speed, but some roller-dancers favor them.
They provide the same kind of sturdy ride as a trusty one-speed bicycle.
A bonus for pedestrians is that you can hear them coming. (The New York Times)


Christine Fay, Edmund Amorosi
Christine Marie Fay, a health care consultant at Ernst &amp; Young, was married yesterday to Edmund Michael Amorosi, a press secretary for the Committee on Government Operations in the House of Representatives.
Both work in Washington.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Lacey performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Church there.
Mrs.
Amorosi, 29, graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in health care finance from George Washington University.
She is a daughter of Anne and William E. Fay 3d of New York.
Her father is a senior appellate counsel with Barry, McTiernan &amp; Moore, a law firm in New York.
Her mother teaches English as a second language at Public School 42 in New York.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 20, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
27
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
2
10
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
3
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
4
1
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in 19th-century Russia.
5
23
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
9
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's disappearance.
7*
8
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
8
4
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
9
4
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in 1942.
10
12
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
11
3
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
12*
1
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
13*
21
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
14
14
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
15
18
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
9
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
45
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
4
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
4
4
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on politics.
5
2
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
6
8
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
7
576
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
12
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
9
2
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A tour of an armored cavalry regiment.
10
10
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio personality.
11
4
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
12*
8
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the Great Plains.
13*
92
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
14
1
VAMPS &amp; TRAMPS, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) Essays on subjects ranging from the Clintons to D.H.
Lawrence.
15
6
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The ways of hospitals.
16*
25
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
17*
27
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
192
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
8
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
4
49
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a ook's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


At Least Their Seconds Are Talking
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Governor-elect George E. Pataki still may not be talking, but at least their chief lieutenants are.
Mr.
Pataki and aides to Mr.
Giuliani said yesterday that the Governor-elect's counsel, Michael C. Finnegan, and the Mayor's senior aide, Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers, spoke by telephone on Friday about unspecified matters affecting the city in the coming weeks.
After 11 days of sniping that began with Mr.
Pataki's victory, the call appeared to signal at least a thaw in the chilled relationship.


How the Last Emperors Dressed and Furnished
An exhibition of garments and household furnishings from China's Qing Dynasty is on view through April 30 at the Textile Museum in Washington, D.C.
The 75 pieces on display in "Rugs and Textiles of Late Imperial China" are highlights from the museum's collection of antique Chinese carpets and Qing textiles, augmented by items on loan from private collections.
In assembling what was to become China's last empire, the Manchu rulers of the Qing dynasty (1644-1912) expanded beyond the Great Wall to the west and north, encompassing people of diverse ethnic origins, languages and religious beliefs, as well as disparate textile traditions.


A Conviction For Murder Is Set Aside
Twelve years after he was sentenced to death for the murder of a police officer here, a Mexican whose claims of innocence were backed by his Government has had his conviction set aside.
Calling the actions of the police and prosecutors "outrageous," a Federal judge here on Tuesday ordered Texas to give the Mexican, 32-year-old Ricardo Aldape Guerra, a new trial or to release him.


Journeys of the Spirit, For $18 a Day Plus Faith
Believers in an afterlife have always operated pretty much on faith.
But as more and more people are revived from what appears to be death, the view from the other side is becoming clearer.
So it was that a number of the participants at the Whole Life Expo gathered at a Manhattan hotel this weekend to listen to people who said they had traveled beyond the pale and returned to praise the experience.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Keeping Tabs on Japan
To the Editor:
I read Karl Taro Greenfeld's "Speed Tribes," then took note of your reviewer's unflattering comments -- and wondered if we'd read the same book.
I've traveled to Japan, written about it and try to keep up with current trends.
I can't think of a single recent work, fiction or otherwise, that more vividly captures the sensibility of contemporary Japan.
BRUCE JAY FRIEDMAN  Water Mill, L.I.


Black, Male and, Yes, a Supermodel
THELMA GOLDEN, the curator of "Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art," the new exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art, sounds more like a college cheerleader than a cultural critic on the subject of Tyson Beckford.
"All I want to do is talk about Tyson," she said.
"He's the only model in my book these days."
Ms. Golden has a somewhat surprising explanantion for her enthusiasm.


Hilary Gleekman, William Greenberg
Dr.
Hilary Amy Gleekman, an internist in the division of infectious diseases at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, was married last evening to Dr.
William Jay Greenberg, a founder and an owner of Physicians' Online Inc., a medical-information computer service in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun in Manhattan.
Dr.
Gleekman-Greenberg, 31, is also a clinical instructor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx and is an actress.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her M.D. degree from Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Barbara and Dr.
Wallace J. Gleekman of Newton, Mass.
Her father teaches chemistry at Brookline (Mass.) High School.
Her mother is a reference librarian at the Waltham (Mass.) Public Library.


Federal Court Expansion Plan May Grow Again, Judge Says
Plans to enlarge the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn, home of one of the nation's busiest Federal benches, are already too big for some of its neighbors.
Now the judge representing the court on the project says that wrangling between two Federal agencies may mean the courthouse needs to be even larger.


BENEFITS
Violinist's Debut  TODAY -- The Carnegie Hall debut of the 15-year-old violinist Tamaki Kawakubo will benefit the New York Youth Symphony.
The performance will begin at 3 P.M., followed by a reception at the Marlborough Gallery, 40 West 57th Street.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 581-5933.
Holiday Boutique  TODAY -- A holiday sale to benefit the scholarship fund of Regis High School, a Manhattan school for exceptionally talented boys, is scheduled for 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. in the school's auditorium, at 60 East 85th Street.
Sale goods are to include antiques, baked goods, crystal, decorations and toys.
A donation of $5 at the door is suggested.
Information: (212) 288-1100.
Hoedown for Hearts  MONDAY -- A night of country-western dancing, drinks, dinner and a raffle to benefit the New York City affiliate of the American Heart Association is to be held at Denim and Diamonds, 511 Lexington Avenue, near East 48th Street, beginning at 7 o'clock.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 661-5335, extension 226.
Benefit for the Jewish Museum  MONDAY -- The first Bridges to Understanding Award is to honor Charles R. Lee, the chairman and chief executive of the GTE Corporation, and will benefit the Jewish Museum.
The black-tie event is scheduled to start at the museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at East 92d Street, at 6:30 P.M. with a cocktail reception and a viewing of the museum's current exhibitions, followed by dinner and the award presentation at 7:45.
Tickets, $1,500, from (212) 423-3264.
Auction at Christie's  MONDAY -- An auction at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue, at East 59th Street, is to benefit the American Indian Ritual Object Repatriation Foundation and the Mohawk Valley Community, a resettlement project for the Mohawk Nation in Fonda, N.Y.
The 6 P.M. auction is to include drawings, sculpture, jewelry, quilts, baskets, clothing and travel.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 840-1166.
A Benefit for the Ballet  TUESDAY -- The opening-night benefit performance of the New York City Ballet is to include the world premiere of a ballet by Peter Martins and the New York premiere of Damian Woetzel's "Glazunov Pas de Deux." Curtain at 7:30 at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The performance is to be followed by a Supper Ball on the theater's promenade.
Tickets, $675, or $10 to $150 for the performance alone, from (212) 870-5585.
A Visit From Tipper Gore  TUESDAY -- Tipper Gore, the wife of Vice President Al Gore, is scheduled to speak at the 61st annual Freedom Award dinner at the Plaza, a fund-raising event for relief efforts of the International Rescue Committee.
Theodore J. Forstmann, a partner in Forstmann, Little &amp; Company, and Felix G. Rohatyn, a senior partner in Lazard Freres &amp; Company, are to be honored.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception is to be followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 551-3023.
Pop Rocks  TUESDAY -- A gala to benefit the Archive of Contemporary Music is to be held at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street at Houston Street.
The event, beginning with cocktails at 7 P.M., is to include a buffet dinner, a concert featuring Lou Reed and Laurie Anderson and a raffle.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 226-6967.
Hospital Benefit in Rye  FRIDAY -- A dinner-dance to benefit the Westchester County branch of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York is to be held at the Apawamis Club, Club Road, Rye, N.Y.
The evening is to begin with cocktails at 7:30, followed by dinner, dancing and a raffle.
Tickets, $75, from (914) 967-6500, extension 411.
Dance-a-Thon  SATURDAY -- The Gay Men's Health Crisis is sponsoring its annual Dance-a-Thon, 7 P.M. to midnight, at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue between West 35th and 36th streets, to raise funds for the group's AIDS-related programs.
Among the scheduled performers are Queen Latifah, Salt-n-Pepa and the Village People.
Required pre-registration and tickets, $75, from (212) 807-9255.
The Actors' Fund Benefit  NOV. 28 -- The annual benefit for the Actors' Fund of America is to be held at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening, beginning with a 6:30 cocktail reception, is to include dinner and dancing.
Among those scheduled to perform are Nathan Lane, Barbara Cook and Harvey Fierstein.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 221-7301, extension 108.
Broadway Cares  NOV. 29 -- The sixth annual "Gypsy of the Year" competition is being held to raise money for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.
Jonathan Hadary is to be the host of the event.
The performance, beginning at 3:30 P.M. at the St.
James Theater, at 246 West 44th Street, is to include dances, original songs and comedy performed by cast members from "Guys and Dolls," "Carousel," "Passion" and other Broadway shows.
Tickets, $10 at the door.
Information: (212) 840-0770.
Ozone Alert  NOV. 29 -- The Center for Environmental Education is to be the beneficiary of a dinner at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Chevy Chase and his wife, Jayni Chase, are to be the hosts.
The evening is to begin with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Historic Landmarks Awards  NOV. 29 -- Bill Moyers is to present the 1994 Landmark Lion award to Arlene Simon, a landmarks preservation activist, at the Universalist Church, Central Park West at West 76th Street.
The reception, from 6 to 8 P.M. at the church, followed by a dinner at Vince &amp; Eddie's restaurant at 70 West 68th Street, is to benefit the Historic Districts Council.
Tickets, $85, or $35 for the reception only, from (212) 799-5837.
YMCA Honors Henry Luce 3d  NOV. 29 -- Henry Luce 3d is to receive a distinguished service award from the YMCA International Program Services.
The event, beginning at 5:30 P.M. at the Merchant's Club, 26 Thomas Street off Church Street, is to include cocktails and a buffet supper.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 727-8800, extension 114.
For Rehabilitation  NOV. 29 -- Morley Safer, a correspondent on "60 Minutes," is to be the master of ceremonies at a dinner-dance for the Caron Foundation, an alcohol and drug rehabilitation center in Wernersville, Pa.
Judy Collins is to sing, and Jim Abernathy, the chairman of Abernathy MacGregor Scanlon, a public relations firm in New York, is to be honored.
The evening is to begin with cocktails at 7 o'clock at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 843-1716.
An Honor for Brendan Gill  NOV. 30 -- The Municipal Art Society is to present the first Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Award to the writer Brendan Gill in recognition of his 80th birthday and his continuing efforts to preserve and protect New York City's architecture.
The event, including cocktails and dinner, is to begin at 7 P.M. at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at East 67th Street.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-1095.
Next Wave Festival  NOV. 30 -- The Brooklyn Academy of Music is to present the Next Wave Festival Gala to benefit the Academy and the Estate Project for Artists With AIDS.
The event is to begin with a performance of two original works of music at the BAM Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, followed by dinner at 55 Wall Street, a landmark building that at different times housed the Merchants Exchange and the New York Customs House.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 636-4182.


The Executive Life; Stage Fright Is Nothing Compared With This
"IT'S a combination of quantum mechanics, Murphy's Law and karma," Andrew J. Shinnick said.
"The more technologically complicated you make your presentation, the greater the chances of it going south on you."
Mr.
Shinnick was talking about an experience common to anyone who makes or attends business presentations these days: the expensive, high-technology speech that lapses into embarrassed silence when some vital piece of hardware or software crashes.


Bigotry at Bryn Mawr
To the Editor:
In the otherwise judicious and careful review of my book "The Power and Passion of M. Carey Thomas" (Oct. 16), there is a point that needs clarification.
It is true that I give careful attention to Thomas's anti-Semitism, but where such grave matters are at issue, it is important that the record be completely accurate.
While Thomas consistently opposed the hiring of Jewish teachers at the Bryn Mawr School in Baltimore, it was only in the 20th century that she prevented Jews from joining the faculty of Bryn Mawr College.
Indeed, in 1891, in what I describe as a "decidedly advanced step for an American liberal arts college," Thomas hired a Jew, the German physiologist Jacques Loeb.
HELEN LEFKOWITZ HOROWITZ  Northampton, Mass.


In Transcript, A New Spin From Simpson
The O. J. Simpson case took another unexpected turn today with the publication of excerpts from a sealed transcript of Mr.
Simpson's interrogation by police officers after his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman, were murdered.
The excerpts included an assertion by Mr.
Simpson that he was a battered spouse.
The transcript of the police interrogation on June 13 was sold for an undisclosed amount to Star magazine, a weekly tabloid.
The excerpts were also published today in The New York Post and The Daily News.
The Star said it would publish the excerpts on Monday.


Laura A. Jacobs and James E. Wolcott
Laura Ann Jacobs, the editor in chief of Stagebill magazine in New York, was married on Friday to James Edward Wolcott, a staff writer at The New Yorker.
Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated in her chambers at the Court House in Foley Square.
Ms.
Jacobs is keeping her name.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Ann Jacobs of Arlington Heights, Ill., and the late Dr.
Edward Jess Jacobs.
Her father was an obstetrician and gynecologist in Arlington Heights and a professor at Northwestern Medical School in Chicago.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Nov. 13-19: Seniority Isn't Everything; In Picking Committee Heads, Gingrich Looks for Ability
Representative Newt Gingrich, the Speaker-presumptive, likes to call himself a revolutionary, and he is proving it in the first stage available to him -- organizing the House of Representatives.


Ellen C. Toole, J. P. O'Donnell 3d
Ellen Clare Toole, the director of college counseling at Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn., is to be married today to James Peter O'Donnell 3d, the director of development at Canterbury.
The Rev.
Lawrence Toole, a cousin of the bride, is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Margaret's Church in Rumford, R.I.
Mrs.
O'Donnell, 32, graduated from Salve Regina University and received a master's degree in higher education administration from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Toole 2d of Rumford.
Her father owns an industrial supply company in Pawtucket, R.I.


Honoring an Art Patron
The Archives of American Art salutes MOMA's chairwoman; Paine Webber Building, Nov. 17.


The Most Regional Region
THE SOUTH IN MODERN AMERICA A Region at Odds.
By Dewey W. Grantham.
Illustrated. 359 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $30.


Two-Way Telephones Come to the Skies
You can run or you can fly, but you can't hide.
Many airlines are now offering in-flight phone services that allow people on the ground to reach travelers in the air.
That is a new wrinkle for a 10-year-old service that until recently worked only from the air to the ground.


A Health Care Windmill
To the Editor:
Don Quixote tilted at windmills, imagining they were dragons.
Some would-be slayers of rising health care costs have found their own windmills -- in the form of medical technology.
"The 'Hillary Factor' in Health Care," (At Work, Oct. 16), for example, says that technology "is an inexorable inflator of costs." That statement is not only misleading; it's just plain wrong.


'Emblematic Rant of the 60's'
WHEN MICHAEL O'DONoghue, once a prolific writer for National Lampoon and "Saturday Night Live," died on Nov. 9 at the age of 54, a rare comic voice was quieted.
Known for his sardonic, black humor, he once pointed out to Timothy White, now the editor of Billboard, that his comedy was about "the tortured little shadow areas we hide from ourselves." According to Marilyn Miller, who worked with Mr.
O'Donoghue, "his voice was the emblematic rant of the 60's." Here are samples of his wit.
In an attempt to modernize its services, the Roman Catholic Church has introduced something new into Communion.
In addition to dispensing the host, priests will now also dispense a "co-host," which symbolizes the body of Mike Douglas. -- Censored "Weekend Update" segment from "Saturday Night Live"


In Plane's Black Boxes, An Abundance of Clues
The display on the computer screen looks like a game: the middle shows the view out the cockpit window, and around the edges are controls showing altitude, airspeed and such.
But there are no sound effects; there is no joystick or fun.
The screen depicts a real flight, one that ended with a crash that killed more than 250 people.
The animation, which can be run showing the plane from any angle, sped up or slowed down or even run in reverse, was generated in the computers of the National Transportation Safety Board from data recovered from the doomed plane's "black box." The animation is one of a stunning array of tools that are emerging for the investigation of crashes and lesser incidents as computers move into aircraft around the world.


Owning Success
To the Sports Editor:
Bruce Mays's suggestion that the players become the owners of major league baseball ("800 Men In: Make the Players the Owners," The Times, Oct. 16) was intriguing.
It contained an inaccuracy about employee ownership, however.
Mays writes that successful employee ownership companies are the exception to the rule.
Hardly.
In fact, research consistently shows that employee ownership improves corporate performance.
The more than 10,000 companies in the United States with employee ownership plans tended to be more successful when they set up their plans, and they have become more successful still after.
COREY ROSEN
Oakland, Calif.
The writer is the executive director of the National Center for Employee Ownership.


Debra J. Simon, John D. Schreiber
Debra Joyce Simon, the director of event marketing at the Children's Television Workshop, is to be married today to John Douglas Schreiber, a producer of entertainment events.
The couple work in New York.
Rabbi Daniel Alder is to perform the ceremony at the Brotherhood Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 36, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is the daughter of Frieda Simon of Edison N.J., and the late Arthur Simon.


Autumn's Long-Lasting Fruit of the Vine
ALTHOUGH the big time for decorative pumpkin faces has gone by, the season for other distinguished members of the clan has arrived.
Pumpkins belong to a rather special group of plants called the gourd family, which also includes such diverse edibles as cucumbers, watermelons and cantaloupes as well as squash and, of course, decorative gourds.


U.N. Authorizes Attacks On Serb Bases in Croatia
The Security Council today authorized NATO to attack airfields in a Serbian-held area of Croatia if the Serbs continue to use them to launch bombing runs against targets in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The resolution, adopted unanimously, apparently does not specifically allow retaliation for attacks that have already taken place, like the one today by Serbian fighter-bombers on Cazin in northwestern Bosnia.


Word for Word/Fernando Henrique Cardoso; Having Left Campus for the Arena, Winner in Brazil Shifts to Right
IF Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Brazil's President-elect, had run for office in the United States, his opponent would have had a field day dredging up his past.
A leftist, though hardly revolutionary, professor who cited Marx and criticized the West when it was fashionable in the 1960's and 1970's, Mr.
Cardoso left a wealth of material for dissection, especially the book "Dependency and Development in Latin America," a seminal text still used in American graduate schools as a period piece on political mood of the 60's and 70's.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Honda Odyssey; Another Shuttle in the Space Race
AS a longtime Honda fan, I have been looking forward to the company's new mini-van.
Now that it is finally in the driveway, I am both pleased and not so pleased.
The 1995 van, named the Odyssey, is based on the popular Honda Accord, and it carries the Accord's four-cylinder engine, which means it is somewhat underpowered.
On the other hand, it is smaller than much of the competition, and its handling is definitely more carlike.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPORTS  WHEN THE COLTS BELONGED TO BALTIMORE  A Father and a Son, a Team and a Time.
By William Gildea.
Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.


Crook


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Magazine/Section 6
A special issue of the Magazine asks "What's New York the capital of now?" It's a city in which density is destiny.
A concentration of creativity has made New York a capital of advertising, art, book publishing, classical music, and that just takes you through "c." Another answer to the question: diversity.


Visit From the Muse of 'Glass Menagerie'
To the Editor:
Further on your Nov. 16 review of Tennessee Williams's "Glass Menagerie": How "self-dramatizing" really was that notorious mother we know as Amanda Wingfield?


Kicking to a Different Tune
SOME things never change.
The Radio City Music Hall Christmas show isn't one of them.


In Gaza, Outbursts Of Fury, Not Blood
On a street they had strewn with rocks and stone barricades, a group of schoolchildren held an impromptu protest march today, holding a ragged Palestinian flag.
"Oh martyrs, oh wounded, your blood has not been shed in vain!" they chanted, their voices lost in the rumble of passing cars.


Honesty in Labor
To the Sports Editor:
We got the treat and next year we'll get the trick.
I am stunned that one league came to its senses and decided to play, but was this a wise move?
The National Basketball Association's aloofness to the collective bargaining woes of its baseball and hockey contemporaries may be a sign of the real trouble that looms ahead.
Hockey and baseball players may be too dumb to kiss and make up, but they're honest.
Basketball appears to be overly optimistic in their assessment of negotiation possibilities.
Unfortunately for fans, the N.B.A. may be painting a picture bound to fall down next year without hard-line concessions.
CLYDE TINNEN JR.
Jamaica, Queens


Lisa Parrilli And Chris Harris
Elizabeth Helen Parrilli, a technology officer at Chemical Bank in New York, was married yesterday to John Christopher Paul Harris, a vice president and the derivatives trading manager at the bank.
The Rev.
Robert J. Robbins performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Family in New York.
The bride, 28, is known as Lisa and is is keeping her name.
She graduated from Florida State University.
She is a daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Matthew M. Parrilli of Fairfax, Va.


Belated Bow


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
California Business Style, As Glamorized on TV
A San Francisco-based women's clothing chain whose style has been made famous by the television characters Amanda on "Melrose Place" and Lois on "Lois and Clark" has recently become a presence around Manhattan.


Police Focus on Arresting Prostitutes' Customers
The undercover police officer, clad in tight mini-skirt, fish-net stockings and high heels, strolled to the passenger window of a white Lincoln Town Car and talked briefly with the driver.
They agreed on a price for sex as police officers nearby listened to their recorded conversation.
Before the man could flinch, a dozen officers swarmed over him like a bees to a hive.
Several others converged on the scene in screeching cars from every direction.
Shaking visibly, the man, Magry Zakhary of Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, was handcuffed and whisked to a waiting van.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
STRANGE PILGRIMS: Twelve Stories By Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Translated by Edith Grossman.
Penguin, $10.95.
Most of these tales do not reflect the trademark magic realism of their author, a Nobel laureate, but reality itself.
Featuring Latin Americans who have resettled in Europe, they are inspired by Mr.
Garcia Marquez's youth.
Last year our reviewer, William Boyd, said, "As always . . . the marvel is his tone of voice."


Giving Credit Where Due
To the Editor:
As director of public relations for the Film Society of Lincoln Center, I feel obliged to point out that in the article "How the Nazis Created a Dream Factory in Hell"  [ Nov. 6 ] , in connection with the series of German films of the Nazi era, currently at the Walter Reade Theater, the name of the man who conceived and curated the series was not mentioned.
Eric Rentschler, a professor at the University of California, Irvine, and one of the leading experts in German film history, programmed the traveling show and is also the author of a book, "The Ministry of Illusion: German Film 1933-45," to be published next year by Harvard University Press.
JOANNA NEY  New York


WHY LAWYERS LIE
Floyd Abrams's "Why Lawyers Lie" (Oct. 9) might leave readers thinking that lawyers, and particularly criminal-defense lawyers, routinely lie and that it is their duty to do so on behalf of their clients.
This is not the case.
While lawyers must zealously defend the accused, their duty does not extend to lying or permitting known perjured testimony to be offered from the witness stand.
The American legal system focuses on process, not the truth.
That is how it was designed and how it is supposed to operate.
Why are coerced confessions and illegally seized evidence suppressed if a person committed a crime?
Because legal processes have been subverted and that is unjust under our system of law.
Defense lawyers promote justice by insuring that the evidence to be used against their clients is legally obtained and that it meets the necessary burden of proof.


Going Back To the Source
To the Editor:
In her article "John and Woody and Mary-Louise and Mia"  [ Oct. 23 ] , Ellen Pall noted that the actor John Cusack was concerned about being compared to Woody Allen in Mr.
Allen's latest film, "Bullets Over Broadway," and quoted him as saying, "Because then I thought I didn't create a character." His comment reminded me of my favorite line of all time, from another Allen film, "The Purple Rose of Cairo." In it, Jeff Daniels portrays an actor whose character has gotten away from him, and he indignantly tells a fan: "He's my character. I created him." She replies, "Didn't the man who wrote the movie do that?" EILEEN ELDRICH  New York


CHARLES MURRAY
I guess the upside for those of us on the lower end of Charles Murray's I.Q. ladder is that we don't have to take responsibility for -- oh, let's see: acid rain, radioactive waste, smog, ozone depletion, World Wars I and II, the atom bomb, germ warfare, water pollution, the Exxon Valdez, slavery, genocide, mercury in fish, the cold war, apartheid, the Vietnam War, Agent Orange, etc. etc.


411 Service Out of Order
Telephone users in the New York metropolitan area had to resort to looking up numbers the old-fashioned way -- in the telephone book -- when an electronic malfunction caused the 411 directory assistance service to crash yesterday.
Bob Varettoni, a spokesman for NYNEX, which operates the system, said the problem was caused by the failure of a routing circuit that allows two computer databases to communicate.
He said he did not know what caused the circuits to fail.


Taxpayers Are Angry. They're Expensive, Too.
AMERICANS believe that their Government wastes vast wads of cash on pork-barrel highways, naval bases in the landlocked home states of important Senators and handouts to an ungrateful underclass -- and that wiping out all this would balance the budget.
After the election of 1994, few Republicans or even Democrats deny that the voters have a point.


Quirky Storm Now Has Lost Some Bluster
The peripatetic Tropical Storm Gordon, which harried Cuba, Haiti, Florida and North Carolina's Outer Banks before it turned south last night, began breaking up today off the north Florida coast.
In 10 days of existence, the storm has proved as fickle in intensity as in its zigzag course.
As a tropical storm, it killed hundreds of people when it hit Cuba and Haiti early this week.
On Wednesday, it weakened, but nevertheless cut a swath across Florida that caused $200 million in damage.


Miracle on Azusa Street
FIRE FROM HEAVEN The Rise of Pentecostal Spirituality and the Reshaping of Religion in the Twenty-first Century.
By Harvey Cox.
Illustrated. 346 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $24.


Help for the Transportationally Challenged
STEPPING out of my building the other day I came this close to being run down by a man delivering food on a bicycle.
I never saw him until he brushed past, and I don't think he ever saw me.
He was too busy cackling and gesticulating at another food deliveryman in the street.
They were racing.
I didn't scream this time and give chase.
I simply visited Charles Komanoff, my transportation therapist.
He sighed.
"This is one group of bicycle riders I have not been able to reach. Part of the problem is that many of them don't speak English. And when I go to their stores and restaurants, suddenly their managers don't speak English, either."


50's-Style Diner Takes Root in, of All Places, a Shopping Mall
A BROTHER and a sister from Caldwell are trying to turn back time a bit by creating a 50's-style diner in a space that used to be a bank.
While there are a few other retro diners scattered around the state, theirs, called Bobby-Q's, is in the Livingston Mall here and may be the only one in a shopping mall in the state.
"That's really the first I've heard of any diner in any mall in New Jersey," said Larry Fidel, executive vice president of the New Jersey Restaurant Association in Somerset.
The organization represents 1,400 restaurant owners in the state and was originally the Newark Diners Association when it was formed in 1942.


UMass Grapples With Games And Grades
Lou Roe heard the pitches and listened to his dreams.
His game was offering all these paths from Atlantic City, and all he had to do was choose one.
These were big-time basketball places in prime-time leagues.
Syracuse had a place at center stage in the Carrier Dome.
Connecticut had become a national program.
Florida State and Clemson were interested.
He chose none of them.
When Lou Roe finally made his decision and told his friends he was headed for this place called UMass, the responses held more skepticism than congratulations.
There had to be some mistake.
"UMass didn't sound like University of Massachusetts," Roe remembered.
"Maybe a technical school or something. People didn't really know. They were like, 'What's wrong? What was on your mind when you made that decision? What made you choose UMass over Syracuse? Are you nuts? Who is UMass, anyway?' "


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Talent; If You Dropped A Bomb On These Pages...
THE PATTERN HAS BECOME FAMILIAR: A PAINTER MOVES TO NEW York from a distant precinct, eats beans and rice for six years, gets a gallery, gets a solo show, gets a bigger gallery, sells a painting for $300,000 and then . . . moves out of New York.
To Sag Harbor, maybe.
Actors go to Hollywood.
Writers to Wyoming.
The talent business has taken a beating in New York.
Dancers have watched rehearsal studios go co-op; painters have watched their SoHo spaces turn over at SoHo prices.
For a few very fertile years in the 1970's, New York spawned a legion of great rock bands (the New York Dolls, the Ramones, Talking Heads et al.); these days, such a scene is more likely to break out in Chapel Hill, N.C., where your van doesn't get broken into every night and where there's always another frat party to play.


Penn State Defense Provides Offense
Reduced to cheerful, if impatient, spectators for all but six minutes, Penn State's offense spent today's first half doing needlepoint and sending out for pizza while the Nittany Lions' defense played fantasy football against Northwestern.
Free safeties fulfilled their end-zone dreams, defensive ends chugged along with interceptions, cornerbacks scooped up fumbles as if they were Easter eggs.


What's New York The Capital Of Now?
The classic New York Answer to the question is, of course, the world, but these days it sounds a little dated.
When I hear it, I think of Dick Falk, who used to work in a dingy office above Times Square and billed himself as Broadway's greatest press agent.
He loved to boast that he was the model for Sidney Falco, the 1950's P.R. man played by Tony Curtis in "Sweet Smell of Success," and it was hard to decide which was more endearing: that he wanted to associate himself with one of the most reptilian characters in the history of film, or that his boast was a blatant lie.
When I met him, three years ago, he was 79 and his business had dwindled to a few clients, among them a "psychic to the stars" and an actress named Suzie Sunshine.
One afternoon, as he was in the process of being evicted from his office, he sat at his desk in front of his manual typewriter showing off yellowed Walter Winchell columns and explaining his world view.
"To me, 42d Street is the most beautiful street in the world!" he declared with a booming voice and a straight face.
"It's the center of the earth, and I'm it! I'm actually 42d Street!"


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
Long Island IT'S ON TO THE FINALS: Troy Gorman scored two touchdowns and passed for another as BETHPAGE (9-0) routed WESTBURY (6-3), 34-6, in yesterday's Nassau County Conference III playoffs at Hofstra University.
Next Saturday the Golden Eagles will meet NEW HYDE PARK, a 12-6 overtime winner over SEWANHAKA in its semifinal game, also at Hofstra.


KILL FOR LIFE
How about a profile on the people who are hunted by McMillan and his friends?
My sister, for example, whose family practice clinic was fire-bombed at 3 A.M., on Oct. 11.
The clinic provided, among other medical services, birth control and abortion.
She has been a physican's assistant for 18 years and recently got a master's degree in counseling.
She's been a care giver all her life.
Ever since she was a child, those in need have known they could turn to her for help.


Law, Conducting and Mathematics in One Package
WE began at 10:30 in the morning on the Saturday of the Labor Day Weekend in the Paradise Diner, Sag Harbor's "greasy spoon," reminiscent of the places in the city where the lawyer, conductor, mathematician Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg might occasionally meet a client before going on to dinner at a setting just slightly more elegant.
We moved through the day as he talked, gesticulating nonstop as if he were still conducting some invisible orchestra, first out to the Sag Harbor pier -- "and I do often meet a client on a jetty or a small strip of beach," he was saying in the kind of aside that so often would come in between his lines, this lawyer who practices without an office or a secretary or an answering machine, partly to spare his clients overhead, partly because he never meant to be a practicing lawyer, not really.


Diner Beware
To the Editor: We were dining at U Zlate Hrusky, the Golden Pear, in Prague last month.
Bread and butter were placed on the table and we had ordered our wine when the waiter came with a one-inch (one-ounce) tiny jar of snail pate.
He offered it; we declined, but he encouraged us to try it and left it on the table.
There was no mention of price, and we simply assumed it was complimentary.
My husband ended up opening it and taking a little taste.
Our bill for dinner and wine was the equivalent of $80, but the pate was $40 in addition.
When we complained, we were treated very rudely and firmly, with no adjustment offered.


The View From an Unmarked Car
AN hour or so after dawn on a cloudy fall day, State Police Trooper First Class Richard W. Dorsch was driving an unmarked cruiser cautiously southbound on Interstate 95 in Greenwich, watching other cars zoom along and offering wry comments.
"There's a lot of wackos riding around in cars," said the trooper, who is of a philosophical bent.
"I guess it's the hustle and bustle of life. It's chaos. It's a hurry to go nowhere."


The Rise of the Losing Class
WHEN Karl Marx described an increasingly miserable and exploited working class, he never imagined that his oppressed workers might someday include Ivy League M.B.A's tossed out of $200,000-a-year jobs.
But a changing economy is gradually linking highly educated managers and technicians with high-school- trained assembly-line workers and office clerks.
The link is in their common place in an increasingly competitive economy that no longer values workers as much as it once did.
What they share, public opinion polls show, are feelings of uncertainty, insecurity and anxiety about their jobs and their incomes.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


KILL FOR LIFE
I've had it with people who, on principle, fight for the lives of unborn children and then disappear when these children enter the world.
Where are these activists then?


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Shoestring Italy
To the Editor: Bravo, Andrew G. Fox!
How refreshing to read about a shoestring tour of Italy by real people who don't need four-star restaurants or sumptuous hotel appointments to be able to enjoy themselves! ("A Group Tour of Italy, Czech Style," Oct. 23.)


Training Board Members
MEMBERSHIP organizations that serve co-ops or condominiums have long believed that special training for those serving on boards is so basic to a well-functioning building or complex that they've made education a key component of their programs.
Yet board members, it seems, are less and less inclined to devote time to training that they feel lacks a payoff.


Sampras Springs! Agassi Falls
Just how much did Pete Sampras want to beat Andre Agassi today in the semifinals of the IBM/ATP Tour World Championship?
Consider this: Leading by 5-3 in a second-set tie breaker he had to win to stay in the match, the top-ranked Sampras finished off one of the week's most remarkable exchanges by sprinting desperately to his left, lunging and knocking a backhand winner down the line.
Sampras, usually among the most sedate and unflappable of 23-year-olds, jumped higher than a freshman cheerleader at the first homecoming game.


Class Puts The Accent On Clarity
ARMANDO MOLINA speaks in the gently accented tones of his native Mexico.
He was an English teacher before immigrating to the United States 12 years ago, but the lessons he taught dealt only with grammar and vocabulary --"the basic stuff," he calls it -- and not with ordinary conversational English.
That, said Mr.
Molina, a bilingual counselor at the Westchester Spanish Coalition, a nonprofit social services organization in White Plains, was something he had to teach himself in America.
It has been a daunting task given his perfectionism and a job that requires him to speak in public.
After years of worrying about his mistakes of pronunciation and usage, Mr.
Molina said he finally found a class that has helped him -- a free, eight-week course to reduce accents given at the Donald R. Reed Speech Center, an independent, nonprofit agency on the grounds of Phelps Memorial Hospital Center here.


Out of Ashes


Streetscapes/Blumstein's Department Store; How a Black Boycott Opened the Employment Door
THE angry demonstrations on 125th Street are over, the displaced vendors relocated to a vacant lot on Lenox Avenue between 116th and 117th Streets.
Last month the vendors were fighting for the right to sell outside the street's stores and began boycotting local merchants who opposed the congestion that sometimes blocked the sidewalks.
Somewhere there must be a few ancient Harlemites who can remember similar demonstrations 60 years ago in front of Blumstein's department store, at 230 West 125th Street.
At that time blacks were fighting for the right to work not outside, but inside, and their victory marked a turning point in Harlem history.


Looking Like Winners, But Acting Like Browns
Art Modell, the Browns' owner and president, doesn't want to get too excited about his team's 8-2 start -- the best since 1965.
But it's hard when all the signs indicate that the team is very good and the record is no aberration.
The Browns are tied with San Diego for the best record in the American Football Conference and for home-field advantage for the playoffs.


An Ignorance of Africa As Vast as the Continent
FOR any American living in this city of gleaming skyscrapers and seamless asphalt highways, there is bound to be at least one encounter with another countryman who, roughing it elsewhere on the continent, says of Abidjan: "Of course, that's not really Africa."
By the same token, many American blacks who have spent time in African countries find themselves contending back home with the wide-eyed inquiries of friends or strangers who have never visited but see Africa as an idealized spiritual home of brotherhood and democracy.


Business Diary: November 13-18
THE ECONOMY The Fed Wants to Make One Thing Perfectly Clear  So the Federal Reserve did raise rates again -- by three-quarters of a point, the most since 1981.
The right move?
Many had doubts.
Complaints ranged from the polite ("misreading the American economy," "extraordinarily aggressive") to the less polite (the Fed "is coming down on the side of the bloody bondholders").
After all, the latest reading on consumer prices showed just a 0.1 percent rise.
But economists, it seems, have this odd formula that equates "full employment" with a 6 percent jobless rate.
Anything less (it's now 5.8 percent) means we're "running out of workers." Put another way: workers get this funny idea that there are plenty of jobs around, and (gasp!) demand more pay.
The result: demon inflation.
The short view, of course, would dictate putting people to work.
The Fed's taking the long view -- correctly, one hopes.


Jonathan Ashley and Susan A. Tobias
Susan Amy Tobias, an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, was married last evening to Jonathan Ashley, an associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
Rabbi Louis Frishman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ashley, 28, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Tobias of New City, N.Y.
Her father is the chairman of the Richwood Brokerage Corporation, an insurance brokerage in Hawthorne, N.Y.


A Diva On Broadway Ascends
Welcoming 'Sunset Boulevard,' the Rainbow Room, Nov. 17.


A Genius for Introspection
KAREN HORNEY A Psychoanalyst's Search for Self-Understanding.
By Bernard J. Paris.
Illustrated. 270 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $30.


Taking the Plunge Into a Reef Off Fiji
The Great Astrolabe Reef, off Fiji in the South Pacific, is known as one of the world's finest dive sites.
This spring, the Beqa Princess will explore its outer, or northern, section -- which the company says has been closed to diving in recent years to protect its delicate ecology.
The reef is known for its coral and its sheer dropoffs, but its biggest attraction is the chance it affords to view big schools of open-ocean hunters like manta rays, barracuda, dolphins, billfish marlin and whales.
The boat's operator, the San Francisco-based Aqua-Trek Dive Travel Service, received permission to dive at the site because it had been in Fiji previously and shown sensitivity to protecting the underwater environment, according to Les Fields, the company's managing director.
In its agreement with the local people, Aqua-Trek will photograph the reef to document damage from cyclones.
The Beqa Princess will carry no more than six divers, two to a cabin.


Scaffolding Leaving the Cathedral of St. John the Divine. More to Come.
An update from one of the world's longest-running construction projects: the scaffolding will be coming down -- for now, at least.
Since 1982, scaffolding has surrounded the south tower of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, on Amsterdam Avenue just north of 110th Street.
It is a visual reminder that, after 102 years, the world's largest Gothic cathedral, still deserves its nickname: St.
John the Unfinished.


Spirit of Youth


Latest Rate Hike by the Fed Makes White House Nervous
The first five times the Federal Reserve raised interest rates this year, the Clinton Administration was surprisingly accepting.
But last week's big increase produced a more varied reaction, leading to worries and irritation among some of the Administration's most senior economic officials.
The concern at top levels of the Administration is that the Fed's actions this time may begin to threaten the 31/2 -year-old economic expansion that must continue through 1996 if the President is to have any serious chance of winning re-election.
A top policy maker, who insisted on anonymity, called the rate increase "a more marginal decision on the part of the Fed" than the central bank's previous interest rate moves.


Governor-Elect's Loyal Aide Likes the Sidelines, Away From the Crowd
When Governor-elect George E. Pataki met reporters one day after the election, he brought only one member of his campaign staff on stage: his loyal aide and campaign chairman, Michael C. Finnegan.
But if the move said much about Mr.
Pataki's feelings for his old friend, the place Mr.
Finnegan took on stage also said much about their relationship: He stood in the wings, barely noticed by the crowd.


Lori Oscher, Eric J. Friedman
Lori Oscher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs Paul E. Oscher of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Eric Jonathan Friedman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Friedman of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
The bride, 25, graduated from Cornell University and is a swimwear designer with Nicole Miller, the clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her father is the chief executive of Crooks, Oscher &amp; Company, a specialist firm and stock brokerage in New York.


Park of Vistas to Improve Looks
Henry J. Stern, the city's Parks Commissioner, was in an expansive mood.
"It is unique because of its vistas," Mr.
Stern mused as he stood before several tons of upturned dirt in Maurice Park last week.
"On a clear day, you can see the Empire State Building."


Keeping Tabs on Japan
To the Editor:
There are too many misstatements in the review of my book, "Speed Tribes" (Oct. 16), for me to refute, but please allow me to cite a few examples:


Despite Gains, Press Freedom in Mexico Is Still Limited
Millions of Mexicans who watched President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's last state of the union address on television this month heard him declare that press freedom exists in Mexico.
"The proliferation of completely uncensored opinions and investigations is there for all to see," he said.


Julia A. Forster, John Thompson Jr.
Julia Allen Forster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher A. Forster of New York, was married there yesterday to John Edward Thompson Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Thompson.
Dr.
Richard P. Unsworth, a Presbyterian minister and the headmaster of the Berkshire School in Sheffield, Mass., performed the ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity, and the Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr., an Episcopal priest, took part in it.
Ms.
Forster, 34, is keeping her name.
She is the director of patron programs for WNET, Channel 13, in New York.
She graduated from Hartwick College.


Nov. 13-19: Just Say No; California's Propostion 187 Meets First Legal Roadblock
The fight over California's hotly disputed immigration control measure did not end on Election Day when voters gave it overwhelming 3-to-2 approval.
Opponents last week won a temporary reprieve in court.


Pataki Names Task Force to Cut Budget
Governor-elect George E. Pataki announced the formation yesterday of a key committee in his transition: a task force to hire a new budget director and put the new governor's stamp on next year's budget.
Heading the group of 10 people will be Assemblyman John J. Faso, a five-term Republican from Kinderhook who abandoned his run for state comptroller earlier this year after the party chose Herbert I. London as its candidate.
Mr.
Faso, 42, who has emerged as a top spokesman for the Republicans in the Democratic-controlled Assembly, said a priority would be to look for cuts in the $34 billion state-financed portion of the budget.


More Parking, but More Dirt
There are two things that residents of northern Brooklyn will fight for only slightly less hard than, for example, their lives.
One is their right to a view of the Manhattan skyline; the other is a parking space.
Under a proposal by the Department of Sanitation, the perpetual parking shortage will ease at least slightly on some blocks, though the price may be clean streets.


He Sure Didn't Take It With Him
OF course, the very rich are different from you and me. Their wills are longer.
And no recent will, lawyers believe, has run on longer than the 120-page tome filed on Monday in New York County Surrogate Court for the late Milton J. Petrie, founder and majority owner of Petrie Stores.


Teen-Agers at Malls: Some Background
The recent portrait painted of teen-agers as nuisances in our malls (Freehold Township Journal, "Teen-Agers at the Mall: An Uneasy Existence") is incomplete without an examination of the places this generation has been excluded from.
Single-parent families and even some two-parent households where both parents work have become so pressed for time that the very essence of family life, sharing experiences with one another, has been sacrificed for making ends meet and, after a certain age, that electronic baby-sitter loses its appeal.


Lori E. Jacobson And Peter C. Jarck
Lori Elizabeth Jacobson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Jacobson of New York, was married there yesterday to Peter Carl Jarck, a son of Ingrid Eifert of Honesdale, Pa., and a stepson of Klaus Eifert.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James's Church.
Mrs.
Jarck, 26, is an assistant teacher at the Episcopal School in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a master's degree in early-childhood development and elementary education from New York University.
Her father, a former vice chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, is a senior partner in Benjamin Jacobson &amp; Sons, a securities brokerage and specialist firm on the exchange.
The bride's grandfather was the late New York restaurateur Toots Shor.


Cochlear Implants And the Young
The cochlear implant has proven to be a useful device for some profoundly deafened individuals.
The article "Enabling the Deaf to Hear: Surgery That Cuts Two Ways" (Oct. 9), while informative, failed to emphasize one important aspect.
Individuals who are deafened at birth or in infancy before learning speech (prelingual) predictably have limited benefit from the cochlear implant if it is placed in late adolescence or adulthood.
For all intents and purposes these people have never heard sound.


Wendy R. Beer, D. I. Wishengrad
Wendy Ruth Beer, a daughter of Myrna and Dr.
Daniel T. Beer of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to David Ian Wishengrad, the son of Ellie and Joel Wishengrad of Pomona, N.Y.
Rabbi Saul I. Teplitz performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Wishengrad, 28, is the compliance counsel at Furman Selz Inc., an investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and from Brooklyn Law School and received a master of laws degree from the London School of Economics.
Her father, an internist, is the president of the Cedarhurst (L.I.) Medical Associates, a medical group of which the bride's mother is the accounts coordinator..


BEST SELLERS: November 20, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
38
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
5
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
3
4
22
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
5
12
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
3
7
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
6
11
2
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
7
6
4
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
8
10
4
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
9
8
119
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
10
9
8
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
11*
7
9
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
12
14
2
A TANGLED WEB, by Judith Michael. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The sequel to "Deceptions," a novel in which twin sisters swapped places.
13
13
17
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
14
12
10
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
15*
3
STAR TREK FEDERATION, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $22.) Captain Kirk and Captain Picard must both carry out vital missions.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope.
2
3
3
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
3
9
11
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
2
3
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
5
5
7
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
6
7
8
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
4
6
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
8
6
6
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
9
8
10
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
10
10
48
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
14
4
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
12
11
37
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
13
1
GUNS, CRIME, AND FREEDOM, by Wayne R. LaPierre. (Regnery, $22.95.) The executive vice president of the National Rifle Association argues against gun control.
14
13
6
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
15
12
8
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign through the eyes of romantically involved consultants.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
78
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
30
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
5
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Ways to cope with life's problems.
4
4
8
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR, by David Grossman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A dark and stunning Israeli novel whose protagonist, a post-Freudian little boy, forestalls the treasons and corruptions of adulthood by ceasing to grow at the age of 11.
CORELLI'S MANDOLIN, by Louis de Bernieres. (Pantheon, $24.) A high-spirited historical romance about events on a Greek island, mostly during World War II, when Italians and Germans occupy the place and try to control it.
A CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK, by Irving Howe. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) The book Howe was working on at his death last year, a collection of freestanding essays on the art of fiction, is mainly a record of the pleasures of thinking, and thinking acutely, about novels.
FAMILY, by Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) An extraordinary history of an ordinary family, in which the author plays the roles of gossip, pedant and loyal member, yielding a reunion strangers are welcome -- and fortunate -- to attend.
FATHERALONG: A Meditation on Fathers and Sons, Race and Society, by John Edgar Wideman. (Pantheon, $21.) An illuminating book-length essay that concerns many things, chief among them the author's struggle to bridge the gulf between himself and his father.
THE FOLLOWING STORY, by Cees Nooteboom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.
THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr.
Frey examines the myth of deliverance through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional sports.
LENIN: A New Biography, by Dmitri Volkogonov. (Free Press, $30.) The wrath of a former believer runneth over in this polemic by a Russian archivist who has discovered enough smoking-gun documents to argue that every disaster of the Soviet Union was the fault of its founder.
TALKING FROM 9 TO 5: How Women's and Men's Conversational Styles Affect Who Gets Heard, Who Gets Credit, and What Gets Done at Work, by Deborah Tannen. (Morrow, $23.) A lively sociolinguist explores what her subtitle specifies.
THIS YEAR IN JERUSALEM, by Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $23.) An engaging novelist's report on his youth as a Zionist and his travels in Israel, ventures that leave him content to be a Canadian.
UNDER MY SKIN: Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949, by Doris Lessing. (HarperCollins, $25.) A remarkable life in a remarkable place -- the declining British Empire in Africa -- told by a novelist who for three-quarters of a century has conceded nothing to political, psychological or literary fashion.


Support Seen For New Term For Cortines
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has the support of most of the Board of Education for an extension of his two-year contract, board members say.
Now the question is whether Mr.
Cortines wants to stay.
Mr.
Cortines has kept his own intentions a tantalizing mystery.
Even as he has repeatedly broadened his already sweeping agenda in recent months, taking on projects that will have barely gotten under way when his contract expires on July 1, Mr.
Cortines has also occasionally hinted that he may retire.
That has left open the prospect that the city could face its sixth wrenching chancellor search in a decade.


What All Alzheimer's Disease Families Share
To the Editor:
There are approximately four million people with Alzheimer's disease in this country, and for every victim there is also a care giver.
I am one of those care givers, and I believe I know how Nancy Reagan must feel now that her husband has been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
I know what to expect.


Indonesia Bars Foreign Reporters In East Timor
As the police struggled to restore order in East Timor after the largest anti-Government demonstrations in years, the Indonesian Government said today that it would temporarily bar foreign reporters from visiting the disputed province.
The move alarmed human rights groups, which have warned of a new, violent crackdown on dissidents in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that was invaded by Indonesia in 1975 and later annexed.


Advise and Compensate
To the Editor:
When I first entered the consulting field, I would do work that involved sharing the risk in the form of a percentage of savings for the client.
Unfortunately, there would usually be a difference over the size of the savings or whether the savings were attained by the client or by the consultant.
When one works, one fully expects to receive compensation.
Clients hire a consultant for skills and experience that are missing from their organizations or because their staffs are overburdened.
Our firm always delivers value-added services, but it is up to the client to use our recommendations wisely and be prepared to implement recommendations if they wish to move forward.
EDWARD FORREST  Roslyn, L.I., Oct. 25  The writer is president of Productivity Consulting Limited, a management consulting firm.


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Help in Avoiding Pitfalls of Retirement
HAVING enough money isn't enough for successful retirement.
"About a third of the people who retire wish fervently that they were back at work," said Guild A. Fetridge, a retirement specialist.


Food Drives: Where to Share for the Holidays
As the holidays approach, some food programs for the needy are beginning their annual food drives while others are continuing their year-round efforts.
Here is a sampling of programs that accept donations.
ALL BOROUGHS  CITY HARVEST AND THE FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS Holiday canned-food drive at all firehouses and police departments in the five boroughs; these sites are designated to receive packaged and canned foods for City Harvest, a nonprofit agency serving 150 emergency food centers in the city.
No glass except for baby food, and no perishable foods.
Holiday food canned-food drive continues through the New Year.
City Harvest accepts donations year-round, including perishable foods; donors can contact City Harvest for more information.
For the location of nearest firehouse or police station: (212) 463-0456.


No Ewing, No Problem For a Night
The Knicks did not have Patrick Ewing in the lineup because of a sore knee, but they still had enough to end their slump.
Returning to form after a 1-3 road trip, New York (5-3) rolled to a 26-point lead in the second quarter, then held off the Atlanta Hawks, 92-79, last night at Madison Square Garden.
Ewing missed the game because of soreness and swelling in his right knee.


Scalia v. Merriam-Webster
IN A 1924 DISSENT, Justice Louis D. Brandeis wrote: "Modification implies growth. It is the life of the law." The law got pretty lively recently on the meaning of the word modify.
Justice Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court's conservative dynamo and frequent dissenter, found himself writing the majority's decision in the case of MCI v.
AT&amp;T.
This case, pitting two of the nation's info-age giants against each other, hinged on the reach of the Federal Communications Commission's power to "modify any requirement" in a section of the law.
MCI argued that this meant the F.C.C. could make basic changes in that section, which it had made over AT&amp;T's objections.


RESULTS PLUS
AUCTIONS It's Going, Going, Gone  The Oklahoma home where Mickey Mantle learned to switch-hit was sold for $60,500 yesterday, and its new owner announced plans to convert it into a Mantle museum.
The buyer, David Drozen, said Mantle's boyhood home will soon be leaving Commerce, Okla. -- lock, stock and barn -- and relocated to Las Vegas, Nev., or Branson, Mo. (AP)


What Was the Question?
SO, IS NEW YORK THE CAPITAL OF . . . funny?
"Yes," said John Leguizamo. "Next question."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Kitchen's Own Cow
A COW on the roof is not equal to a bull in the street.
At least not in Smithtown.
For decades Smithtown's bronzed bull has guarded the intersection of Routes 25 and 25A with nary an incident.
All right, there was the time vandals spray-painted its private parts pink.
That caused the Town Board to discuss castrating the sculpture, which led a member of the Smith family to stand up and shout, "There will be no castration without representation!" Democracy prevailed.
The bull has remained intact, and in high regard.


V.A.T. Prevalent, Refunds Less So
SWITZERLAND is joining the 19 European countries that charge a value added tax, or V.A.T., on goods and services.
The tax, the equivalent of a national sales tax, goes into effect Jan. 1, and the rate is 6.5 percent.
It applies to things that concern tourists: accommodations, car rentals and restaurant meals, as well as goods purchased to be taken home.
It will not be applied to theater tickets, according to Erika Lieben, public relations manager for the Swiss National Tourist Office in New York.
The new tax, described as a consumption tax, will replace a purchase tax of 4.5 to 4.8 percent that now applies, but only to merchandise.
Despite the rise, the 6.5 percent rate is the lowest in Europe, where the levels run up to 25 percent in Denmark, 21 percent in Ireland, 18.6 percent in France and 17.5 percent in the Netherlands and Britain.


Scienceport Museum Finds a Place to Land Temporarily
SCIENCEPORT, the museum that aims to reveal the secrets of this world and of the universe beyond, has performed a neat physical trick: After three years of virtual invisibility in the county, Scienceport has materialized at the old Eastview School here with a flourish worthy of Houdini.
Not that the museum, which was founded in 1991 by the Council of Junior Leagues of Westchester and incorporated in the same year by the State Board of Regents, has been inactive.
Although it still awaits its dream building at the county-owned Playland in Rye, Scienceport has been busy in the schools.
The museum administers Starlab, an astronomy workshop featuring a portable planetarium, and Science-by-Mail, a pen-pal program that pairs fourth through ninth graders with professional scientists.


Roll Right On In
At Mr.
Chips, an ice-cream parlor at 22 East 92d Street, fresh red lettering on the door proclaims: "Roller Blades Welcome." The shop sits under a pink awning in the heart of the Upper East Side.
Inside, the aroma of baked waffle cones clings to the air.
There are swivel stools in peach and mint green, including short ones for smaller customers.
Mr.
Chips was opened in September by Chip Fisher, the son of the electronics tycoon Avery Fisher.
"I'm 38 years old and I go all over town in my Roller Blades," he said.
"I'm just really angry that you can't get into any stores." Most merchants, Mr.
Fisher said, fear litigation.
"If someone falls in my store," he said with an optimism unusual in a New Yorker, "I'll tell them they don't know how to skate, but I don't think they will sue me." D.M.H.


The Executive Computer; Getting On-Line -- the Microsoft Way
AT the Comdex computer show last week in Las Vegas, the Microsoft Corporation gave the first public demonstration of its planned on-line service, which is to debut next year.
And in typical fashion, Microsoft immediately set out to rewrite the rules of a game it hasn't even started to play.
Called the Microsoft Network, it resembles other on-line services like America Online, Prodigy and Compuserve.
Users will be able to send electronic messages, get technical support they can no longer get over the phone, look up words in far-away data bases and yak it up with strangers.
Or shop for socks.
Or exchange mail with the White House, and read about Socks (the First Cat).


No Headline
"It's an overreaction by the Fed. The government seems to dabble a little too much into the economy, and by so doing, they're going to stifle it. They're being too tight about inflation." DON FALCONER a retiree from Maryland, on the latest interest rise.  [ 26:4. ]


Habitats/Middletown, Conn.; Fighting the Good Fight
PAULETTE AND DONOVAN SAMUELS and their son, Michael, 4, thought they would never buy the little white ranch house just off a country road here.
"There was one point when I went into the real estate office and I said 'I'll give you money -- anything -- but I want out,' Mrs. Samuels said, sitting on the brown calico loveseat in her new living room. "It became so emotional."


Deep-Pocket Braves Set a Budget
The Atlanta Braves have nine players signed for the 1995 season (what 1995 season, you ask?) at a total of $30 million.
That's more than 11 teams spent, or would have spent without the strike, on their entire payrolls this year, but the Braves don't plan to break Ted Turner's bank.
"Actually, we have our own internal budget, which has been the admonition of agents and players, especially in the last three months," John Schuerholz, the Braves' general manager, said.
"We've taken their words to heart. They all said you don't need any kind of cap; all you have to do is set up a budget. So we're going to do that."


Justice for East Timor
To the Editor:
Re "Anti-Indonesia Protest at U.S. Embassy" (news article, Nov. 13):


A Hampstead Socialist Tackles Schwarzenegger
Emma Thompson IS SO intelligent, so articulate, so politically aware that it seems only logical to assume that her choice of roles is quite deliberate.
So how has she -- this ironic, sensual and frank 35-year-old woman -- come to represent the American fantasy of Englishness, as a stiff-upper-lip, Merchant-Ivory kind of person who subordinates passion to duty?
She laughs.
"Really, what you're describing is 'The Remains of the Day.' The question is, what roles are there? What stories are you really interested in?" Good parts for women are rare, she says, and in comedy even rarer.
That's why, with delight, she accepted the invitation last year to make "Junior," a fantasy opening on Wednesday about male pregnancy, with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito.
The team, which includes the director Ivan Reitman, also made "Twins" back in 1988.


Gallic Touches
LES HALLES ** (212) 679-4111; 411 Park Avenue South, near 28th Street; $$; all major credit cards


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BREAKING BARRIERS
Bessie Coleman and Eugene Bullard, pilots during the earlier part of this century and two of the first black Americans to seek careers in aviation, are represented in a photographic exhibition at the Norwalk Maritime Center through March 1 of next year.
Complementing the current Imax film, "Destiny in Space," the exhibition, titled "African-Americans in Space Science," focuses on men and women who fought discrimination in industry and the military, ultimately breaking down the racial barriers and achieving distinction in a demanding field of endeavor.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Sound Bytes column last Sunday, about Daniel S. Bricklin, the first programmer to develop an electronic spreadsheet, misstated the name of one of his computers.
It is a Toshiba Portege.


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Dear Diary: About Those Earthquakes
EMMA THOMPSON, A veteran of Shakespeare and Merchant Ivory films, has her first leading role in a Hollywood film in "Junior," which opens on Wednesday.
Directed by Ivan Reitman, the Universal film also stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as a scientist who, through an experiment, becomes pregnant and Danny DeVito as his obstetrician.
While Ms.
Thompson was in California making the film, her husband, Kenneth Branagh, was editing his film "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" in England.


Carla L. Slocum, David J. Friedman
Carla Lockwood Slocum, a daughter of Jean K. Lockwood of San Antonio and the late Frederick R. Lockwood, was married last evening to David Jay Friedman, the son of Anne P. Friedman of New York and the late Maurice M. Friedman.
Justice Marylin G. Diamond of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Manhattan apartment of Phyllis F. Mack, the sister of the bridegroom.
The bride is a merchandise manager for men's sportswear at Abercrombie &amp; Fitch in Columbus, Ohio.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pittsburgh.


At a Loss for Words With Those Who Aren't
Meeting one of his favorite authors, David Kratz was at a loss for words.
"I was worried about what I would talk to E. L. Doctorow about," said Mr.
Kratz, a public relations executive who lives on Central Park West.
"I mean, he is E. L. Doctorow."


ARAFAT'S FORCES ARRANGE A TRUCE WITH MILITANTS
Struggling to rescue itself from its deepest crisis, the Palestinian self-rule government arranged a temporary truce today with Islamic militants and agreed to investigate street battles between police officers and protesters on Friday that killed at least 13 people and wounded as many as 200.
Unlike the day before, Gaza City's streets did not echo with gunfire for long hours today, although shots were heard occasionally.
Both the Palestinian Authority led by Yasir Arafat and the dominant Muslim group, Hamas, sought to pull back from the brink of what some here fear could become a civil war.


Indian Artists Speak for Themselves
A MYSTICAL aura emanates from eight "Spirit Masks" that revolve slowly with the slightest air current in the gallery of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in Lawrenceville.
Their construction is simple, the concept complex.
Lloyd E. Oxendine, a Lumbee Indian, inserted feathers into empty holes in the rims of used wooden tennis rackets and suspended turtle shells or deer skulls within the hollow frames.
"These masks are homage to all the little spirits that permeate our lives," he says in a note in the catalogue.
"The feathers represent flight and freedom; the tennis rackets relate to transformations of the mundane into the mystical. They speak of the continuity of Native American ideas in a cosmopolitan city."


A Parellel Art World, Vast and Unruly
"THERE'S NO ROOM FOR FAKERY," SAID Carol Lay, neatly drawing a line in the sand between underground comics -- her world -- and high art.
She was sitting in the living room (and studio) of her apartment in the Windsor Terrace section of Brooklyn talking about cartooning's double requirement -- drawing and writing skills -- that can make it seem even more demanding than higher art forms.
Ms.
Lay became a cartoonist after a disenchanting period studying fine art at the University of California, Los Angeles, in the early 1970's.
"Let's just say I took one too many courses in Conceptual Art," she continued, smiling only faintly.
Aline Kominsky-Crumb, one of the first women to publish in underground comics, was more blunt.
"I like the fact that I do things that people read on the toilet," she said, speaking from her house in Sauve, a small village in southern France.
"Comics are cheap and funny and throwaway. I definitely want to stay away from the pretentious end of the art world."


Arias, Art Songs And a Jazz Birthday
IT is another busy musical Sunday, with more than half a dozen classic events of note on the concert agenda, and a jazz birthday party to top off the afternoon.
At 2 o'clock, one can choose between free recitals in Westport and New Haven.
The soprano Annette Nauraine, who is from Stamford, offers a recital of arias, art songs and musical theater selections at the Westport Public Library (227-8411).
Wendy Sharp, a Yale faculty violinist, appears in a duo recital with the pianist Li-Pi Hsieh at Sprague Memorial Hall (432-4157); the program includes works of Bach, Schubert, Bloch and Wieniawski.


THE NEW YORK TIMES TOP 20
1 -- NORTH CAROLINA -- The 1993 national champions were the near-consensus preseason No. 1 last fall but failed to advance to the Sweet 16 for the first time in 13 seasons.
But senior Donald Williams is once again healthy and Jerry Stackhouse, Rasheed Wallace and the rest of the Tar Heels' stellar recruiting class of 1993 are a year older and now have something to prove.


Fine-Tuning With a Hammer
WHEN for the first time in a decade, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates by a startling three-quarters of a percentage point last week, there was hardly a murmur of protest from the White House or Congress.
And for an obvious reason: America's factories and offices are running at full tilt, much faster than the talking heads were predicting just a few months ago.
But lurking behind the near-consensus that it is time to rein in the economy is the disquieting reality that Washington has come to rely exclusively on the Fed to buffer the ebb and flood of economic tides.
And while the institution generally gets high marks from economists -- "It's hard to fault monetary policy in the last decade," said Benjamin M. Friedman of Harvard -- there is, arguably, a substantial price to be paid for leaving it all to the gnomes.


Author! Author! and More Author
Between hobnobbing with Robert Caro and introducing E. L. Doctorow to Walter Mosley, it has been a busy month for Bernie Wohl, executive director of the Goddard Riverside Community Center.
Besides working at the center's annual book fair and auction, he dashed to three meet-the-author dinners.
"Last week Roy Blount just picked up his book and started reading, and people were howling," said Mr.
Wohl, who saw Mr.
Blount at the Central Park West apartment of Betty Levinson. . . .
The same night, Elie Wiesel, Frederic Morton and Paul Auster entertained guests across town at the home of Andre Baeyens, the Consul General of France. . . .
Last Friday, Calvin Trillin read from his work at a gala auction at Goddard Riverside.
The dinner was catered by Katie Workman, a cookbook editor at Clarkson Potter.
Auction items included a dinner for 10 cooked by the chef Mark Strausman at Campagna.
Also on hand were Bruce Harris, executive vice president of Random House, and Peter Workman, head of Workman Publishing and Ms.
Workman's father.
He said, "It's good that the event is actually at Goddard Riverside -- it's not abstract. We're not all going off to the Plaza for a fund-raiser." J.K.B.


Few Fan Sparks as Cuba Smolders
ONE morning late in the summer exodus that became a spectacle of Cubans' desperation under Communist rule, a compact, 40-ish woman marched down a rocky beach near this city to where a group of would-be refugees was fashioning a raft from scrap lumber and old inner tubes.
"Why should we leave?" the woman demanded suddenly, stopping the work cold.
"If we are going to risk our lives in the sea, letting the sharks eat us, why not die fighting against the ruler? Did we not fight against Batista when he had a big army? Why can we not fight against Fidel, when he is killing us by not giving us food?"


Sound Bytes; He's Making a Clean Break
AFTER 26 years of selling soap, Bob Herbold is looking for a clean start in software.
Mr.
Herbold, who had a career of progressively more influential executive roles at Procter &amp; Gamble, surprised the consumer products industry two weeks ago when he announced he was leaving to join Microsoft.
Last week, Mr.
Herbold began his new job as the third member of Microsoft's office of the president and the company's new chief operating officer.
At P.&amp; G., based in Cincinnati, Mr.
Herbold spent the last four years as a senior vice president for management systems, market research and advertising, overseeing all technology acquisitions.


KILL FOR LIFE
It is hard to decide which aspect of Roy McMillan is more offensive: an ego huge enough to use the sensitive, difficult and private situations of women with unwanted pregnancies to gain an audience for uncivil behavior or his poorly reasoned philosophy, with no perspective beyond a "my opinion is better than yours" judgment on the motives and actions of others.


Here's Help for a No-Name Neighborhood
Two weeks ago on this page, Jonathan R. Butler offered some names for his no-name neighborhood, south of Houston and west of the Avenue of the Americas.
The City asked readers for their own suggestions.
Here is a selection:  To the Editor:


Q and A
Cycling in Ireland
Q.
I'd like to tour the west coast of Ireland by bike next year.
I can rent or ship my own bike for two weeks.
Which would be cheaper?
And what would be the best routes and the best season to view the most gardens, public and private? -- J. W. Rommel, New York, N.Y.


Crisis of Confidence For a School Team
FOR as long as anyone can remember, the vast majority of coaches of girls' high school basketball teams in the state have been men.
The same situation prevails at most universities, including the University of Connecticut.
And it is also the case in volleyball and softball.
Conversely, it is extremely rare to find a woman coaching a boys' team anywhere in the country.
Indeed, Michael Savage, the executive director of the Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference could not recall an instance where a woman coached a boys' team in the state until Candy Perez became the coach of the boys' varsity basketball team at Wamogo Regional High School in Litchfield in 1989.


Sabatini Hopes to End Drought
It seems as if it has been ages since the last time Gabriela Sabatini won a tournament.
It has been two and a half years to be exact.
Today, she has a chance to end that drought.
Yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, Sabatini overcame herself, as well as Kimiko Date, for a 4-6, 6-0, 6-3 victory and a trip to the final of the Virginia Slims Championships.
The 24-year-old Argentine will face an 18-year-old American, Lindsay Davenport, who crushed Mary Pierce, 6-3, 6-2, yesterday.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Deals; A Day's Worth
Hey, buddy!
Need a (pick one) blue-chip stock/manuscript/polo horse/Cartier necklace/dime?
Consider this chronicle of just a handful of the deals that went down on one day, October 17, 1994. 2:00 A.M. -- Con Edison sells its metropolitan customers 3,633,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity, worth approximately $500,000, over the next 60 minutes. 3:30 A.M. -- Luna, a horse that just participated in the U.S.
Open polo championships on Long Island, leaves Kennedy Airport for Argentina via cargo jet.
Mersant International Ltd., a Queens-based freight forwarder hired by Luna's owners, clears the horse through Customs and the Department of Agriculture. 6:05 A.M. -- A beat-up box truck loaded with pumpkins, gourds and gooseneck squash pulls up to Gus Theos's U.S.
Evergreen store at 805 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan.
Theos pays about $1,200 for the lot; he'll sell the smaller pumpkins to retailers for about $4 each.
The larger ones, some weighing upward of 100 pounds, will fetch $40 each. 7:45 A.M. -- After three weeks of negotiations, General Electric announces the sale of the troubled investment house Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company to Paine Webber.
G.
E. will receive 21.5 million shares of Paine Webber common voting stock, $100 million in 20-year 6 percent convertible preferred stock, and $250 million in 20-year 9 percent preferred stock.
Total value: approximately $670 million. 8:10 A.M. -- Five Board of Education employees set out from 65 Court Street in Brooklyn to deliver some 97,000 paychecks, two weeks' pay, to schools in Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens and Manhattan. (Staten Island, in a characteristic show of independence, sends its own driver.) Total value: $186,795,574.69. 9:20 A.M. -- An undercover police officer buys one glassine envelope of "Killer Bee" heroin on Suffolk Street in Manhattan.
Price: $10.
Rental price for the week: approximately $3,000. 9:45 A.M. -- A private investor in Manhattan, through his broker in Connecticut, buys 1,000 shares of General Public Utilities at 25-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange. 10:05 A.M. -- Marine Midland Bank announces that it has made a deal with Inner City Press, a South Bronx community group that had challenged the fairness of the bank's lending practices.
Marine Midland promises that over the next three years, it will lend a total of $15 million to borrowers in the South Bronx and Upper Manhattan. 10:30 A.M. -- Thomas Dunne, an executive editor at St.
Martin's Press, purchases the U.S. rights to "The Seventh Scroll," the 25th novel by the South African writer Wilbur Smith, whose previous book, "River God," was a best seller.
The deal is negotiated by Dunne and Charles Pick, Smith's agent in England. 10:35 A.M. -- After a burst of spirited bidding at Christies' East in Manhattan, auctioneer Christopher Hartop awards Lot 50 -- "Victorian Five-Piece Silver Tea and Coffee Service on a Matching Two-Handled Tray" -- to C. &amp; T. Mammon, a London silver dealer who was bidding by phone.
Hammer price: $11,500 11:00 A.M. -- Managed Healthcare Systems, a New York HMO, donates $20,000 to the Minority Scholarship Assistance Program at New York City Technical College. 11:15 A.M. -- The New York City Finance Department opens its mail to find checks totaling $12.93 million in real-estate taxes.
Also, Albany has sent $5.06 million in health aid and $3.7 million in education aid, while the Federal government has sent $37.36 million in welfare and other payments. 11:37 A.M. -- At the We Can redemption center on West 52d Street in Manhattan, John F. exchanges 480 12-ounce cans and 30 1-liter bottles for a voucher.
He cashes the voucher at Freeman Check Cashing, on Ninth Avenue, for $25.50. 11:45 A.M. -- The family of a deceased woman pays Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn $838, covering today's "opening" fee -- for digging a grave and lowering the coffin.
Her ancestors had bought what is now considered a 12-grave plot on August 15, 1899.
These days, a plot that size cost about $48,000. 12:37 P.M. -- Smith Barney "crosses" -- that is, sells from one of its brokerage clients to another -- 250,000 shares of McDonald's stock, at 27-1/2 per share.
Value of the transaction: $6,875,000. 1:50 P.M. -- The Ad Store, on East 30th Street in Manhattan, announces it has won the advertising account for Vagabond Shoes, USA, the new Connecticut-based branch of a Swedish company.
Estimated yearly billings are just over $1 million. 2:30 P.M. -- Gary Hobbib, president of High Noon Management, finishes negotiating a royalty agreement with Columbia Records in Los Angeles.
The agreement concerns "Making Me Sick," a song by the band Bash and Pop, which will appear on the soundtrack of the movie "Clerks." 2:40 P.M. -- Alexandra Stango, a real-estate broker for the Corcoran Group, completes the sale of a seven-room co-op on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The new owners: a stockbroker, his wife and their two children.
Price: $650,000. 2:55 P.M. -- Sixty-one cartons of women's sweaters arrive at Kennedy Airport from China, to be delivered by truck to a wholesaler in Manhattan's garment district.
F.O.B. price: $75,000. 3:00 P.M. -- A Florida collector purchases "Dirty Painting," a 1987 oil-on-canvas painting by the artist Arman, from the Marisa del Re Gallery on East 57th Street in Manhattan.
Price: $120,000. 3:45 P.M. -- At a jewelry sale at Sotheby's, on York Avenue in Manhattan, executive vice president John Block auctions off a Cartier diamond necklace, circa 1930, for $211,500, to an anonymous buyer. 4:15 P.M. -- Allen Gross, president of GFC Capital Resources, completes the sale of Astoria Manor, a defunct catering hall on Astoria Boulevard in Queens.
The cost: $26, billed to a corporate account. 7:05 P.M. -- At a midtown Manhattan office, two matrimonial lawyers, Rona Shays and Bernard Rothman, reach a settlement concerning a Manhattan couple who are filing for divorce.
Both lawyers maintain that the agreement reflects a 50-50 split. 7:20 P.M. -- In the basement of the Transit Authority headquarters on Jay street in Brooklyn, money-room employees finish counting the tokens and cash collected from turnstiles and token booths during the day.
The total: 1,094,025 tokens and $5,659,764 in cash. 8:31 P.M. -- A Los Angeles art consultant, via fax, buys eight Marianne Engberg photographs -- flower abstractions done with a pinhole camera -- from the Staley-Wise Gallery.
Price: $1,000 to $2,000 each. 11:30 P.M. -- In the West 20's, between Tenth and Eleventh Avenues in Manhattan, several men negotiate the price of various sexual acts with several women -- who turn out to be undercover police officers.
"Operation Losing Proposition" will ultimately net 29 suspects, ranging in age from 18 to 52.
Seventeen suspects are taken to Manhattan Community Court, on West 54th Street, for arraignment.


McNair Takes to Air For a Final Flourish
The Alcorn State Braves were hoping for a Division I-AA playoff berth when they went into their game against Jackson State today with a 7-2-1 record.
Sixteen teams will make the playoffs, and the Braves knew their chances would be good when the pairings are announced Sunday afternoon.
In fact, they improved their fortunes with a 52-34 victory as Steve (Air) McNair completed 29 of 34 passes for 533 yards and threw for 5 touchdowns.


KILL FOR LIFE
On the one hand, McMillan urges men to be "real men" (i.e. exercise their physical superiority over pregnant women who want to have an abortion) and thus "protect your child." On the other, Dr.
Smith, McMillan's wife, prescribes no birth control, leaving women with no means of avoiding potential pregnancy.
One of the failings of people like Smith and McMillan is that they insist babies be born into a world that may not want them.
McMillan may see himself as the savior of such children, while they may, at some point in their lives, wish to damn him to hell.
KATHLEEN A. AHERN Sea Girt, N.J.


Alternatives to Turkey on Turkey Day
UNUSUAL Thanksgiving dinners with flair are widely available this year.
Those seeking nontraditional turkeyless meals will have no problems.
Grilled venison with green-peppercorn sauce, fillet of sole stuffed with salmon mousse and lobster sauce, roast breast of goose with holiday stuffing and lingonberry sauce, pan-roasted salmon with rock shrimp and caper-thyme butter and Chesapeake Bay jumbo lump crab cakes with red-pepper coulis compete with turkey for top billing.
Venison ($29) is one of six entrees at the Fusion Grille in East Setauket (751-2200), where cheese pumpkin soup with curried Granny Smith apples ($6.50) and pumpkin souffle with ginger clove Anglais and fresh berries ($6.50) are also on the menu.


A New Terminal in Frankfurt
The Frankfurt Airport last month opened Terminal 2, a new glass-domed building that will handle 19 international airlines formerly situated in Terminal 1, including Delta, Continental and, starting in January, USAir.
Because Lufthansa (along with its partner, United Airlines) has remained in Terminal 1, passengers must transfer between Terminals 2 and 1 to reach many connecting flights to final destinations in Germany.
Those travelers should be careful to have their luggage checked through to their last stop.
Passengers entering Germany from abroad may clear customs at their final destination rather than at the port of entry.


Selling a Home Without a Broker
To the Editor:
Your "Selling Without A Broker" (Your Home, Nov. 13), which made some useful points about selling a residence without the aid of a real estate broker, was correct as far as it went.
However, it missed an essential point.


Old-Time Toys for an Old Time Holiday
Ever have a Rubik's cube or an old Raggedy Ann doll you just couldn't throw away?
Apparently, so have many other New Yorkers for more than a hundred years.
Hundreds of these old toys have been donated to the Museum of the City of New York and are now displayed in an exhibition called "A New York Holiday."


'Oliver!' in Revival at the Paper Mill
COMMON wisdom has it that revivals are the life blood of the infirm musical theater.
Not quite.
The good old faithful revival is almost as infrequently produced as the musical just out.
Instead of settling for retreads of golden oldies, bold directors have been putting a new spin on shows of another time.
For better or worse, reinventions of "Carousel" (better) and "My Fair Lady" (worse) have invoked the symbolic and the psychological -- fashionably called "dark" -- sides of musicals previously noted for sentiment and charm.


Proof Is in the Polls: Women's Game Has Grown in Appeal and Stature
If two rounds of the preseason Women's National Invitation Tournament have already been played, and if Tennessee and Louisiana Tech, perhaps the two best teams in the land, are meeting today in the State Farm Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic, and if 20 or 30 teams have been playing every night for a week, why is it the women's college basketball season does not start until Friday night?
Well, preseason tournaments don't count.
And those recent nontournament games that sent collegians against foreign or club teams don't count, either.
Nothing counts until Friday night, collegiate conference races do not heat up until January and a National Collegiate Athletic Association champion will not be crowned until April.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Refugees; From Russia, With Hope and Fear
FELIX IOSIFOVICH ANDREEV IS HAVING A rough day.
Because he is executive director of the Brighton Beach District Management Association, because he calls himself the unofficial "mayir" of the neighborhood, because he is a natural-born promoter and something of an apparatchik and because he grew up in Moscow, his head teeming with "wild dreams" of America as the land of "liberty and generous people," he wants nothing more than to show off Brighton Beach as a model of American immigrant life.
He is dismayed when it turns out to be just that.
He is still too green a citizen to know that American immigrant life, especially in New York, where it is most lavishly displayed, asserts its character by letting people down as soon as it bucks them up.
This has been particularly true in Brooklyn, which since the 1850's has cooked and stirred a psychedelic soup of Irish, Germans, Italians, Poles, African-Americans, Scandinavians, Puerto Ricans and, more recently, Dominicans, Mexicans, Central Americans, Middle Easterners, Asians and now the people of Felix Andreev.
The earlier arrivals crowded onto Ellis Island; the latest swoop into Kennedy Airport, their dreams submerged by weariness, bewilderment and open-faced excitement.


Yale Rushes Its Way To '94 Bragging Rights
The Ivy League's largest crowd of the season, a turnout of 35,500 that came close to filling Harvard Stadium, today saw a contest that had no special meaning except that it was The Game, the 111th between Harvard and Yale.
Barbecue fragrance wafted all about Soldier Field as the tailgating rites were conducted on a beautiful, warm day out of context from the frigid Harvard-Yale history.


'More Memorable Than the Films'
To the Editor:
Rita Reif's article "Monsters, Demons and Other Delights"  [ Oct. 30 ] , on the exhibition of horror-film memorabilia at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, caught my attention, since one of my father's paintings for the poster for the 1958 film "Monster on the Campus" was prominently displayed.
But, as usual, he was not credited.
I subsequently visited the exhibition; eight of my father's works were there, including poster art for the 1955 "Tarantula" and the 1958 "Attack of the Puppet People." But, again, there was no attribution.


CHARLES MURRAY
The idea that you can explain the distribution of the "goodies" of life in this country by invoking arguments of race and genes is intellectually dishonest ("Daring Research or 'Social Science Pornography'?" by Jason DeParle, Oct. 9).
The public policy implications of "The Bell Curve" are merely Republican prescriptions for laissez-faire policies, with Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein cloaking their arguments in academic garb to gain respectability.
They exalt the virtues of the marketplace and see government policies as assaults on the meritocracy.
They ask us to ignore or forget that this meritocracy systematically excluded women, people of color, the disabled, etc. from the competitive process.
Their argument is not new.
Neither is abuse of so-called scientific research in the service of mean-spirited political objectives.
THOMPSON F. WILLIAMS JR.
Watertown, Mass.


3 Are Killed and 13 Hurt in Queens


Nov. 13-19; Cranberries. Sweet Potatoes. Ostrich.
ANYONE who says the American economy has lost its vim and vision doesn't know a thing about ostriches.
The lanky birds with Barbara Bush eyes have set off a speculative boom.
Lawyers, realtors, antique dealers: all are plunking down up as much as $40,000 for a pair of the flightless birds, convinced that on a Thanksgiving not too far off, their fellow Americans will be carving ostrich legs.


Troops Enter Rio Slums In Drug War
Joining drug enforcement efforts for the first time, heavily armed Brazilian Army soldiers occupied two densely populated hillside shantytowns here today, setting up sandbag gun positions for a campaign against powerful trafficking gangs.
The soldiers arrived in olive green helicopters and small tanks under a driving tropical rain.
On Friday night, the troops had set up checkpoints at entry points to five other shantytowns in Rio's beachfront area.
Installed without warning, the barriers cut off weekend drug users from their suppliers in this resort city.


CRIME
Of all the killings in DIRTY WHITE BOYS (Random House, $21), the death of the American family is the most monstrous.
That's the story that Stephen Hunter is really telling in his violent and exhilarating crime novel about three convicts who break out of the McAlester pen and cut a murderous swath through Oklahoma and Texas.
Richard Peed, "a weak white man with no criminal skills," is smart.
Odell Pye, who carries a child's brain in his massive body, is dangerous.
Odell's beloved cousin Lamar, "a sly genius at disorder, a prince of chaos," is smart, dangerous and bad.
The bizarre "family" is completed by Ruta Beth Tull, a grim farmer who slips right into the wife-and-mother role, offering the trio refuge and "some terrible parody of happiness" on her remote farm.
A state trooper named Bud Pewtie is the only lawman with a prayer of stopping this oddly pathetic gang of savages, but Pewtie drops his banner as the all-American father-hero when he betrays his wife and children through an adulterous affair.


Seer


Westbeth Memories
FOR the parents, Westbeth was the deal of a lifetime: airy apartments in Greenwich Village, very low rent, the company of other artistic people.
When it first opened in 1969 as the nation's biggest federally subsidized arts colony, artists of all kinds clamored for admission.
For the artists' children, the "great peculiar lump of a building" -- as one resident called it -- had other advantages.
It was vast, its long corridors were twisted.
It had dank hidden alcoves and odd back rooms and a roof the size of a city block.
There were lots of other children.


Postal Service Allowed to Sell Flawed Stamp
Six stamp speculators who planned to make hay out of a misprint have had their hopes dashed by a Federal judge, who ruled on Friday that the Postal Service could sell 150,000 copies of a flawed stamp honoring a black rodeo star.
The suit concerned the 1994 "Legends of the Wild West" stamp sheets, which included a stamp featuring the rodeo star, Bill Pickett.
The Postal Service recalled all 5.2 million copies of the sheet in February after relatives said the picture was not "Bulldogging" Bill Pickett, but Ben, the rodeo star's chubby older brother.


Advertisements for Themselves
TALK DIRTY TO ME An Intimate Philosophy of Sex.
By Sallie Tisdale. 338 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $22.95.
VAMPS &amp; TRAMPS New Essays.
By Camille Paglia. 532 pp.
New York: Vintage Books.
Paper, $15.


Narrators, Unreliable And Otherwise
To the Editor:
Reading Matt Zoller Seitz's essay "Never Trust a Narrator Who's Under 16"  [ Oct. 30 ] , I was amused to see the concept of the unreliable narrator, a staple of academic literary criticism for the last quarter century, applied to a television series.


A FUNNY THING HAPPENED ON THE WAY TO PRIME TIME
Margaret Cho makes me laugh ("A Funny Thing Happened On the Way to Prime Time," by Martha Southgate, Oct. 30).
I watched the first episode of "All-American Girl" with my entire family and realized that the United States is beginning to recognize that it has a multiethnic population.
But bluntly stated, the show is not as funny as it could be.
And its producers should be asking themselves why.
I'll throw them a hint: There's not a single Korean-American writer on the show.


Musician


Southern Africa's Old Front Line Ponders Its Future in Mainstream
As a summit meeting of southern African leaders was winding down last month, Frederick Chiluba, the elfin former union leader who is now the President of Zambia, lapsed into a pensive monologue.
Maybe Africa was not really cut out for Western-style democracy, he told his fellow heads of state with a sigh.
How could a president get anything done with opponents constantly carping at him?
Maybe the one-party state was the way to go, after all.


Abbey Quests
To the Editor: John Russell's informative and insightful article "Westminster's Ancient Abbey" (Oct. 23) brought back wonderful and amusing memories of our last visit there, in May.
We were awed again in this majestic yet intimate building.
As we wandered along with hundreds of others, the mixture of voices, music, echoes and silence was somehow fitting for this ancient yet vital edifice.


Viewpoints; The Credit Card: We Love It, We Hate It
WHAT is the defining act of the American consumer?
Easy.
It is handing a salesperson that slim piece of encoded plastic -- the credit card.
What is harder to answer is why so common an act is such a mystery.
On the one hand, we love the Card.
There are 1.15 billion credit cards in circulation, amounting to nearly 10 for every American cardholder.
This year, collectively, we will charge about $700 billion of goods and $325 billion of debt on them.


Electing to Be Married


The Meat Industry's Bad Beef
The American Meat Institute claims it is only trying to protect consumers from dangerously contaminated beef, but it has chosen an odd way to do so.
The trade association, joined by six other food-industry and supermarket groups, has filed suit to stop the Agriculture Department from testing ground beef for E. coli bacteria that are responsible for as many as 20,000 illnesses and 500 deaths a year.
The contamination occurs when a cow's intestinal or fecal matter comes into contact with muscle meat during unsanitary slaughter.
Ground beef poses a special hazard because the grinding process spreads the contamination throughout the product.
Proper cooking will kill the bacteria, but many people have grown used to eating their beef rare or raw.
Even a supposedly well-done hamburger may not be safe because of uneven temperatures within the patty as it is cooked.


Shari B. Gersten, David M. Rosenblatt
Shari Beth Gersten, a daughter of Roslyn and Gerald Gersten of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to David Mark Rosenblatt, a son of Roslyn and Harvey Rosenblatt of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
The bride is a special assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary for International Trade at the Commerce Department in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a law degree from American University.
Her father retired as the owner of Lila Food Packers, wholesale grocers in the Bronx.
Her mother owns the R. G. Domestic Employment Agency in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Running as One
To the Sports Editor:
What kind of people live in New York City?
My answer to that question changed on Marathon Sunday 1993.
Living in Brooklyn, I saw and experienced crime, prejudice and the feeling of being alone in the middle of a crowd.
While running in the 1993 New York City Marathon, I got a view of community togetherness.


Heidi M. Stetz, Richard Schwartz
Heidi Marie Stetz, a daughter of Elaine Wood of Plattsburgh, N.Y., and a stepdaughter of David Wood, is to be married today to Richard Fox Schwartz, a son of Penny Schwartz of Fort Lee, N.J., and Stan Schwartz of New York.
Rabbi Haskel J. Lookstein is to officiate at a private residence in Teaneck, N.J.
Ms.
Stetz, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the merchandise coordinator in Manhattan for the women's division of Calvin Klein.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the State University at Albany, he cum laude.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at Saranac (N.Y.) Central High School.
The bride's stepfather is a lawyer in Plattsburgh.


Autumn's Long-Lasting Fruit of the Vine
ALTHOUGH the big time for decorative pumpkin faces has gone by, the season for other distinguished members of the clan has arrived.
Pumpkins belong to a rather special group of plants called the gourd family, which also includes such diverse edibles as cucumbers, watermelons and cantaloupes as well as squash and, of course, decorative gourds.


Inflation Fuels Discontent Against Iran's Government
Iranian demonstrators took time out from a week of state-sponsored anti-American rallies recently to redirect their anger against the Islamic Government and economic policies that have created a crisis of inflation.
At a demonstration this month commemorating the takeover of the United States Embassy during the Iran hostage crisis in 1979, nearly 500 students called for the execution of "capitalists" and denounced lawmakers for favoring wealthy merchants over low-income groups.


Late Rally by West Virginia Topples B.C.
West Virginia continued a comeback from a dismal early season, beating Boston College, 21-20, today to improve its record to 6-5 and brighten its bowl hopes.
The sophomore quarterback Chad Johnston zipped a 19-yard touchdown pass to Zach Abraham -- their second touchdown connection -- with 4 minutes 8 seconds remaining in the game and the West Virginia defense held on.


Nov. 13-19; Cadillac Heaven


Root Vegetables to Sop Up the Gravy
FOR many, turkey is one of those things in life you have to accept, like teen-age acne or rap music.
I actually quite like turkey (pumpkin pie is another matter), but I'd rather eat it cold the next day, preferably around 11 in the morning, standing by the refrigerator.
My favorite part of Thanksgiving dinner, apart from chestnut stuffing, is the vegetables that are traditionally served with turkey.
I have always loved creamed white onions, brussels sprouts, sweet potato puree and braised red cabbage.


Correction
An article on Oct. 30 about the Cone sisters, the art collectors for whom the Baltimore Museum of Art's newly refurbished Cone Galleries are named, misstated Claribel Cone's birthplace and profession.
She was born in Jonesboro, Tenn., not in Baltimore, and was a pathologist, not a gynecologist.
The article also misstated the ownership of Picasso's painting "Mother and Child." It did not belong to both sisters; Etta bought it after Claribel's death.
The article also referred incorrectly to the purchase of Matisse's "Blue Nude." That painting was bought by Claribel, not by Etta, and not from Gertrude Stein but at an auction of the estate of the lawyer and arts patron John Quinn.


Autumn's Long-Lasting Fruit of the Vine
ALTHOUGH the big time for decorative pumpkin faces has gone by, the season for other distinguished members of the clan has arrived.
Pumpkins belong to a rather special group of plants called the gourd family, which also includes such diverse edibles as cucumbers, watermelons and cantaloupes as well as squash and, of course, decorative gourds.


'Dictatorship of Virtue'
To the Editor:
Only by using an elastic measuring stick and the proverbial rose-colored glasses could one pronounce, say, the civilization of the Australian aborigines to be the "equal" of that of Greece in the fifth century B.C. or put the indigenous cultures of sub-Saharan Africa on a par with those of Renaissance Italy or Elizabethan England.


'Bobby Was a Difficult Child': My Cousin, Robert Lowell
MY first cousin once removed was Robert Lowell, the poet -- a fact I just happened to mention on my application to Harvard University.
The worst part was that I had to work it into the essay section.
They had a section for listing family members who had gone to Harvard, but that was only for immediate family members.
It was 3 o'clock in the morning and the application was due next day.
So I started writing something dumb about my intellectual development -- or was it my personal growth? -- all the time saying to myself, "I can't, I can't," when suddenly out of the blue came, "As I was having dinner last night with my first cousin once removed, Robert Lowell, the poet, I turned to him and said. . . ."
That was a long time ago, in 1969, and it is just as well to make a clean breast of it now.
Also, I might just as well admit that I do not get poetry.
In high school I was good at subjects like "The Culture of Poverty" and "The Negro," but when it came to analyzing those poets, forget it.
To this day, put a gun to my head and I still cannot tell you the difference between the tone of a poem and the mood of a poem.
Still, I did not lie on the application.
Bobby -- Bobby is what we called him in the family -- had been out to Concord the night before. (Concord, Mass., is where I grew up, under the influence of the writings of Louisa May Alcott -- my mother said there was an excruciating period when I called her Marmee and helped with the dishes every two seconds.) Bobby came out to visit my mother whenever he was teaching at Harvard.
They were first cousins, and Bobby had been reading her his poems ever since they were teen-agers summering at Rock.
They got along great, although neither of them probably understood a word the other one said.
My mother is very pretty and very normal, and she believes in treating other people as normal even if they're not.


The Mobster Was a Mole for the F.B.I.; Tangled Life of a Mafia Figure Who Died of AIDS Is Exposed
Inside the Mafia, Gregory Scarpa Sr. could have served as a role model for ambitious gangsters.
His underworld persona was that of a steadfastly loyal capo, or captain, in the Colombo crime family who for three decades ran rackets in New York City that enriched himself and his mob partners.
A flashy dresser who often carried $5,000 in cash, he at one point had homes on Sutton Place, in Las Vegas, and in Brooklyn and on Staten Island.
Guile and ruthlessness earned him the underworld nicknames of "Hannibal" for his tactics and the "grim reaper" for his violence.


Will Rogers Institute Expands Its Mission
WHEN Will Rogers the laconic American actor, social satirist and the biggest star of his day -- was killed in a plane crash in 1935, the entertainment industry set up a charity to honor his memory.
Rogers was known not only for his humor and rope tricks but also for his compassion and kindness to colleagues.
Almost 60 years later, the Will Rogers Institute has managed to maintain its vision of offering medical assistance to those in show business while adapting to entertainment and health fields so changed that Rogers himself would barely recognize them.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Westbeth was to be a vibrant arts center; 25 years after it opened, many old-timers say it is just subsidized artists' housing.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The Christmas Spectacular is Radio City's annual pot of gold.
Keeping it that way is an annual challenge.


It's Public Housing, on the Air
If Verleen Brown had her own radio show, she would discuss hairstyles.
"I could talk about different ways of braiding, teach people to braid," said Miss Brown, 17, who is coiffed in beads and cornrows.
"It could be good." If he controlled the airwaves, Rafael Santiago, 19, would be a DJ, playing rap artists like Dr.
Dre and Ice Cube.
"I think I would like that," he said.


Annals of St. John the Unfinished


Why Proposition 187 Won't Work
Proposition 187, the California ballot initiative that deprives illegal immigrants of state services, has quickly been revealed as the inhumane headache its opponents promised it would be.
Already a host of examples of the new measure's inevitable consequences have shown how unlikely it is that its supporters really thought much before casting their votes.


Politics, Power and Other Phone Games
WHEN it comes to the telephone, the way that a call is returned often speaks louder than any words.
Just ask Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose congratulatory calls to Governor-elect George E. Pataki on election night have gone unreturned for almost two weeks now -- creating a day-by-day vigil that has provided fun for David Letterman and some the city's papers, at least one of which published both men's numbers.
Yet, by the standards of serious telephone jocks, the out-and-out snub implicit in Mr.
Pataki's aloofness is amateur stuff.
There is a whole range of strategies in the gamesmanship of returning calls, and each one conveys a subtle bit of information about the relationship between the caller and the callee.


Grading Game
To the Sports Editor:
Thomas George's article extols Steve McNair's academic success ("McNair, With Record Distance, Seeks Degree," The Times, Oct. 23).
The accompanying graphic of McNair's academic transcript tells a different story.


STEVE GUNDERSON
I found it interesting that good friends and fellow Representatives Newt Gingrich and Steve Gunderson likened Gunderson's homosexuality to alcoholism and left-handedness, respectively, in Chandler Burr's article "Congressman (R), Wisconsin. Fiscal Conservative, Social Moderate, Gay" (Oct. 16).
Gingrich certainly showed me the light when he said, "It's an orientation in the way alcoholism is an orientation." Does he mean that the way it sounds?
An acquired disability or sickness as a way of life?
Gunderson's metaphor surprised me as well.
Comparing your life style to an awkward physical characteristic may be a sign that you're not comfortable with it.
I understand what Gunderson was trying to say, though -- that the world is about as well suited to gays as it is to southpaws.
JEFFREY CASTELLANO Dallas, Pa.


Opening Lot For Parking To Get a Park
The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation will offer a parking lot concession to a Sheepshead Bay business that is willing to put up money to turn a stretch of abandoned city-owned land at the edge of the bay into a park.
City officials and community groups say that Lundy's Management Corporation, a development concern that is working to turn the old Lundy's restaurant on Emmons Avenue, a mile west of the site, into a retail complex, has offered to spend $700,000 on the park in exchange for the 100-space parking concession, which would be used by shoppers.


Exit Nears For Sex Shops On Times Sq.
Don't blink yet but a third of Times Square's remaining sex-related businesses will soon be evicted by a state agency, making way for a planned major new hotel, retail and entertainment complex at the northeast corner of 42d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Neighborhood civic leaders are worried that the pornography shops will simply pop up at new sites nearby, as in the past.
Such moves would be blocked by an anticipated one-year city moratorium on the opening of sex businesses but, as Nicholas Fish, Community Board 5's chairman, says, people fear the shops "will relocate prior to the moratorium's kicking in."


What's New York the Capital of Now?: ATTITUDE; A PRIMER FOR URBAN LIVING
Survival tactics in New York, where everybody's got an attitude. start with style that telegraphs your psychic address.


A Year After Trade, Yanks Giving Up on Hernandez
A year ago, the Yankees made two pitching moves they thought could help catapult them into the division championship they had not experienced since 1981.
They acquired Terry Mulholland from the Philadelphia Phillies to help stabilize their starting rotation, and they obtained Xavier Hernandez from the Houston Astros in the hope that he could be their closing reliever.
They were wrong on both counts, and now neither pitcher remains with them.


Latin American Roads
To the Editor:
A Nov. 12 Business Day article reports glowingly on privatization of public roads in Latin America.
Tolls charged by the new owners cover construction, maintenance and interest costs, and the owners will add premiums to cover toll collection and make a profit.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $200,000
368 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; renovated kitchen and baths, terrace; maintenance $878, 50% tax deductible, listed at $229,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $475,000
439 Lafayette Street  3,500-sq.-ft. open-loft duplex co-op; elevator, 2 baths, 16-ft. ceilings, west exposure; maintenance $1,800, 55% tax deductible, listed at $525,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Eychner/Village; Elise Ward)  TRIBECA  $290,000
99 Reade Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. penthouse condo in a loft building; part-time doorman, elevator, c/a, fireplace, Jacuzzi, 400-sq.-ft. roof space; common charge $512; taxes $6,016, listed at $303,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $165,000
515 East 89th Street  (Gracie Gardens)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,675, 47% tax deductible, listed at $165,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Elias Bernstein Real Estate)  BRONX
GUN HILL ROAD AREA  $190,000
3049 Eastchester Road  2-family 60-year-old detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 25- by 108-ft. lot; taxes $1,507, listed at $225,000, 38 weeks on market (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  WAKEFIELD  $200,000
4414 Matilda Avenue  3-family 6-year-old brick house; 3 bedrooms in two units, 1 bedroom in other; dining area, 1 bath in each; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,500, listed at $225,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Charles G. Brophy and Associates)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN COLLEGE AREA  $180,000
630 East 22d Street  2-family 90-year-old Victorian; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 1/2 baths in simplex; dining room in each; h/w floors, 1-car garage, taxes $1,773, listed at $199,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: J. Shayovitz)  FISKE TERRACE  $215,000
768 East 19th Street  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, detached frame house; dining room, den, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,500, listed at $249,000, 60 weeks on market (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  KENSINGTON  $115,000
814 Friel Place  2-family semi-attached frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen, private driveway; taxes $1,100, listed at $140,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: John P. Berg)
QUEENS
MALBA  $375,000
6 Hill Court  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 64-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, fireplace, side patio; 65- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $2,450, listed at $427,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: ReMax/Universal Real Estate; ERA/United Realty)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $620,000
119 Continental Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 65-year-old detached brick Federal-style house; dining room, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,000, listed at $795,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
OAKWOOD HEIGHTS  $157,000
116 Park Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 23-year-old semi-attached aluminum-sided house; washer/dryer, patio, finished basement, corner lot; taxes $1,300, listed at $164,900, 22 weeks on market (Brokers: Home Time Real Estate; Kingsley Real Estate)  WESTCHESTER
BEDFORD HILLS  $240,000
11 Church Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 96-year-old colonial; front porch, modern eat-in kitchen, wood floors, moldings, woodstove; 0.5 acre; taxes $4,076, listed at $249,000, 5 months on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  EDGEMONT  $489,000
19 Lynwood Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 68-year-old Tudor; covered patio, hand-hewn beams, cathedral ceiling, French doors, study; 0.5 acre; taxes $5,755, listed at $550,000, 3 1/2 months on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  MOUNT KISCO  $232,000
56 Red Oak Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 29-year-old raised ranch; bay window, family room, modern kitchen; 0.33 acre; taxes $7,576, listed at $255,000, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Holmes &amp; Kennedy)  PELHAM  $338,500 619 James  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 66-year-old Mediterranean; cathedral ceiling, fireplace, library, dining room, attached 2-car garage; taxes $9,982, listed at $350,000, 6 1/2 months on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Co.)  LONG ISLAND
BABYLON  $865,000
195 Peninsula Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car attached garage, heated pool, boat slip, 1.1 acre; taxes $22,500, listed at $975,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates)  GLEN HEAD  $285,000
20 Scudders Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, 5 skylights, fireplace; taxes $4,300, listed at $315,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)
LAKE RONKONKOMA  $95,000
45 Peter Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700, listed at $104,000, 12 weeks on market (Straub Resales)  MASSAPEQUA PARK  $330,000
3 Knell Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $8,600, listed at $379,990, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Fitzgerald Properties; Prudential Long Island)  NEW JERSEY
BOONTON  $185,500
25 Sunrise Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old ranch; fireplace in living room, enclosed porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,323, listed at $199,500, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential New Jersey Realty; Weichert Realtors)  CAPE MAY  $114,000
3403 Bay Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old ranch; deck, family room, w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen, circular driveway; taxes $2,581, listed at $119,900, 13 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz Real Estate)  HILLSDALE  $295,500
414 Piermont Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, newly built, bi-level; 2-car garage, c/a, Jacuzzi in master bath; taxes to be assessed, listed at $315,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors)  PENNINGTON  $215,000
109 West Welling Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, front porch, full basement, h/w floors; taxes $3,879, listed at $227,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel Realtors)  CONNECTICUT
DANBURY  $230,000
123A South King Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old vinyl-sided colonial; eat-in kitchen, cathedral ceilings, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $3,684, listed at $249,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt Real Estate)  GREENWICH  $727,500
15 Desiree Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old brick/shingle split-level; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, flagstone terrace, c/a, 2-car garage, 2-acre lot; taxes $5,192, listed at $755,000, 86 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ Schlott Realtors)  OLD GREENWICH  $697,500
75 Benjamin Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 75-year-old Dutch colonial; breakfast nook, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage, 67- by 160-ft. lot; taxes $5.636, listed at $765,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Country Living; Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  NEW CANAAN  $787,500
68 Sherwood Lane  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, screened porch, renovated kitchen, family room, hospitality suite over garage, 2-acre lot; taxes $6,325, listed at $835,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties)


Intricacies of Redistricting: Draw, and Then Draw Again
From Morris Heights up to Riverdale, School District 10 spans a diverse racial and socioeconomic territory, from its poor southern neighborhoods to its richer northern ones.
A plan to redraw the district -- one of the city's largest in geography and student population -- along north-south lines was scrapped amid an outpouring of criticism that it was tantamount to racial segregation.
But a revised plan to split the district in western and eastern sections, while not eliciting the same level of opposition, has left many doubting it, too, underscoring the intricacies of redistricting in a racially and economically mixed area.


S. L. Deutsch, T. J. Clendenin
Stephanie Lisa Deutsch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira J. Deutsch of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden to Thomas James Clendenin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Clendenin of Tobyhanna, Pa.
Cantor Kerry Ben-David performed the ceremony, in which Msgr.
James Cooney took part.
Mrs.
Clendenin, 29, is a second vice president in the credit card division of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a director of institutional sales at Cowen &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Susan Deutsch, is a program coordinator at the American Cancer Society in White Plains.


Farmland Preservation Is Lagging
A STATE program started 14 years ago to preserve New Jersey's diminishing farmland has so far saved 22,080 acres -- an average of about 1,575 acres a year.
But during the same period, an average of 10,000 acres a year has been sold for development, state records show.
Further, state officials acknowledge that despite efforts in recent years to streamline the application process, insufficient local and state funds, political delays and the state's relatively high land values have contributed to large backlogs in applications for the State Farmland Preservation Program.
As a result, the state approves fewer than a dozen applications a year for farmland preservation while hundreds of others are routinely turned down.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Scenes; The Village Barber
MY FRIEND M. WORKS 12-hour days at a record company.
To meet her for dinner, I book weeks in advance; lunch is out of the question.
So when she confesses that she has been going to a hair salon "far too often," making appointments for cut and color on separate Saturdays so she can go twice as much (when before she ranked getting her hair done right up there with having root canal), I am intrigued.
There is something about this salon that makes her want to be there.
"I can't explain what it is," she says.
Strolling along West Fourth Street on a balmy Saturday morning, past people in blue jeans sipping cappuccino at sidewalk cafes, teased by the aroma of home fries wafting from an open restaurant door, I come upon M.'s salon at the corner of Bank Street, and recognize it as a place I've seen at night -- its arched Palladian windows softly lighted, a spectacular vase of flowers on a glass table inside -- and wondered, hurrying on to somewhere else, what could it be?
There was no lettering stenciled on the windows, no name proudly emblazoned on an awning.
Peering in, I could see a pair of handsome, framed mirrors, and two beautiful, battered, tall Thonet chairs.
The space was spare yet expectant, like a stage after everyone's gone home.


Many Women Eager to Test Abortion Pill
A month after the announcement that the Planned Parenthood clinics here and in five other cities would take part in the clinical trial of the French abortion drug RU-486, thousands of women have called to volunteer, the clinics say.
"It's been much more than we expected," said Kitty Kahn, director of surgical services for the Houston clinic.
Her clinic has received more than a thousand calls from prospective volunteers from Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana, and as far away as Iowa, she said.


Many Fingers, Many Pies
In 1923 an affable high school dropout, Miguel Covarrubias (1904-57), arrived in New York from Mexico City armed with an extraordinary talent for drawing, a keen intellect, boundless curiosity and good connections.
His gifts were immediately recognized by the likes of Carl Van Vechten and Frank Crowninshield, and he soon found work doing caricatures and illustrations for Vanity Fair and other leading magazines.
Gallery shows, book publication and commissions for set designs followed.
Rosa Roland was a celebrated dancer and choreographer when Covarrubias met her, but by the time they married in 1930, she had left the stage.
A striking beauty photographed by, among others, Edward Weston and Cartier-Bresson, she became an accomplished painter, photographer and cook.
In COVARRUBIAS (University of Texas, $29.95), Adriana Williams, an independent scholar, chronicles the lives and times of Miguel and Rosa Covarrubias with a veritable torrent of names, places and events.
Most of the notable artists and intellectuals from the 1920's and 30's seem to have crossed their paths, either in New York, on their travels, or in Mexico City, where they moved in the mid-30's.
Their wide range of friends included Al Hirschfeld, Nelson Rockefeller, Diego Rivera and John Huston.
Covarrubias was fascinated by the ethnic roots of culture and eager to experience authentic forms of dance, music and art before they were lost to the leveling effect of modern life.
This passion not only enriched his art -- from the Harlem drawings to his murals for San Francisco's 1938 international exposition -- but also led to books on Balinese culture and the archeology of Mexico.
Ms.
Williams has not worked this rich material into an authoritative biography, but the abundant information she has gathered should serve future biographers well.
ROSEMARY RANCK


A Capitol Hill Empire Is in Eclipse, Ending a Long Reign by Its Emperor
After 14 years of unchecked expansion, the empire of Representative John David Dingell Jr. is being dismantled.
Like a plump Thanksgiving turkey, the House Energy and Commerce Committee, where Mr.
Dingell has been chairman since 1981, is being readied to be carved up and dished out.
Gleeful Republicans have begun to disassemble its muscular investigative unit and pass around its meaty legislative authority.


Tigers, Elephants and Sharks Gain at Conservation Meeting
The agenda was as diverse as Noah's passenger list and, not surprisingly, conservationists said the results were mixed as partners in a treaty to control global trade in imperiled species concluded a meeting in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., this week.
Ten Asian nations taking part in the biannual meeting of the treaty's signers reached a major accord to protect tigers, whose parts are often used in folk medicine and whose numbers are steadily dwindling despite the treaty's safeguards.


Melissa B. Russo, Michael E. Meyers
Melissa Beth Russo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Russo of Syosset, L.I., was married last evening to Michael Evan Meyers, a son of Elizabeth A. Feldman and Daniel L. Meyers of New York.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the evening ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.


A Heisman Race
To the Sports Editor:
William C. Rhoden wrote that Steve McNair will not win the Heisman Trophy this year in "The Heisman Vote's 3-Card Monte" (The Times, Nov. 13).
He reasons that "ultimately the dynamic here is not racism but Place-ism." History, however, discloses that only racism can deny McNair this award.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-20  TEMPORARY TRUCE IN GAZA  The Palestinian Government arranged a temporary truce with Islamic militants in the Gaza Strip, bringing calm, but that did not change the severe crisis facing Yasir Arafat's leadership.  1  People in Gaza tried to find meaning in the latest violence there.  18


SERBIAN JETS BOMB MUSLIMS A 2D DAY, FLOUTING U.N. BAN
Defying NATO and the United Nations Security Council, nationalist Serb fighter jets bombed a Bosnian Muslim enclave for the second straight day today, United Nations officials said.
One jet crashed into an apartment complex crowded with refugees, and at least nine civilians were injured.
One apartment building was struck by bombs in the attack at Cazin, a town in the besieged Bihac pocket of northwestern Bosnia, said Paul Risley, a spokesman for the United Nations military in Zagreb, Croatia.
It was not clear whether the casualties resulted from the bombing or from the crash of the plane or both, he added.
He said the pilot had been killed.


Supreme Court to Rule On Frequent Flier Miles
DO airlines have to keep their promises to the millions of members of their frequent flier plans?
And what if they don't?
While the all-American response may be "see you in court," the answer did not appear nearly so simple in an argument before the United States Supreme Court this month.
In American Airlines v.
Wolens, the Justices have agreed to decide whether airlines can be sued for consumer fraud or breach of contract in connection with retroactive changes in the value of frequent flier miles.


Mavis Lockwood, Jonathan Borak
Mavis Ferens Lockwood, a daughter of Dr.
Theodore D. Lockwood of Santa Fe, N.M., and the late Elizabeth A. Lockwood, was married on Wednesday to Dr.
Jonathan Benjamin Borak, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Borak of New York.
An officer of the city of Geneva performed the ceremony at the Hotel de Ville in Geneva.
The bride, 41, is a neuromuscular training specialist and a certified movement analyst, and she teaches anatomy and kinesiology at Connecticut College in New London, Conn.
She was the dean of the Laban/Bartenieff Institute of Movement Studies in New York, from which she received a graduate certificate.
She graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father, who is retired, was a president of Trinity College in Hartford.


Still Waiting for Library Renovation to Start
When the Tompkins Square Library shut down in May for a major renovation, patrons of the branch eagerly watched for the project to begin.
Six months later, they are still waiting.
"Among the playground moms, it's one of our big topics," said Lin Wefel, who regularly used the library with her 8-year-old daughter, Ariel.
"When it dawned on us that they weren't doing anything, that started everybody gabbing and wondering. There were even rumors that they may close it completely."


AIDS Instruction Has to Be Explicit
With words like "shocking" and statements such as, "The more I found out the more astonished and embarrassed for my clients I was by how pandering the curriculum is," he was reacting to material that is necessarily explicit in order to make as clear as possible the ways in which the deadly virus that causes AIDS is transmitted.
With the epidemic as horrid as it is, not just in the world, but right here on Long Island, and increasingly among our youth, as well as adult men and women, the need for plain talk should be understood rather than disparaged.


KILL FOR LIFE
So far, Roy McMillan has been content to let others do his bidding, defending anti-abortion murderers but claiming that he would never point the gun.
Now that your magazine has made of him an overnight celebrity, might he not feel that he has to act on his beliefs?
Remember that Paul Hill, convicted murderer of Dr.
John Bayard Britton and James Barrett in Pensacola, Fla., spouted his hateful rhetoric on "Donahue" and "Nightline" only months before practicing what what he preached.
In a society that rewards with publicity those who espouse coldblooded murder, the consequences can be tragic.
PAMELA J. MARALDO President Planned Parenthood New York


After Five Years, Carroll's Road Winds Back to Minnesota
They coach big-league teams a block apart on Long Island, where they live around the corner from each other, and they both left Minnesota to follow their dreams in New York.
Even more, Lorne Henning understands how Pete Carroll feels about returning Sunday to play the Vikings at the Metrodome as head coach of the Jets.
Carroll spent five years as Minnesota's secondary coach and Sunday's game will be the first time he has faced his old team since departing after the 1989 season to join the Jets as their defensive coordinator.


Nov. 13-19; Wow, Talk About Landslides!
How close was it?
Think of it this way: In a Congressional District of 54 towns spread across eastern Connecticut, where 186,000 people went to the polls on Nov. 8, Sam Gejdenson squeaked into his eighth term in Congress with a victory margin the size of a typical car pool.
Or a bridge game.
Or the members of his immediate family.
He won by four votes, two one-thousands of 1 percent, according to the recount completed last week.
Only one Congressional race in the 20th century has been closer.
That took place in 1910 in New York, when Charles Bennett Smith defeated De Alva Stanwood Alexander by a single vote.


Santa Fe Art Market Scheduled for December
The winter version of Santa Fe's Spanish Market, a colorful exhibition of contemporary artwork in the Spanish Colonial tradition, will be held this year on Dec. 3 and 4 in La Fonda Hotel.
More than 125 artists from New Mexico and southern Colorado are expected to take part.
The summer edition of the festival is usually overshadowed by the town's far larger and better-known Indian Market, but the work on display in the winter also reflects an enduring cultural presence.
Consisting primarily of folk and religious pieces, the Spanish art testifies to the 500-year history of the Spanish in New Mexico, and the close ties between church, family and community.


Commercial Property/The Lower Manhattan B.I.D.'s Chief; A Politically Savvy Leader Jumps In Swinging
OFFICIALLY, lower Manhattan's much ballyhooed Business Improvement District will not be up and running until Jan. 1.
But someone forgot to tell that to Carl Weisbrod, the group's new head.
Ensconced in temporary offices across from Battery Park, Mr.
Weisbrod, fresh from the leadership of the city's Economic Development Corporation, is already chipping away at downtown's travails.


Sam Shepard Goes to the Races and Wins
IN THE FIRST ACT OF SAM Shepard's fine, seriously funny new play, "Simpatico," two old friends meet for the first time in years in a cheap apartment in Cucamonga, Calif.
The place is so small and barren that it makes the average hot-bed motel room look like a suite at the Ritz.
Vinnie (Fred Ward) lies on the filthy, cotlike bed, apparently in the last stages of physical and mental dissolution.
He's unshaven, his hair matted.
The expensively dressed, immaculately groomed Carter (Ed Harris) walks around a heap of dirty laundry with care, as if he didn't want to soil the soles of his shoes.
They talk edgily about the old days before they went their separate ways, Vinnie into hiding under a succession of assumed names in backwater towns, Carter to fortune, power and respectability raising thoroughbred race horses in Lexington, Ky.
The slobbish Vinnie baits Carter as much with what his ex-wife describes as the "apologetic menace" in his voice as by what he says.
To tell the truth, Vinnie sneers, he always thought that Carter would run for Congress: "You had that aura about you. A kind of a, uh -- yuppie Protestant aura that's become so popular these days."


Deals and Discounts
BRITISH CHRISTMAS Four members of the Summit International Hotels group in Britain are offering holiday discounts and packages.
At the 390-room Summit St.
James Court, the Christmas rate starts at about $140 (calculated at $1.60 to the pound) for a room, single or double occupancy, from Dec. 15 to Jan. 5.
A 17.5 percent tax is additional.
Rates regularly begin at about $224.
The 43-room Halcyon in Holland Park has a rate of about $240 for a single or double deluxe room, including service and tax; the regular rate starts at about $375.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Designated Xavier Hernandez, pitcher, for assignment.
Sent Billy Masse, outfielder, and Jose Musset, pitcher, outright to Columbus of the International League.
Purchased the contracts of Andy Croghan, Andy Pettitte and Brien Taylor, pitchers; Jose Posada, catcher; and Ruben Rivera, Matt Luke and Lyle Mouton, outfielders, from Columbus.


Aunt Ruthie Shows the Way
YOUR UNCLE AL and I had a whirlpool romance," Aunt Ruthie tells me. Then she pauses. "Is that the word I mean?" We're having lunch to celebrate her 89th birthday. She dabs a little applesauce on her blintzes.
"I make the best applesauce," she says.
"You want to know the secret? I put in the pits."


New Jersey Pair Lead in Bridge Tournament
Few players from outside North America are taking part in the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here, but those few are already making a mark.
After the first day's play Friday, Gunnar Hallberg and Hakan Nilsson of Sweden were second in the Life Master Open Pair Championship.
However, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., one of the most successful American partnerships, had a big lead going into the two final sessions today.


Lacing Up the Skates To Help Battle AIDS
Benefit party and auction at the Wollman Rink, Central Park, Nov. 14.


Time and Again: Watch Fobs Are a Fad
The watch fob, a 19th-century signature on every gentleman's vest, is being revived -- often without the watch -- by both men and women as a form of decorating the tailored pants suit.
One style is to wear a fob anchored in the lapel buttonhole with the chain cascading into the breast pocket.
A man seen on Madison Avenue (bottom, far right) wore both the traditional vest fob and a jacket lapel chain.
The same chains are being worn by women as bracelets wrapped twice around the wrist (bottom, second from right).


Susan Stafford, William Breidenstine
Susan Melanie Stafford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Stafford of Smoke Rise, N.J., was married there yesterday to William Scott Breidenstine, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Glenn S. Breidenstine of Lancaster, Pa.
The Rev.
S.
Hayden Britton, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Community Church of Smoke Rise.
Mrs.
Breidenstine, 28, is a marketing specialist in Camp Hill, Pa., for I.B.M.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father owns Barton Associates, computer consultants in Smoke Rise.


Nicole Avrami, John Blomfield
Nicole Stephanie Avrami, a daughter of Mrs.
Louis Avrami of Morristown, N.J., and the late Mr.
Avrami, was married there yesterday to John Roe Blomfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Blomfield of Morristown.
The Rev.
P.
Christopher Muldoon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Assumption.
The Rev.
Dr.
David Hegg, an Episcopal priest, took part in the service.
Mrs.
Blomfield, 31, is a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father was a nuclear physicist at the Picatinny Arsenal in Dover, N.J.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.59
97.73
108.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5544
1.5313
1.7140
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3674
1.3582
1.3268
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5666
1.5963
1.4735
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.20
$385.20
$378.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Steakhouse That Matches Its Looks
WHEN Dar Tiffany was reviewed four years ago the striking restaurant in Greenvale resembled a Miss America contestant.
It was an obvious winner in the swimsuit competition but fell short on talent.
At a steakhouse talent means terrific meat.
At that time the restaurant did not measure up.
But things have changed.
This year Dar Tiffany was sold, resulting in a shakeup in the kitchen.
Now the food is a match for its good looks.


Journal; Blowing In the Wind
Of all the comebacks of Election '94, surely the strangest is the counterculture.
Declared dead in the 1970's and finally laid to permanent rest at Woodstock II last summer, the counterculture was long ago annexed by a corporate culture that employs the Beatles' "Revolution" to hawk Nikes.
But now Newt Gingrich, echoing other Republican moralists like William Bennett and Dan Quayle, has brought the counterculture back -- not for a reunion concert, alas, but as a scapegoat with flowers in its hair.
Not only is the counterculture being held responsible for the excesses of Bill Clinton -- a non-inhaling Fleetwood Mac fan, of all unlikely hippies -- but for everything immoral, violent and sexually explicit in American culture today.


Celebrating the Roar Of Literary Lions
Writers are honored at the New York Public Library's annual dinner, Nov. 14.


In Demand
To the Sports Editor:
When Ken Griffey Jr. needed one home run to tie the major league record for home runs hit in successive games, I happened to be in Seattle and I wanted to go to the game.
I grabbed the opportunity to purchase four seats near the home dugout at the list price of $25 per seat.


Driver Killed and 15 Hurt As Van Crashes in Queens
A van packed with 16 people spun out of control on the Grand Central Parkway in Queens yesterday morning, skidding 200 feet before it flipped over onto the metal-rail divider, crushing the roof and those inside, the police said.
The driver was killed immediately, and the injured were taken to six hospitals, where two later died.
Some of the survivors remained in critical condition, though all were expected to live.
Four people were released.


Ms. Belasky, Mr. Greenberg
Alisa Joy Belasky, the daughter of Sharyn and Michael Belasky of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., is to be married today to Sanford Harris Greenberg, a son of Millicent and William Greenberg of New York.
Rabbi Brooks R. Sussman is to officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 26, is a lawyer in the compliance department at Smith Barney, the New York securities brokerage.
She graduated from Emory University and received her law degree from Hofstra University.


Teaching Mothers Their Job
A GROUP of eight pre-schoolers were clustered on a rug in a cheerful, brightly lighted space while their teacher used finger puppets to engage them in a nursery sing-along song.
The paraphernalia of a day-care setting, from alphabet decorations, Little Tikes plastic riding toys and wooden play kitchens to a quiet room with cribs for babies were present.
But for all the similarities to a conventional day-care program, the youngsters at the Cottage Place housing project are part of a social experiment designed to help their mothers become better parents.
A Different Start, founded here in 1990 by Irene Groban, a social worker, and Joyce Smith, a teacher, offers mothers who might neglect or abuse their children a structured setting to learn both child-rearing strategies and academic skills while their children are cared for.


In Hartford, Bumptious and Alive and on the Cutting Edge
NEGATIVE ENERGY," a show that contains no words but manages to seem loquacious nonetheless, is on view at Real Art Ways in Hartford. And as habitues of this alternative space have come to expect, the effect is relentlessly avant-garde and not a little confusing.
Take, for example, the title: This may or may not be a pun on electricity and the photographic process.
But it hardly matters for, to quote the news release, the show it defines "stretches the rules and possibilities of photography" (as if they needed any more stretching).
This is not to say the display lacks visual interest; on the contrary, with most of the images in black and white, it is one of the gallery's more dramatic looking (and more disciplined) installations.


This Country Needs A Guest Worker Plan
To the Editor:
Amid the distortions and emotional statements about the mass migrations of the world's rural peoples to urban areas, it was heartening to read a few sensible words from President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico (news article, Nov. 14).
Mr.
Salinas stated that the movement of millions of Mexicans "is inevitable, and it is better to order and regulate it than to confront it with administrative measures that are not going to stop it."


Root Vegetables to Sop Up the Gravy
FOR many, turkey is one of those things in life you have to accept, like teen-age acne or rap music.
I actually quite like turkey (pumpkin pie is another matter), but I'd rather eat it cold the next day, preferably around 11 in the morning, standing by the refrigerator.
My favorite part of Thanksgiving dinner, apart from chestnut stuffing, is the vegetables that are traditionally served with turkey.
I have always loved creamed white onions, brussels sprouts, sweet potato puree and braised red cabbage.


Autumn's Long-Lasting Fruit of the Vine
ALTHOUGH the big time for decorative pumpkin faces has gone by, the season for other distinguished members of the clan has arrived.
Pumpkins belong to a rather special group of plants called the gourd family, which also includes such diverse edibles as cucumbers, watermelons and cantaloupes as well as squash and, of course, decorative gourds.


Medicinal Rather Than Melodic?
To the Editor:
As a composer, I read Edward Rothstein's essay "Supply-Side Composers Join the Band"  [ Oct. 30 ]  with interest.
I am writing in response to the larger questions raised: Why does our society find most of today's serious concert music superfluous?
Why would most audiences prefer to do without that which we composers feel such an imperative to write?


Alabama Gets the Measure of Archrival
The chains were brought onto the field and stretched out as far as the first-down sticks would reach while the state of Alabama waited and watched.
Thirty-one seconds remained in the yearlong passion play of Alabama and Auburn, a bitter co-existence that can divide households right down the middle of their dining-room tables.
Despite an early 21-point Alabama lead, the game had somehow stayed close to Auburn's audacious grasp, even now, as it came to a temporary, breathless halt.


All Aboard: Big East Is Switching From the Local to the Express
Three new coaches, each of whom loves to run on offense and press on defense.
Two marquee freshman guards, both of whom may force their new coaches to run whether they like it or not.
Syracuse and Connecticut, both favorites again this season, both with tradition steeped in wide-open basketball.
Don't look now, but the Big East has finally caught up with the 1990's.


Changing Visions of Madness in America
IN 1751, CIVIC LEADERS OF Philadelphia asked authorities to charter the colonies' first mental hospital.
The main concern, wrote Benjamin Franklin, was the growing number of "lunatics" who "going at large are a terror to their neighbors, who are daily apprehensive of the violences they may commit."
Have things come full circle?
A sense of historical cycles comes through repeatedly in the new exhibition "Madness in America: Cultural and Medical Perceptions of Mental Illness Before 1914." An exploration of how changing ideas resonated among science, culture and art, the 60-odd items in this compact show, gathered from far-flung sources, are on view at the New York Academy of Sciences and the New York Academy of Medicine, until Dec. 30.


Sports of The Times; For Ramsey, Home Is Where His Heart Is
AUBURN fans may find this difficult to believe, but Eric Ramsey has never stopped cheering for their Tigers.
His heart broke when Auburn was tied by Georgia last week and Ramsey was so excited about the Auburn-Alabama game yesterday that he planned to fly into Birmingham -- in dark glasses and trench coat -- to attend.
His lawyer advised against it.
Told Ramsey that he didn't want him to get carried away.
Literally.


In Mississippi, Bondholders Cry Fraud
BELLE CASINOS promised "Old South charm and elegance." The bondholders who lent it money encountered what they now charge in court was fraud and duplicate sets of books.
And they face one of the most audacious claims by a bond issuer ever.
Having sold what it labeled first mortgage bonds, Belle now says that there was no mortgage at all.
So the bondholders, it argues, have no claim to the casino built with their money.
The Belle saga, the first bankruptcy in the burgeoning Mississippi casino industry but surely not the last, is a tale of many things, including Wall Street faddishness and foolishness, inept marketing and ruinous competition.
It also serves as a warning to those who have complacently asserted that today's junk bond market, unlike that of the late 1980's, has not grown overly speculative.


Corrections
A table last Sunday showing voter preferences in the elections for the House of Representatives included incorrect racial breakdown figures for voters nationwide.
Revised data from Mitofsky International, the company that conducted the Election Day poll, show that the electorate was 84 percent white, 10 percent black, 4 percent Hispanic and 1 percent Asian (not 79, 13, 5 and 1).


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Treasury statement, Oct., $ billions
4.0
-53
Wed.
Durable-goods orders, Oct., pct. chg.
0.4
0.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
327
325
Fri.
Consumer sentiment, late Nov.
90.1
91.0
*4*This Week's Developments
Mon.
2-year Treasury note auction
Tues.
5-year Treasury note auction
Thur.
Eat. Eat some more.


Helping Groups Find Out About Lending Practices
To the Editor:
As former staff attorney at the Bronx-based community organization, Inner City Press/Community on the Move -- discussed in "Taking on the Banks, Crusading for the Bronx," Nov. 13 -- I was deeply involved in preparing three challenges recently submitted to the Federal banking regulators under the Community Reinvestment Act against First Fidelity, NatWest and Republic banks.


Pregnant Woman Is Struck and Killed On Street in Bronx
A pregnant 26-year-old Bronx woman died early yesterday after being struck by a pickup truck and a car while crossing Tremont Avenue, the police said.
The fetus did not survive.
The driver of the pickup was arrested on charges of driving under the influence of alcohol.


Karen L. Conant, Steven E. Rindner
Karen Louise Conant, an associate at Maloney &amp; Burch, a Washington law firm, was married last evening to Steven Eric Rindner, an associate in the Washington office of Shearman &amp; Sterling, the New York law firm.
Rabbi Joseph P. Weinberg officiated at the Willard Hotel.
Mrs.
Rindner, 27, graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Ruth and Dr.
Richard H. Conant of Potomac, Md.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Chevy Chase, Md.
Her mother is an interior designer in Potomac.


Finally, That's All He Wrote
For some Glendale residents, the fate of Robert Morrissey eclipses the O. J. Simpson trial.
They went to every one of his eight or nine court proceedings until Mr.
Morrissey pleaded guilty a few weeks ago, and they fully expect to throng the courtroom when he is sentenced on Dec. 14 to one to three years in prison.
Mr.
Morrissey, a 19-year-old resident of East New York, Brooklyn, is one of the most destructive graffiti vandals in the city, according to the Queens District Attorney's office.
Although he was charged with only two specific incidents, law-enforcement officials believe that "DESA" -- the tag, or graffiti signature, they say he spray-painted on walls, bridges, overpasses and posts across Queens and Brooklyn -- has caused more than a $1 million in damage.


A Male Sex Fantasy?
To the Editor:
The responses to my review of Robert Wright's "Moral Animal" (Letters, Oct. 30) demonstrate the value of his book -- careful research and fresh ideas instead of politicized cliches.


Nov. 13-19: Free Speech Issue (Cont.); Justices Overturn Ruling Against a Fiery Educator
The Supreme Court has almost certainly not seen the last of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, the flamboyantly outspoken chairman of City College's black studies department, though the Justices did find a convenient way last week to get his free speech dispute with the college off their docket and back to the lower courts.
The Court vacated a six-month-old ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan, that City College had violated Dr.
Jeffries's First Amendment rights by removing him as department chairman.


Nov. 13-19; Call Me 'Mister,' Aristide Says
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide's many enemies within Haiti's Roman Catholic Church have long sought to drive him from the clergy, but the President-priest last week beat them to the punch.
Weary of disputes with his superiors over matters both political and theological and fearful of the impact that could have on Haiti's effort to recover from three years of brutal military rule, he agreed to renounce the priesthood and govern as a layman for the 15 months remaining in his term of office.


Don't Give Short Shrift To a Legendary Nightspot
To the Editor:
The Nov. 13 article, "Fillmore's Next Act: The Wrecking Ball," about the planned demolition of the Fillmore East building at 105 Second Avenue made scant reference to the building's incarnation as a gay disco, The Saint.
Not only did The Saint have a much longer run than Fillmore East (seven years versus three), it arguably played a more important role in the city's history.


Leaping Hurdles, Hospital Reaches Halfway Mark
HALFWAY through New York Hospital's development and modernization program, many of the professionals associated with it are already looking back in satisfaction.
The governmental approval process is complete.
The design work is finished.
The construction contract has been signed.
The platform over the F.D.R.
Drive that serves as the foundation for a large part of the building is in place.
A Federal commitment to insure the mortgage has been granted.


How the Union Joined the South
"HERE'S to the land you tore out the heart of," went the song by the folk singer Phil Ochs during the bloody battles over integration in the South.
"Mississippi, find yourself another country to be part of."
Three decades later, as the Republican Party Chairman, Haley Barbour of Mississippi, does his endless, homespun spin over his party's historic election sweep and conservative legislative agenda, it can be argued that Mississippi and the South have taken another route.
Instead of finding another country, they have taken over this one.


Patrick L. Hynes and Brenda Murphy
Brenda Jeanne Murphy, a daughter of Joan Murphy of Breezy Point, Queens, and the late John J. Murphy, was married yesterday to Patrick Liam Hynes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn.
Msgr.
Michael Connolly performed the ceremony at St.
Edmund Roman Catholic Church in Rockaway Point, Queens.
Mrs.
Hynes, 24, and her husband, 27, graduated from Iona College.
The bride, who teaches history at Canarsie High School in Brooklyn, is studying for a master's degree in guidance counseling at Brooklyn College.


Zelda's Unwavering Love Is No Longer Unrequited
Unrequited love was all that Zelda Gilroy knew as she pined hopelessly more than 30 years ago for an indifferent Dobie Gillis.
As it turned out, she did just fine without him.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
TO THE STREETS: About 50 parents demonstrated in front of Public School 261 in Boerum Hill last week, decrying the $190 million in budget cuts proposed for public schools.
The principal, Arthur Foresta, said that if passed, the cuts would force the school to send elementary students home an hour early and return to half-day kindergartens. . . .
GOOD SPORTS: Public hearings have begun on a proposed sports complex for the underused Steeplechase Park in Coney Island.
If the Sportsplex becomes reality, it will offer a track and field arena, basketball courts and a boxing gym, among other uses.
A chairman of the center's planning commission proposes that the $70 million cost be paid with 30-year tax-exempt bonds. . . .
I.D., PLEASE: In a continuing effort to rid Bay Ridge parks and streets of drunken teen-agers, the 68th Precinct has begun to crack down on stores that sell alcohol to minors.
Last week, seven shop owners were issued summonses for selling to an undercover 20-year-old officer. . . .
ODD REINDEER: The Brooklyn chapter of the Harley Owners Group will hold a ride-a-thon today, zooming from the Canarsie Pier to the St.
Margaret Mary's Head Start Program, a unit of the Brooklyn Catholic Charities, in Long Island City, where the cyclists will arrive bearing gifts for needy children, who will in turn give them milk and cookies.
The ride begins at 11 A.M. at the group's club at 3449 Fort Hamilton Parkway.
The bikers are scheduled to arrive in Long Island City around 1 P.M.


Help Is Available For Alcoholics
I was happy to see you address the issue of alcohol abuse among Long Island's Hispanic population  [ "Isolated Immigrants Aim of D.W.I. Drive," Oct. 2 ] .
The Long Island Center Inc., with offices in Huntington and Massapequa, has been treating problem drinkers and their families for the last 16 years.
We have a special Spanish program, under the direction of a certified social worker, Abe Valentin, that meets every Saturday, and we are always looking for ways to let the community know more about our services.
We are certified by the State Office of Alcohol and Substance Abuse Services.
Anyone who requires further information can reach us at 423-7660.
MARLENE G. PALEY Long Island Center Huntington Station


Anthony Davis and Cynthia Aaronson
Cynthia Aaronson, a soprano who is a former member of the New York City Opera, is to be married today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in New York to Anthony Davis, a composer, who wrote the music for "Angels in America: Perestroika" on Broadway.
The Buddhist ceremony is to be performed by Joseph Jarman, a priest of the Jodo Shinshu Buddhist Church.
Also to take part in the ceremony are the writer and librettist Thulani Davis-Jarman, Mr.
Jarman's wife, who is also a Buddhist priest and a cousin of the bridegroom.


Paige J. South and Thomas C. Law
Paige Janine South, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James D. South 2d of Middletown, Pa., and Beach Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Craig Law, a son of Doris Law of Carlisle, Pa., and William J. Law of Owensboro, Ky.
The Rev.
Dr.
Eldrich C. Campbell officiated at Kynett United Methodist Church in Beach Haven.
Mrs.
Law, 24, and her husband, 27, graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Both work for Atlantic City casinos.
She is a manager of V.I.P. services for the Sands Hotel and Casino.
He is the manager of casino marketing at the Trump Taj Mahal.


Look-Alike Hostesses And 11 Floors of Food
UPTOWN -- On Nov. 15, Twins, a restaurant on the Upper East Side owned by identical twins and staffed by 23 pairs of identical twins, who filled out the same application forms for their jobs and aren't allowed to work if their twin is sick, had its grand opening.
It was a fun-fun party-party.


Are Extra Pounds An Illusion or Real?
REPORTS of models gaining weight may be somewhat exaggerated.
The New York Post, The Daily News and USA Today are among the publications to report that Linda Evangelista, Christy Turlington and Kate Moss are looking heavier.
"As far as I know, Linda hasn't put on weight, nor has Christy," said Katie Ford, co-president of the Ford modeling agency.
Ford represents Ms.
Turlington, but not Ms.
Evangelista.


Picked for Basement, Oregon Gets the Roses
Oregon 17, Oregon State 13
Danny O'Neil, the quarterback who couldn't bring his team from behind, who was booed and second-guessed by Oregon fans for much of his career, has the Ducks in the Rose Bowl for the first time in 37 years.


And Now, Here's . . . Ummm . . . Space Ghost
IMPLAUSIBLE SCENARIO A: ON A faraway barren planet, a sort of Fortress of Bad Attitude, a retired Saturday morning cartoon superhero plots his comeback.
Noting that Earth's late-night airwaves are clogged with talk shows, he launches his own gabfest, inviting guests like Adam West, Weird Al Yankovic and Dr.
Joyce Brothers.
Implausible scenario B: At the Cartoon Network, one of the farthest outposts of the Turner Broadcasting empire, a bevy of frustrated young programming executives confront the sad fact that the cable channel they work for has almost no budget for original programming.
Unearthing a half-forgotten kiddie show from the corporate vaults, they cannibalize it to create their own animated program -- one that is most untypical.


CHARLES MURRAY
Regarding Charles Murray's research on intelligence, why prize this thing, I.Q., so highly?
What exactly does it guarantee?
Ethical behavior?
The choice of socially useful work?
Happiness?
Wisdom?


Death of a Salesman
OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN By Jean Rouaud.
Translated by Barbara Wright. 152 pp.
New York: Arcade Publishing. $19.95.


Drug Makers and Black Groups Fight Prescription Controls
At first glance the conference titled "TennCare: An African-American Perspective" hardly seemed unusual.
The daylong meeting in Nashville featured prominent blacks like Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the Bush Administration, and the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts of New York's Abyssinian Baptist Church, criticizing Tennessee's revamped Medicaid program and discussing how recent cost-cutting measures could shortchange the poor.
But while the conference was sponsored by a conservative public policy institution and a black physicians' organization, the $67,000 it cost to stage it -- including payment of speaking fees to Mr.
Sullivan -- was provided by a company with a financial interest in blocking some of Tennessee's health-care changes: Pfizer Inc.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: Colonialism; Passing the Plate
THE HISTORY OF EAT- ing in New York, like the history of the city itself, is a story of successive co-optation.
Immigrant groups arrive with exotic eating habits, and within a generation they change the way New Yorkers eat, as surely as they themselves are changed.
German sausages become New York Hot Dogs; Eastern European bread, New York Deli Rye.
Thin-crusted pizza from Naples is reinvented as New York-Style Pizza.
Even food within our own borders is fair game.
What is New York Steak if not the best cut of beef from Chicago's cattle yards?


KILL FOR LIFE
Behind McMillan's talk about loving children, born and unborn, and how he himself could have been aborted, we find a thinly veiled agenda that relegates women to positions of economic, political and social dependence.


Bookshelf
SUNDAY POTATOES, MONDAY POTATOES.
By Vicky Shiefman.
Illustrated by Louise August.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) Why potatoes?
Because in the European village charmingly illustrated in this story, a poor family liked to eat -- and, let's face it, potatoes are better than nothing.
They can be delicious, especially if you have potato pudding for supper on Saturday night.
Recipe included.


Data Bank/November 20, 1994
Data Bank/November 20, 1994
Sales at Retail Outlets
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
1.1
0.5
1.4
Industrial Prodction Index
Monthly percent change
0.7
-0.1
0.8
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
84.9
84.5
84.8
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.2
0.3
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,419
1,497
1,463
Merchandise Imports
Sept.
Aug.
July
In billions
$69.8
$69.6
$67.4
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$59.6
$59.9
$56.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 11
Nov. 4
Oct. 28
In thousands
327
332
322


Is Josh Redman a New Archetype
WHETHER HE LIKES IT or not, the saxophonist Josh Redman, at 25, is a walking treatise on the state of jazz.
The three albums that he has released since March 1993 have sold nearly 250,000 copies, many times the number most jazz musicians sell in a lifetime.
He tours as the leader of his own band, playing more than 250 dates a year, which at his age makes him an anomaly.
And for somebody who clearly hasn't finished the maturation process that jazz requires, he has received an extraordinary amount of coverage in the mainstream news media.
Mr.
Redman will appear on Dec. 2 at Town Hall.
It is his biggest New York date so far and a show that moves him out of the clubs into the concert hall.
He is in the process of creating a public personality that's more the province of pop stars than of jazz musicians.
As jazz inches its way into the mainstream, through everything from television commercials to increased spending by major record companies, players who might never have had an audience outside jazz are finding themselves pop icons.


Gambling Crackdown Intercepts a Cash Flow to Organized Crime
Law-enforcement officials in Brooklyn have stepped up investigations in the southern end of the borough in search of illegal gambling operations.
Their efforts are part of a drive to cut off one source of cash flowing to organized crime, officials said.
The latest crackdown is a result of a joint operation between the Kings County District Attorney's office and the Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor.
On Oct. 31, 22 people were arrested and $200,000 in betting slips was seized during a two-hour raid of nine sites citywide, three of them in Bensonhurst, at 479-481 74th Street, 425 101st Street and 687 86th Street.


Public Needs, Private Answers -- A special report; Business Districts Grow, At Price of Accountability
More than a decade after New York City business and property owners began creating self-taxing districts to clean, patrol and upgrade their neighborhoods, the districts have spread to virtually every corner of the city, delivering services that once were the sole responsibility of city government.
And though their efforts have generally won broad praise, critics say that some have grown too powerful and have taken over municipal duties without sufficient oversight or public accountability.


Helping Groups Find Out About Lending Practices
To the Editor:
As former staff attorney at the Bronx-based community organization, Inner City Press/Community on the Move -- discussed in "Taking on the Banks, Crusading for the Bronx," Nov. 13 -- I was deeply involved in preparing three challenges recently submitted to the Federal banking regulators under the Community Reinvestment Act against First Fidelity, NatWest and Republic banks.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GHOSTS  HAUNTED AMERICA  By Beth Scott and Michael Norman. Tor/Tom Doherty, $23.95.


World Markets; Weighing Murdoch's British TV Venture
DURING the last decade, Rupert Murdoch has shifted his emphasis from the newspaper business to television and entertainment.
In the United States he is best known as the owner of Twentieth Century Fox and the Fox television network.
But he has also built or bought television properties in Europe, Asia and Latin America, arguably giving him greater global reach and influence than any other executive in the electronic media industry.
Now investors have their first chance to place a direct bet on one of Mr.
Murdoch's largest television ventures, British Sky Broadcasting, a satellite-delivered television service that is the main alternative to Britain's four broadcast networks.


To Be Conscious Is to Suffer
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG By J. M. Coetzee. 250 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


The Nets Win Acclaim In Losing to the Magic
The signs were in plain view.
Back-to-back games.
The 2:30 A.M. arrival time via team charter the night before.
And that lackluster victory against the Washington Bullets at home on Thursday.
Putting a fairly predictable spin on what might happen to the Nets against the Orlando Magic on Friday night required little prescience:


Pinning Down a Shining Pair
THE ART OF CLASSICAL BALLET HAS NEVER witnessed anything quite like the partnership of Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev, who began to dance together in the 1960's.
Keith Money, a young photographer, writer and painter, was there from their first rehearsals on.
"Fonteyn and Nureyev: The Great Years," his collection of more than 300 photographs being published this month by HarperCollins, is a record of the dancers' relationship with each other and with Mr.
Money's patient and sensitive camera.
Mr.
Money was warned not to photograph the ballerina.
"She loathed and detested being photographed," he said recently.
Slyly, Mr.
Money piqued her curiosity with a dramatic photograph of two other Royal Ballet stars.
"She gave in when she saw a photo of Lynn Seymour and Christopher Gable that I had artfully allowed her to discover half out of my bag."


Getting Through the Maze Of Mortgage Insurance
LIKE many first-time home buyers, Sandy Murphy undertook a crash course on the mortgage market before closing the deal.
In books, newspaper articles and meetings with his mortgage broker, he learned about loan-to-value ratios and lifetime caps.
He also scrutinized amortization tables and pondered the pros and cons of adjustable-rate and fixed-rate loans.
"It's a little overwhelming," said Mr. Murphy, a civil engineer from Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Levine Leads St. John's Over Wagner in City Showdown
St. John's 34, Wagner 14
Quarterback Mark Levine led St.
John's to its first post-season victory as the Red Storm defeated Wagner, 34-14, in the Eastern College Athletic Conference Division I-AA Bowl yesterday at St.
John's Stadium.


Red Storm Routs Russians
Before the game was even 10 minutes old, St.
John's owned a 22-point lead against a rugged bunch of Russians last night.
Aquarius Select Volvograd of Russia looked bewildered, while St.
John's looked slick as its supposed preseason test quickly evolved into a farce.
St.
John's played intense defense, unveiled a nifty transition game and looked comfortable in new, gaudy, black, red, white and yellow uniforms during a 100-85 victory at Alumni Hall.
Coach Brian Mahoney learned that his team can play strong defense behind both Felipe Lopez and Maurice Brown, can display some nice inside moves with both Charles Minlend and Zendon Hamilton and can thrill the fans with the animated Lopez creating most of the excitement.
Aquarius Coach Sergei Prigunkov found out that his players, despite the deficit and the difference in talent, would not quit as they outscored the Red Storm over the last 30 minutes.


Abbey Quests
To the Editor: What a pleasure to be escorted through Westminster Abbey in company with the distinctive curiosity of John Russell, and his perspective of a half-century.
The records in stone of the Abbey surely rival the printed page or the random guidebook in their near-infinite inventory of potential discoveries.
Daniel Webster, that mountain of sentiment and pragmatism, was the perfect American representative (even though he was a Senator) to burst into tears upon entering the Abbey.


Root Vegetables to Sop Up the Gravy
FOR many, turkey is one of those things in life you have to accept, like teen-age acne or rap music.
I actually quite like turkey (pumpkin pie is another matter), but I'd rather eat it cold the next day, preferably around 11 in the morning, standing by the refrigerator.
My favorite part of Thanksgiving dinner, apart from chestnut stuffing, is the vegetables that are traditionally served with turkey.
I have always loved creamed white onions, brussels sprouts, sweet potato puree and braised red cabbage.


Profile; A Truly Prophetic Bit of Wall Street Swear-and-Tell
THE scene is a small, overheated SoHo theater.
The stage: a square of shiny red floor, with the audience all around.
The props: a few chairs, desks and phones, and scattered papers.
Looming overhead are computer screens flashing the incessant numbers of a Wall Street trading floor.
And the tale the actors are telling is this: A hotshot bond trader has been strutting and crowing about a $460 million profit, but this house-of-straw falsehood is collapsing before our eyes to reveal a very different reality -- a $150 million loss.


Stacey M. Green, Abraham Mintz
Stacey Meryl Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford N. Green of Stamford, Conn., is to be married there today to Dr.
Abraham Mintz, a son of Raquel Mintz of Mexico City and the late Dr.
Gregorio Mintz.
Rabbi Ely J. Rosenzveig is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Agudath Sholom.
The bride, 31, is the corporate counsel at the Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received her law degree.
Her father retired as an electrical engineer in Stamford.
Her mother, Gloria B. Green, retired as a kindergarten teacher at Public School 299 in Brooklyn.


Nov. 13-19: A Nuclear-Free Ukraine; Moves in the Ukraine Bring Elation to U.S.
What a difference four months makes.
When Leonid Kuchma, former director of a missile factory, was elected Ukraine's President in July, the Clinton Administration feared that he would be another neo-Communist hack who would do little about the problems Washington was worrying about: Ukraine's 1,800 nuclear warheads and its collapsing economy.
But when Mr.
Kuchma visits Washington on Tuesday, he will have done virtually everything President Clinton has asked.
Last Wednesday, thanks to vigorous arm-twisting by Mr.
Kuchma, the Parliament in Kiev voted to eliminate Ukraine's nuclear arms, putting aside the belief that such weapons could make Ukraine a power to reckon with.
The Clinton Administration hailed the vote because it removed roadblocks from two major strategic arms-reductions treaties that had been stalled.


Karen P. Murphy, T. F. Roberts 4th
Karen Patricia Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Murphy Jr. of Montville, N.J., was married yesterday at St.
Mary's Church in Pompton Lakes, N.J., to Thomas F. Roberts 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roberts 3d of West Bay Shore, L.I.
Steven Madreperla, a deacon of the Roman Catholic Church, performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
Stephen Verkouw, a Lutheran minister, took part.
Mrs.
Roberts, 30, graduated from Lynchburg College.
She is a secretary in the corporate finance department of Dillon Read &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
Her father is a partner in the R.B.A.
Group, an engineering and architectural firm in Morristown, N.J.


We're About More Than Just Health Care
To the Editor:
Your article about John Forbes Nash Jr. ("The Lost Years of a Nobel Laureate," Nov. 13) mentioned that Mr.
Nash had visited his former teacher, Albert W. Tucker, at Meadow Lakes, a "nursing home" near Princeton, N.J.
While Mr.
Tucker does indeed reside in the Meadow Lakes Health Care Center, I would like to point out that the words "nursing home" do not offer a complete characterization of our community.
Meadow Lakes, a not-for-profit, nonsectarian complex that is affiliated with the Presbyterian Homes of New Jersey, is much more than a nursing home; it is a continuing-care retirement community, which means that it offers a continuum of care, including independent-living residences, personal care services and on-site health care -- including the 90-bed health care center.
A.
JAMES DUFFY  Hightstown, N.J., Nov. 14  The writer is executive director of Meadow Lakes.


Wall Street; Bank Stocks Make Their Mark, but on the Low End
BANK stocks took big hits last week, monopolizing the lists of 52-week lows in the stock market.
The Federal Reserve's interest rate hike on Tuesday was no help, of course, adding fuel to existing fears that profit margins at banks would grow thinner.
"We're at the point where banks will have to take their deposit rates up, which they haven't done aggressively for a while," said Anthony Lombardi, bank analyst at Dean Witter.
That means skimpier profits as banks compete for the funds they need to make available to borrowers.


Corrections
An article on page 45 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the video documentary "The Art of Conducting" identifies the program's producer, Stephen Wright, incorrectly.
He is the managing director of IMG Artists Europe, not IMG overall.


Let's Recognize the Alarming Disappearance of Unskilled Jobs; G.O.P. and Redistricting
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 13 news article on racial redistricting's impact on the election: Any notion that the Republican Party supports minority voting rights, as its former chief counsel suggests, borders on hypocrisy.


Wall Street; Betting on Holiday Spenders
NOT all the stepped-up buying this week will be in the nation's department stores.
Some brave souls are venturing out of the local mall and into the neighborhood brokerage office, hoping to cash in on gains in department store stocks this holiday season.
It's anything but a fashionable view, though, that profit opportunities await in the months ahead.
In fact, it would take an obstinate contrarian -- the sort of investor who wore safari suits three seasons into the Armani look -- to bet on a resounding surprise at the stores this season.


Cab Calloway Dies
The flamboyant band leader, who scatted his way to fame in the 1930's as the "Hi-de-ho" man of jazz, was 86.
Page 59.


Friendly, All Right, but Stick to the Pizza
IF ever a place was well-named, it is Amici's Restaurant on Route 7 in Ridgefield, tucked into a roadside building that formerly housed the Cooper Tavern.
Amici (friend in Italian) translates here into a bubbly, cheerful environment with a separate bar to the left of the entrance, and a cozy, low-ceiling dining room on the right.
Smokers may dine in the wood-paneled bar; at dinner, the entire restaurant is a smoke-free zone (there are a few tables at lunch for smokers).


Bookish


In Florida, a Nightmare for Farmers
John Alger has had a string of luck so rotten that when he steps into his flooded fields of sweet corn he can only joke.
"We keep kidding that we rescued three Cuban rafters crossing across here," he said, pointing over the muddy flats where Tropical Storm Gordon turned 630 of his acres into a miniature Straits of Florida.
The storm's wind and rain ruined crops on tens of thousands of acres across the southern half of Florida this week, and vegetable prices are already increasing in some Eastern grocery stores as a result.
But for farmers in Homestead, the crop losses came with an odd twist: although this city south of Miami bore the brunt of Hurricane Andrew in August 1992, its vegetable crops suffered more at the hands of this much weaker tropical storm.


Department of Clarification
To the Editor:
When you write a book about Si Newhouse -- America's richest media tycoon -- you're bound to invite very strong responses.
All that you can hope is that those who review it might do so fairly and ethically.


In America; No G.O.P. Imitations, Please
Representative Charles Schumer put it best: The Democrats created a vacuum and the Republicans filled it.
Mr.
Schumer, a Democrat from Brooklyn, said last week: "Any Democrat who wants to revitalize the party has to start from the basic premise that while there were lots of other factors, the Democratic Party was ultimately to blame for the election fiasco. Yes, the Republicans were nasty. Yes, right-wing talk radio emphasized the negative. But those kinds of things can only succeed when there's a vacuum, and we created the vacuum."


On L.I. Golf Courses, the Trend is Organic; Huntington Weighs Privatizing Links
TAKE a number to play on the Crab Meadow Golf Course in the Town of Huntington, if you can.
The crowds at the 18-hole course, critics contend, are evidence of golf's growing popularity.
The Island has 43 public courses, with 34 in Suffolk.
"I could build 10 more tomorrow and I still couldn't satisfy the demand," said Ed Wankel, Suffolk Parks, Recreation and Conservation Commissioner.


'Peter and the Wolf' With Jane Alexander
AS the holidays approach, music for younger listeners crops up more and more frequently.
Today, for instance, the Putnam Symphony Orchestra has invited Jane Alexander, a resident when she isn't in Washington heading the National Endowment for the Arts, to narrate Prokofiev's "Peter and the Wolf."
Ms.
Alexander will tell the tale twice, at 2 and 4 in George Fischer Middle School in Carmel.
Also on the program, conducted by Mark Ettinger, are Leopold Mozart's "Toy" Symphony, with students of the Carmel Schools helping out on penny whistle, ratchet and cuckoo call, and instrumental excerpts from Humperdinck's "Hansel and Gretel."


The Rockets Just Relax And Go With 9-0 Flow
Kenny Smith calls it "ho-hum." Vernon Maxwell's term is "laid back." Robert Horry considers it "not much of a big deal."
These are the Houston Rockets, and for them, a 9-0 start to their National Basketball Association season is not much cause for excitement, or even surprise.
They started last season 15-0 and ended it with an N.B.A. title.


When It Comes To Film Biography, Everyone's a Critic
IF ANY GROUP COULD BE SAID TO have truly lived by their wits, it would be the famed writers and editors, the humorists and poets who gathered for lunch during the 1920's at the Algonquin Round Table, thus affirming their membership in the aristocracy of wit.
The members of the club, which was centered in the restaurant of the eponymous hotel on West 44th Street in Manhattan, were classics of a certain American genre: people from small towns and provincial cities across America who came to New York to be free, to become famous, to get rich.
They were, of course, not the only ones who spent that boisterous epoch creating bodies of work and literary reputations.
Over the seas in London, there was the Bloomsbury circle, and, with less bohemian flair but arguably more literary importance, there was T. S. Eliot, the transplanted businessman's son from St.
Louis who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1948 for canonical works like "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" and "The Waste Land."


Friendly Advice to the Politically Lovelorn
To a nonpolitician, there is an obvious way to deal with the extraordinary feud that has riven New York the last two weeks.
When a relationship is going badly, you turn to an expert.
Dear Ann:
Recently a colleague sought a promotion.
Although he had counted on my support, I backed his rival, and in the heat of the moment I made some nasty personal remarks about him.
Unfortunately, he got the promotion anyway and now controls part of my budget.
I tried to make up with him, but he won't return my telephone calls or meet with me alone.
I know I hurt his feelings, but isn't he being unreasonable?
What can I do?


Ms. Banks, Mr. Eickelberg
Marilyn Kellogg Banks, a sculptor, was married yesterday to Prof.
W.
Warren Barbour Eickelberg, a biologist.
The Rev.
Gary Maier performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Banks, 69, is keeping her name.
She is the founder of the Bayou Banks Studios in Amityville, L.I., and Alexandria, La.
She graduated from Pine Manor Junior College and from the Art Institute of Chicago.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Kellogg.
The bride was a widow.


Jean A. Walsh, Paul A. Pipia
Jean Ann Walsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Walsh of Astoria, Queens, and Dr.
Paul Anthony Pipia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Pipia of Elmont, L.I., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Moriarty Jr., a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church in Astoria.
The bride, 35, is the clinical nutrition manager at the Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received a master's degree in nutrition.
Her father retired as the executive officer and an inspector of the Manhattan bureau of detectives in the New York Police Department. .


A Way to Get The Gunmen: Get the Guns
Police departments here and in Kansas City, Mo., have tried something police departments never did before to get illegal guns off the streets: They have focused on the guns in the way they have long focused on drugs and drunken drivers.
Elementary as it sounds, it works.


As Ever, Politics With a Vengeance
GERALD AND SARAH MURPHY, the socialite friends of F. Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald, loftily declared that living well was the best revenge.
But politicians are generally a less self-sufficient lot.
Rather than abiding by the Murphys' benign maxim, they are more likely to invoke Machiavelli's darker dictum: "It is much more safe to be feared than to be loved" or Joseph P. Kennedy's credo, "Don't get mad, get even." Politicians typically define revenge as living well at someone else's expense.
Enter, or, perhaps, exit, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
By bolting the Republican Party to embrace Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for re-election, Mr.
Giuliani gained stature among many of his New York City constituents.
But disloyalty stings even more deeply than defeat.
The Mayor alienated his party, Gov.-elect George E. Pataki (who refused even to engage in a game of telephone tag) and Mr.
Pataki's patron, United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
"I'm not going to squish him," a magnanimous Mr.
D'Amato said of the Mayor.
"He's going to squish himself."


At Work; The Work-Family Bottom Line
IT was the early 80's.
Money, fast and lots of it, was in.
Yuppies grazed expensively.
The Italian Peg Perego stroller would soon become the most expensive form of transportation most New Yorkers, at least, would ever purchase.
True, the recession of the early 1980's shook the confidence of a plethora of white-collar professionals, many of whom suddenly found themselves rocked back and in need of new careers.
And true, "having it all" was becoming a dubious goal, as women, especially, found it difficult to juggle the multiple lives anyone with a family and a job has.
Even a decade ago, predownsizing, the demands of work made it virtually impossible to do much more than shoehorn a private life, including spouses and children, into gaps in the work schedule.
The pioneering companies that went looking for support services for their employees found few options.
"It was a simple landscape: a desert," remembers one executive on a tape put together by Work/Family Directions, the Boston-based consulting firm, to observe the beginning of its second decade of purveying the work-family ethic to corporate America.
A decade ago, Work/Family began scouting out child care providers in its clients' local communities, gradually building an infrastructure of referral services around the country.


Carousel
HERE'S HOW THINGS work at the Center of the Universe, also known as New York City: LET'S SAY A REPORTER FOR a certain New York newspaper rushes back from Florida with a story that the First Lady, before anyone ever heard of her, had a real talent for playing the horses.
Seems that in one day alone, with just a minor bit of counseling from her husband's political pals, she turned a $100 bet into $1,000 and then, in a year, she had a $1 million bonanza to finance the start of their campaign for the White House.
The reporter's editors think that's a helluva yarn and run it at the top of their front page.


Microbrewers Set the Pace, and Draw the Heat
AGAINST a curdled gray Georgian sky, Gregory Kelly hoisted a pint-glass of coppery liquid topped with a dense layer of creamy foam, rotated the glass and carefully sipped the mixture.
"The best beer in the world," he declared, "Red Brick Ale."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE SHADOW OF A FLYING BIRD A Legend From the Kurdistani Jews.
Written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion. $15.95. (Ages 6 and up)


KILL FOR LIFE
Your profile of militant abortion opponent Roy McMillan was certainly chilling, but once again I found myself wondering why news coverage of "grass roots" abortion activism always focuses on the abortion opponents.
Your article barely acknowledges that a growing corps of pro-choice activists is also gathering outside clinic walls, and in voting booths, across the country.
Among other things, these grass-roots activists act as safe clinic escorts and offer counseling to women who are harassed by people like McMillan.
NANCY M. YANOFSKY Executive Director Pro-Choice Resource Center Mamaroneck, N.Y.


WALKING THE WALK
Television news programs have elevated the perp walk to a new art form through the use of "slo mo" techniques and by rerunning the same film loop (The Big City: "Walking the Walk," by John Tierney, Oct. 30).
A short piece of film can be used for any number of voice-over reports during the booking, trial, sentencing or appeal of a criminal.
In these segments, the perp can be seen going up and down the same stairs, in and out of the same elevator, entering and leaving the same courthouse.
A local Albany station has one film clip of a convicted killer that is rerun each time his sentence is appealed or his case is reviewed by the courts.
FRANCIS W. RODGERS Rensselaer, N.Y.


CHARLES MURRAY
Charles Murray knows he treads on nonpolitically correct ground when he writes of genes and intellect.
Proof of his theories is hard to come by and anecdotal evidence is not science.
However, there is some history that might serve as a clinical trial to prove his thesis on a more scientific basis.
He touched upon it when he paid the Israeli cellist the national compliment: "In terms of I.Q., you guys are off the charts."


Forces Marshaled for Battle on Airport Rail Link
Battle lines are being drawn over a prized Manhattan real-estate site -- the shuttered Alexander's at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue.
Well-financed forces have retained high-powered lawyers in a fight that could rival epic development struggles like Westway and Columbus Circle.
The confrontation has also fostered an unlikely alliance between two frequent adversaries on zoning issues: developers and civic groups.


Clear but Hypocritical
Overlook, for just a moment, the brutality of their ideas.
Representative Newt Gingrich and his band of ideologues have enlivened U.S. politics -- indeed, engaging the public in political discourse that is supposed to be at the core of democratic society.
They ran on a platform that told Americans how they would transform society by, in part, ripping away every strand of the social safety net.
With government out of the way, they said, civil society would bloom.
The Democrats -- led, in the final weeks of the campaign, by President Clinton -- held the contract up to voters for ridicule.
The voters decisively picked sides.


London Fog: Out of the Drizzle and Into the Rain
THE storm clouds were already gathering a year ago for London Fog, but the venerable raincoat maker ventured forth anyway -- with an ambitious plan to reinvigorate itself.
It got drenched. And since then, if anything, things have gotten worse.


Janet L. Popofsky and Keith Vance
Janet Lynn Popofsky, the daughter of Martin L. Popofsky of North Woodmere, L.I., and the late Elaine Popofsky, was married last evening to Walter Keith Vance, a son of Benjamin Franklin Vance Jr. and Jean C. Lewis, both of Bryan, Tex.
Rabbi Morris S. Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere.
Mrs.
Vance, 32, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is an associate in the New York office of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, a Los Angeles law firm.


'Dictatorship of Virtue'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Dictatorship of Virtue" (Oct. 23), Leon Wieseltier charges that the author, Richard Bernstein, "flirts with false and ugly notions about the superiority of some civilizations over others," and adds that if "all civilizations are not the same it does not follow that they are not 'equal.' "


Welcoming In the Young Wine
The end of November revolves around turkey dinners and family get-togethers.
And, to a lesser but still noticeable extent, there is a holiday tradition imported from France: the arrival of beaujolais nouveau.
This fresh, fruity, two-month-old red wine from south of Burgundy arrives in Paris on the third Thursday in November, where it finds its main market among the solid, casual bistros.
A selection is listed here.
CAFE DE PARIS  + (212) 486-1411; 924 Second Avenue, at 49th Street; $; all major credit cards


Common Ground: Tax Talk
The talks between major league team owners and players recessed today without an answer to the most crucial question: Will the players accept any part of the payroll tax proposal presented to them this week?
The answer to that question will not be known until at least Nov. 28, the date the players and the owners hope to resume full negotiations.


Can Sinatra's Second Act Top the First?
DOES THE MOST sensational pop stunt of the decade have a viable second act?
That is the inevitable question posed by "Frank Sinatra Duets II," the follow-up to last year's "Duets," which became the singer's best-selling album ever when he was 78.
The answer is a highly qualified yes.
Once again, Mr.
Sinatra displays a punchy (but sometimes punch-drunk) aggressiveness as he recapitulates past triumphs joined by guests who vocally stretch themselves to fit a classic pop mode.
The first album was a conceptual and technological landmark in its teaming of Old Blue Eyes with rock and soul singers like Bono and Aretha Franklin in versions of classic performances that retooled the original arrangements by Nelson Riddle, Don Costa and other Sinatra arrangers.
The fact that the singer and his partners sounded as if they were sitting side by side, even though they had recorded their parts separately, made the feat all the more astounding.


Quebec Police Say Baby Was Target of Cult
A three-month-old boy was stabbed to death in a Quebec village because he was considered the Antichrist in the rituals of a cult linked to the murder-suicide of 53 people in Switzerland and Quebec last month, the Quebec provincial police say.
The police reconstructed the bizarre developments in a burned-out chalet in the ski resort village of Morin Heights, north of Montreal, where five people were found dead early last month.
The incident was followed a few days later by the fiery deaths of 48 cult members in two Swiss villages.


Arnold R. Fox and Yolanda Vega
Yolanda Vega, a daughter of Angel and Rosalina Vega of the Bronx, was married in Manhattan yesterday to Arnold Robert Fox, the son of Charles Fox of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and the late Frances Fox.
Justice Bruce Wright of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at Gilda, a restaurant.
Ms.
Vega, 36, is keeping her name.
She is the director of agency services at Casita Maria, a settlement house in the Bronx.
She graduated from City College, as did her husband, and she received a master's degree in social work administration from Hunter College.
Her father is a taxi driver in New York.


Root Vegetables to Sop Up the Gravy
FOR many, turkey is one of those things in life you have to accept, like teen-age acne or rap music.
I actually quite like turkey (pumpkin pie is another matter), but I'd rather eat it cold the next day, preferably around 11 in the morning, standing by the refrigerator.
My favorite part of Thanksgiving dinner, apart from chestnut stuffing, is the vegetables that are traditionally served with turkey.
I have always loved creamed white onions, brussels sprouts, sweet potato puree and braised red cabbage.


Proud to Be Your Bud, But It Wasn't Working Out
A BUDWEISER advertising slogan from 1911, "The old reliable," could have also described how the brewer, Anheuser-Busch Inc., felt about its advertising agency.
The St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles had created campaigns for Budweiser since 1915, making their relationship one of the most enduring in an industry where change is a constant.
So it was startling when Anheuser-Busch abruptly announced last week that it would dismiss D.M.B.&amp; B. after 79 years together.
Starting in February, responsibilities for creating the approximately $125 million worth of Budweiser ads that appear annually will be shifted to DDB Needham Chicago, which handles other Anheuser-Busch accounts.


Funny Things Happen On the Way to a Treaty
IF ever anyone needed evidence that the politics of international trade defy every rule of logic and partisanship, consider the past seven days.
Donning colorful batik in Indonesia, President Clinton claimed his latest victory in commercial diplomacy, as the leaders of Asia agreed to free trade in the Pacific, sort of, by the year 2020.
Of course, it was an accord with some of the world's premier protectionists, and as soon as the cameras wandered off, Mr.
Clinton's summiteers quickly noted that this was a declaration of "common resolve," not a binding agreement.
After all, argued the Chinese and the Malaysians, among others, 25 years might be a little hasty for a radical notion like opening their markets.


Microbrewers Set the Pace, and Draw the Heat
AGAINST a curdled gray Georgian sky, Gregory Kelly hoisted a pint-glass of coppery liquid topped with a dense layer of creamy foam, rotated the glass and carefully sipped the mixture.
"The best beer in the world," he declared, "Red Brick Ale."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SECRET LESSONS OF TOYS
"Toys/Art/Us," an exhibition title that echoes the slogan of the toy store chain, describes some less than playful ideas that artists extract from toys.
The exhibition is at the Castle Gallery of the College of New Rochelle through Jan. 20.
Laurie Simmons, for example, does photographic portraits of dolls that are a commentary on "women's work," and Lisa DiLillo's video, "Kitchen Commando," deals with a bored housewife fantasizing that a battle is taking place among her pots and pans.


Microbrewers Set the Pace, and Draw the Heat
AGAINST a curdled gray Georgian sky, Gregory Kelly hoisted a pint-glass of coppery liquid topped with a dense layer of creamy foam, rotated the glass and carefully sipped the mixture.
"The best beer in the world," he declared, "Red Brick Ale."


Carolyn A. Paris, David L. Tirschwell
Dr.
Carolyn Anne Paris was married in Los Angeles last evening to Dr.
David Lawrence Tirschwell.
Judge David Kenyon of the United States District Court for the Central District of California in Los Angeles performed the ceremony at the Ebell Club.
Dr.
Paris, 30, is keeping her name.
A pediatrician in Seattle, she graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz and received her medical degree from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Nancy and George Paris of Los Angeles.
Her father is the vice president for programming at the Tribune Entertainment Company in Los Angeles.


Silken Badges Bearing Mysterious Messages
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, visual symbols have been used the world over to designate status.
In China, symbols in the form of insignia took on special significance at the beginning of the Ming dynasty.
Around the year 1390, the emperor formalized the use of insignia with an imperial edict: court officials were ordered to display their civil or military rank by distinctive badges affixed to their robes.
The decree remained in force for more than 500 years.
The wealth of silk-embroidered squares produced were emblazoned with brilliantly colored images of birds and animals, each imbued with political and social meaning.
By 1911, at the end of the Ching dynasty, such insignia became obsolete.
But Western tourists and scholars began collecting them as souvenirs and historical documents.


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Soap Opera Continues
WITH a seven-game losing streak, the Giants' season has dissolved into a multiple choice of soap-opera titles:
(a) As the Quarterback Turns


KILL FOR LIFE
I'm pro-choice, support free speech and oppose capital punishment.
Reading Lisa Belkin's article "Kill for Life" (Oct. 30) tested all of these convictions.
I caught myself thinking: "He shouldn't be allowed to say or do that! Why Dr. Gunn and not him? Too bad abortion wasn't legal when his mother was considering her options."


Lew's Blues
BLACK HORNET By James Sallis. 150 pp. New York: Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers. $18.95.


Clinton Plays Dutiful Guest On Vacation At Trip's End
No one can accuse President Clinton of ignoring his hosts.
Mr.
Clinton came to Hawaii for three days of what was to have been rest and relaxation.
The visit was intended as consolation for a schedule that had sent him to two dozen cities in the last four weeks alone.
And for their lodgings here, he and his wife, Hillary, have taken advantage of a prime Presidential perquisite: the ocean-front guest quarters of the big Marine Corps base near here, where President Dwight D. Eisenhower once stayed and which has its own private beach adjoining the magnificent Haneoha Bay.


Risa I. Goodman, Robert J. Groux
Risa Ilene Goodman, the daughter of Laurence J. Goodman of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Judith L. Goodman of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Groux, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Robert Groux of Apopka, Fla.
Fletcher Freeman, a justice of the peace for Dallas County, performed the ceremony at Hotel Crescent Court in Dallas.
Mrs.
Groux, 30, was until recently a director of sports marketing for KEZY-FM, a radio station in Anaheim, Calif.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the vice president of the women's division of Robert Stock, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her mother is a psychologist in Beverly Hills, Calif.


Snoopy


Ms. Selditch and Mr. Zelermyer
Dianne Susan Selditch, a freelance writer and editor, and Benjamin Zelermyer, a senior partner in Serchuk &amp; Zelermyer, a White Plains law firm, are to be married today at their home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Carl Wolkin, the bridegroom's stepbrother, is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 49, graduated from the University of Florida.
She is a daughter of Beatrice and Nathan Selditch of Boca Raton, Fla.
Her father retired as a partner in Seymour D. Singer &amp; Company, certified public accountants, formerly in Miami Beach.
Her mother, also retired, taught kindergarten at Temple Or Olom in Coral Gables, Fla.


Historic Whoopses
George Pataki looks downright gentlemanly compared with . . .
George Bush, who, during dinner with the Japanese Prime Minister in January 1992, vomited into his host's lap.


Geraldine O'Brien, Rod Cain Jones
Geraldine Ann O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James G. O'Brien of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Rod Cain Jones, the son of Nelda A. Cain of Dallas.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Jones, 28, is an account executive with the Merchandise Group, a marketing agency in Dallas.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father is a managing director and the general tax counsel at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


Campus Contretemps: A Bronx Tale
Who is Cyrus Azari and why is he saying such terrible things about Fordham University?
Or maybe the question is better asked the other way around.
Mr.
Azari, a 32-year-old Army veteran who transferred to Fordham as a junior this year after graduating from Bergen Community College in New Jersey, has been living in his car in a university parking lot since the beginning of October, after he threatened to beat his roommate and the Fordham administration evicted him from his residence hall.
The result has been a tempest in a teapot, which would be amusing if the weather weren't turning cold.


Trial of Priest, Ex-Officer and Others in Brink's Theft Nears End
The fate of three New York City men, including a Melkite Catholic priest, charged in a $7.4 million robbery at an armored-car depot here appears to depend on whether jurors are convinced that a fourth suspect on trial was the inside man on the theft.
Final arguments in the case are scheduled to begin on Monday.


Catching Sight of Past Podium Titans
THERE IS A FABULOUS moment near the end of "The Art of Conducting," a video documentary built around vintage performance clips that show 16 titans of the podium at work (Teldec 95038; laser disk and VHS cassette).
Leonard Bernstein, rehearsing the London Symphony Orchestra in the Shostakovich Fifth Symphony, in 1967, stops the players after a hushed chord and exhorts them to produce an even lighter sound.
"Please, almost no bow," he says in an emotional, urgent tone familiar to anyone who has seen him rehearse or speak about music.
"I mean, just like breathing on the string. I know it goes against your grain as solo violinists to do that, but you must, to get this sonority of voices. It must be like singing, it can't be just" -- he pauses, looks down and adds in a deadpan voice -- "string playing."


St. John's Loses in First Round For the Third Consecutive Year
A goal by Hamisi-Amani Dove with seven minutes left gave Rutgers a 1-0 triumph over St.
John's tonight in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.
The loss marked the third season in a row in which St.
John's has been eliminated in the opening round.
The Red Storm, which finished the season at 14-5-3, lost to Dartmouth two years ago -- the first time St.
John's made the tournament -- and lost to Boston University last year.


What's New York the Capital of Now?: VOYEURISM; On the Outside Looking In
IT CAN HAPPEN IN A FLASH.
YOU'RE wandering the streets of New York, impervious to the architecture that wallpapers the city, when suddenly you're transfixed, like Alice on a tour of Wonderland, by some extravagant apparition.
A tower.
A dome.
A forest in the sky.
Who's the lucky stiff, you wonder, who gets to rent a castle?
Now, in any other place, the normal reaction might be envy.
But in turf-conscious New York, the skeptic reigns supreme.
Sure, you say, it looks great from the sidewalk, but what about the inside?
Dark and uninhabitable, right?
Well, no, actually.
The sad news is, some of New York's more fascinating exteriors have fascinating interiors as well.


The Hero in Many Guises, A Model for Lesser Mortals
ONE NIGHT THREE CENTURIES ago, the ruler of the small desert kingdom of Bikaner in Western India had a dream.
He saw the god Vishnu, his skin a deep indigo blue, enthroned in a garden pavilion with the goddess Lakshmi seated on his knee.
The fortunate sleeper -- Raja Karan Singh, by name -- awoke, described his vision to his chief court artist, and directed him to capture it in paint.
The idea of the dream became a popular one in the Bikaner court, and a generation of artists painted it repeatedly.
One gorgeous version, depicting the comely young god attended by female musicians, perfectly distills the heady combination of sensuousness and spirituality that makes Indian miniatures so haunting and is among the highlights of a remarkable exhibition titled "Realms of Heroism" at the Brooklyn Museum.


Erwin Griswold of Harvard, Ex-Solicitor General, 90
Erwin N. Griswold, the United States Solicitor General under two Presidents and for many years dean of the Harvard Law School, died yesterday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 90.
Mr.
Griswold was a resident of Belmont, Mass., and Washington.
The Harvard Law School announced his death last night, but the cause was not given.


Abbey Quests
To the Editor: Your article about Westminster Abbey did not mention that near the entrance, set into the stone floor, are brass letters forming a simple sentence, "Remember Winston Churchill," put there at the direction of Queen Elizabeth II.


Caring for the Canine Geriatric Set
MIND if I let the dogs in?" Sony Schotland asked her guest. As Mrs. Schotland's claim to animal-rights fame is adopting elderly dogs, one expected a passive procession of wobbly creatures. Instead the sliding-glass door opened, and three huge mounds of excited caninedom tumbled into the living room.
In a single bound they reached the visitor.
Bo, a German shepherd, flipped his tennis ball into the lap.
Raisins, a spaniel-mix, pounced on feet, sniffing shoes, purse and whatever appendages she could reach.
With head butts, Sheba, a bearded collie, tried to push Raisins, Bo and his ball away, so she could have her head rubbed.


Stamford Plays Its Part
THE executive producer Alexander H. Cohen has more on the agenda of the Rich Forum in Stamford than feeding the Broadway theater.
But somebody's got to do it.
Witness "Comedy Tonight," which is to begin performances on Friday and run through Dec. 11, a 10-day delay from the dates previously announced.


New Columbia Looks an Awful Lot Like Old Columbia
What had developed into a renaissance season for Columbia ended in a nightmare yesterday when the Lions squandered a 24-point lead in the second half as Brown erupted for eight unanswered touchdowns en route to a 59-27 victory.
Ahead by 27-3 early in the second half, Columbia appeared on the way to its sixth victory against three defeats and one tie in the season finale for both teams.
That would have given the Lions their most victories since the 1971 team, the last Columbia squad to record a winning record, went 6-3.
But then this vastly improved Columbia team, which had surprised its most ardent supporters -- not to mention the entire Ivy League -- reverted to the inept form that had characterized Lion teams over most of the last two decades.


On Sunday; Victory Won, Fair Nassau Hails Its Hero
THE title of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's memoir in progress is "Enough Is Enough." If there's no Yoknapatawpha being mapped by his literary muse, there is at least nearby Oceanside and the Rainbow Diner, where his Republican precinct captains gather for breakfast to greet the county judges, the town councilmen, the Congressmen and, above all, the Senator: "Mr. D," as one loyalist hails him with all respect.
Bouncy, jubilant, Mr.
D'Amato must be seen here in his reign as New York's bantamcock champion of the politics of hamlet, town and mansion: the Faulknerian nine yards.
Here his taproot goes deeper than all his cloakroom schemings in Washington and red-meat caperings for the talk-radio carnivore.


Q. &amp; A.
The Smell Of Chinese Cooking Q I live in a cooperative loft, a nine-story former factory building in a mixed commercial and residential neighborhood.
The ground floor and my second-floor unit were built out to the lot line.
The building directly across the courtyard, a four-story brownstone housing a Chinese restaurant at ground level, is also built to the lot line, close to my building.


Let's Recognize the Alarming Disappearance of Unskilled Jobs
To the Editor:
Notwithstanding the results of the election, it is disappointing that neither party has addressed the core issue of our time: How can you have a stable, safe society when the labor of a large and increasing segment of society is not needed?


Chairman of Joint Chiefs Defends Clinton Against Attack by Helms
Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went out of his way today to reject assertions by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina that President Clinton was not up to the job of Commander in Chief and that many military officials shared that view.
"I was taken aback by the implication that he left that somehow the Joint Chief of Staffs and I shared his view on President Clinton," General Shalikashvili said in a telephone interview.
"Nothing could be further from the truth, and I think it's important to me that this view not be represented as that of the military leadership or for that matter the view of the military as a whole."


For the Elderly, a Deli Is a Lifeline
In Manhattan, getting from one place to another usually involves considering up- or downtown, not up- or downhill.
But for elderly people living along a slice of the island's easternmost avenue, the threat of losing the only deli for a mile is bringing local topography into unusual focus.
"We are at the bottom of a hill," fretted Ursula Maksic, 72 years old, who lives around the corner from the Sutton House Deli, at 1155 York Avenue, between 62d and 63d Streets.
First Avenue, she said, has a variety of stores, but they are inaccessible to her.
"Sixty-Second, 63d and 64th are all uphill streets," she said.
"For elderly people or the handicapped -- I happen to be both -- this is impossible."


Nov. 13-19: Palestinian vs. Palestinian; Arafat's Police Use Guns To Quell Gaza Riots, Killing 13 Protesters
Tensions were building for weeks between Yasir Arafat's struggling self-rule government and Islamic militants in the Gaza Strip, and on Friday the crisis many had feared came to pass.
Armed officers fired repeatedly for hours at stone-throwing protesters, killing at least 13 and wounding perhaps as many as 200.


Margaret Ansell, Lance D. Podell
Margaret Beth Ansell, a daughter of Constance W. Gatta of West Deal, N.J., and Richard Ansell of Deal Park, N.J., is to be married today to Lance David Podell, a son of Barbara Klazmer and a stepson of Bernard Klazmer of Rydal, Pa.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik is to perform the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
The bride, 26, graduated from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.
She completed a clerkship in September for Judge William C. Conner of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.
In January, she is to become an associate at Willkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher, the New York law firm.


On the Dull Cutting Edge of Technology
To the Editor:
"A Can Top For a New Day?," (Technology, Oct. 30), reported that the Ball Corporation has come up with a new and improved can-opening device for aluminum and steel drinking cans.
Several years after the latest innovation in such a device -- the pull-tab lid -- I am amazed that anyone got away with a design that involves pushing the sometimes dusty, often sticky and occasionally (surely) filthy outside of a can into the presumably sanitary, pristine contents of the can.
Now it seem that Ball has a new design -- with all kinds of marvelous improvements -- but which still entails pushing the exterior of the can into the contents.
I, for one, remain distinctly unimpressed.
JOAN ROSENFELT  Manhattan, Nov. 3  The writer is an independent film maker.


Cab Calloway Is Dead at 86; 'Hi-de-hi-de-ho' Jazz Man
Cab Calloway, the flamboyant band leader who strutted and scat-sang his way to enduring fame as the "Hi-de-ho" man of jazz, died on Friday in a nursing home in Hockessin, Del.
He was 86 and lived in Greenburgh, N.Y.
The cause was a stroke he suffered in June, said his wife, Nuffie.


Barbara Rooney, Andrew J. Peer
Barbara Jean Rooney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Rooney of East Granby, Conn., was married yesterday to Andrew John Peer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Peer of Little Silver, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas A. Flower performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Bernard in Tariffville, Conn.
Mrs.
Peer, 28, is an assistant vice president at the Willis Coroon Corporation, an insurance brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Bryant College.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Arborio Corporation, a construction company in Cromwell, Conn.


PBS's Star Fixer-Upper To Become a Magazine
"This Old House," the highest-rated regular series on public television, tells 10 million viewers a week how to turn their dull old domiciles into fantasy homes with cathedral ceilings, solar rooms and beautifully appointed fixtures.
So what could be more perfect than to have the same people who brought you Martha Stewart Living introduce This Old House Magazine?


Bridge
Two major titles were decided by tiny margins here Saturday night at the start of the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
The Life Master Open Pairs was won by Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., and Dr.
Richard Katz of Rancho Mirage, Calif., by five match points, or one-eighth of a board.


Random Bullet Kills Woman in the Bronx
A Bronx woman walking with her 10-year-old daughter was shot in the back and killed yesterday, apparently by a randomly fired bullet, the police said.
The woman, whom police would not identify, was walking along East 180th Street between Vyse Avenue and Boston Road at about 6:15 P.M. when she was shot, said Sgt.
James Coleman, a Police Department spokesman.
She was pronounced dead at the scene.


North Korea Reports Fulfilling a Nuclear Promise
North Korea has struck its most conciliatory and cooperative note in years, announcing publicly that it had frozen its nuclear reactor program, as promised in an agreement with the United States.
It also vowed to carry out its pledge to dismantle the remaining elements in its suspected nuclear weapons sites, and said over the weekend that it had permitted American experts for the first time to visit its nuclear complex at Yongbyon, just north of the capital.


Trying to Say Absolutely Everything
Nicholas Maw's "Odyssey," nearly two hours long and played without interruption, is a stately rumination on the orchestra.
Leonard Slatkin and the St.
Louis Symphony played it at Carnegie Hall on Friday night, demonstrating if anything Mr.
Slatkin's courage and sense of adventure.
This is not the kind of piece ambitious conductors generally take on out-of-town trips.
"Odyssey" says almost anything you can think of about orchestra sound and technique.
In the process it neither begs, borrows nor steals; nor does it copy or paraphrase.
Mr.
Maw has his own fluid voice and an articulate vocabulary to go with it.
Great banks of brass sound rise.
Birds twitter above flowing lines in the lower strings.
Winds and violins race in scale passages.
Indeterminate chords colored by mallet percussion float out from the stage.
"Odyssey" reads like a thick textbook on how to make 100 skillful musicians do just about anything.


U.N.'s Forces Put on Alert As Serbs Advance in Bosnia
As nationalist Serb forces were reported to have advanced against the Bosnian Army near the town of Bihac, United Nations peacekeepers went on a heightened alert across the country today in anticipation of NATO retaliation for Serbian air attacks on civilian areas.
"The situation is critical in Bihac," said Bosnia's Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic.
He said Serbs, backed by tanks, had retaken the village of Veliki Skocaj south of the Bihac enclave in northwestern Bosnia, which has been designated a "safe area" by the United Nations.


Corrections
A list of Gov.-elect George E. Pataki's transition committee on Friday misspelled the names of one member and of the law school where he is dean.
He is Frank J. Macchia rola, a former New York City schools chancellor; the law school is Cardozo.


After Frustration, Sampras Hits Winning Note
This time, there was no depriving Pete Sampras of his exclamation point.
A year ago in the final of the I.B.M./ATP Tour World Championship, he was overpowered by Germany's second-favorite tennis player, Michael Stich, who slammed 27 aces to keep Sampras from finishing his first year as No. 1 in style.


Market Place; The final episode approaches in a battered REIT's proxy battle.
ONE of the nastiest election fights of 1994 ends today, after weeks during which the two contestants called each other names and denounced each other's competence and integrity.
The battle is for control of a real estate investment trust that ranks as one of the worst performing of the breed.
Through good times and bad for the industry, American Industrial Properties, as it is now known, has had little but bad news for its investors.
After going public at $15 a share in 1985, its price steadily declined, dipping to $1.25 last month.


POP
Sad Stories And Lonely Characters  Tramps
On Wednesday night, the Ass Ponys, a rock band from Cleveland, took the audience on a tour of the same types of lonely, twisted American characters who fill the pages of William Faulkner and Flannery O'Connor novels.
In a cracking, tuneful drawl somewhere between that of Michael Stipe of R.E.M. and Wayne Coyne of the Flaming Lips, Chuck Cleaver sang of the man too corpulent to leave his trailer home ("Azalia"), the love-blinded 17-year-old girl who carved "I love Bob" into her calf ("I Love Bob"), and the loner who imagines the women who once drank from the discarded bottles he finds on the ground ("Peanut '93").


Fire Department Ladder Buckles, and a Father Dies
It seemed that the entire family was going to make it to safety yesterday afternoon as yellow and orange flames licked out of a rambling apartment building in a mostly industrial section of Brooklyn.
Standing on a 91-foot aluminum alloy ladder that extended from a fire truck, Firefighter Greg Smith was carrying two children who had been handed through a smoky sixth-floor window on the side of the building by their parents.
The parents came next, and the firefighter stepped down a rung to make room.


Patents; Through Genetic Engineering, Soil Bacteria Develop An Appetite for Sulfur and Help Clean Up Fossil Fuels
GENETIC engineering is frequently used to create drugs or practice biomedicine.
Now a Texas company has patented a recombinant gene that it hopes will help eliminate acid rain.
When sulfur is burned, sulfur oxides are produced; when these are released into the atmosphere they mix with rain, snow or mist and become sulfuric acid.
This falls back to earth to pollute lakes, kill plants and even eat the paint off cars.
A good deal of sulfur gets into the skies through the emissions of power plants, cars, trucks, trains or ships and other devices that burn fossil fuel.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An 'Immortal' Hour Shows Signs of Mortality  Juilliard Theater
Maybe it's the season, but Rutland Boughton's "Immortal Hour" seems to resemble nothing so much as a spectacular balloon for the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade that sprang an irreparable leak after its wildly acclaimed early appearances.
Lord knows, plenty of hot air is available.


Turner Steals Into Record Book
Until today, Marcus Turner had been the Jets' nickel back nobody knew.
Now he's in their record book.
With three interceptions, including a 90-yard touchdown return, in the 31-21 victory over the Vikings today, the 28-year-old defensive back now shares the Jets' record for most interceptions in one game with Dainard Paulson, Billy Baird, Rich Sowells and Erik McMillan.


Review Set Of Nasdaq's Operations
The Nasdaq stock market, under mounting pressure from antitrust regulators, litigious investors and the Securities and Exchange Commission, announced yesterday that it had appointed a seven-member committee, headed by former Senator Warren Rudman, to review its governance and operations.
The committee includes Peter S. Lynch, the former manager of the Fidelity Investment's Magellan Fund and an author of books and articles on investment strategies, and two former S.E.C. commissioners, Irving M. Pollack and A. A. Sommers Jr.


Poor Families Will Pay for the G.O.P. Victory
To the Editor:
So Representative Newt Gingrich's tough love solution is to stop "promoting the counterculture value system" and to prevent "the ruin of the poor" (front page, Nov. 13), by cutting all aid to mothers under 21, cutting all aid for legal immigrants and cutting all mothers from welfare and work programs after two years, whether or not jobs or health care are available.


Being Perfect Can Be A Burden
At the end of a weekend of rivalries, a time that defines seasons and determines the futures of coaches, there was one casualty that stood above the others.
The system that creates bowl-game pairings took the worst hit of the weekend, as it faced the possibility that three teams -- Nebraska, Penn State and Alabama -- may reach the new year with perfect records and no chance of facing an unbeaten opponent.
Alabama's passionate 21-14 victory over Auburn, in the brassy din of Legion Field, held far more significance than the annual climax of a state's unending obsession.
The Crimson Tide, with an offense that has become more accomplished and daring as its season progressed, has suddenly become a threat to overtake Penn State and move into position behind top-rated Nebraska in the polls that produce a champion.


Ammirati Gives Up A Sara Lee Account
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York has resigned from one of its Sara Lee Corporation accounts, Bil Mar Foods, as part of its continuing efforts to focus on core accounts.
Bil Mar markets meat products under the Mr.
Turkey name, primarily in the Midwest.
Since 1977, its account has been handled by agencies owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies; Lintas New York, a predecessor of Ammirati &amp; Puris/ Lintas, was awarded the account in 1990.
The agency said Friday that it would continue to handle larger Sara Lee brands like Sara Lee baked goods and Hillshire Farm and Hygrade meat products.


Keeping in Touch With the Victims of Domestic Violence
A son hit his 65-year-old father with a shovel, leaving deep cuts on his left hand.
A young man got into an argument with his live-in girlfriend over their sex life and the argument escalated so furiously that she called 911 out of fear he would beat her.
A man burned his common-law wife's face with a cigarette during a fight.
These brief descriptions of some of the 16 domestic incident reports that Police Officer James O'Donnell reviewed last Monday morning gave only a glimpse of the violence that went on behind closed doors last weekend in the 120th Precinct on the northern part of Staten Island.


BBDO Executive Moves to Lowe
Andrew Dijak, a senior vice president and creative director at BBDO New York, has joined Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York in the new position of executive vice president and creative group head.
He joins Jay Taub, executive vice president and creative director, in managing one of the agency's two creative groups.
Mr.
Dijak, 38, an art director, also previously worked at Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York and Chiat/Day in the Venice section of Los Angeles.
He arrives as Lowe participates in reviews on two important accounts, Prudential Insurance and Citibank credit cards.


Oscar Mpetha, Ally of Mandela And Labor Union Organizer, 85
Oscar Mpetha, a longtime African National Congress figure and union leader who was a political prisoner in South Africa even past his 80th birthday, died on Tuesday in Cape Town.
He was 85.
Mr.
Mpetha had advanced diabetes, and the British newspaper The Guardian reported that both his legs had been amputated, that he was partly blind and had lung and kidney problems.


Battered Chiefs Win Down and Dirty Game
Cleveland versus Kansas City today at Arrowhead Stadium turned into a game of attitudes.
Who's bad? Who's toughest?


Estrogen Substitutes Aren't All the Same
To the Editor:
As an obstetrician-gynecologist with 30 years' experience and the director of the Menopause Institute of Northern California, I believe it may be helpful to readers of your Nov. 18 front-page article on hormone replacement therapy for women after menopause to know the important facts surrounding estrogen replacement.


Poor Families Will Pay for the G.O.P. Victory; A Different Agenda
To the Editor:
So Representative Newt Gingrich, the Speaker-in-waiting, says he wants to make Congress family-friendly (front page, Nov. 15).


CHRONICLE
BRENDAN GILL , the New Yorker writer and architecture critic, and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis became firm friends during struggles to preserve various landmarks in the city.
Now he is to be the first recipient of an honor named for her: the Municipal Art Society's Onassis Award.
It will be presented at the organization's annual benefit Nov. 30 at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.
"No matter what the hour or the building we were trying to save, Jackie would be on the ramparts," Mr.
Gill said the other day.
"She was indispensable. This will be a very poignant recollection of her value to the society and what her friendship meant to us."


USAir Hires an Ex-General As Safety Operations Chief
USAir, trying to reassure customers after five fatal crashes in the last five years, announced yesterday the appointment of a retired Air Force general to a new position of chief of safety operations and the hiring of a consulting concern to conduct an independent audit of flight operations.
The announcement was made by Seth E. Schofield, chairman and chief executive of USAir.
It also was contained in a full-page advertisement published today in The New York Times and more than 40 other newspapers.


Hair Spray, Rifles, Toys (and Jobs); A Discount Megastore Wins Friends and Influences Rivals
When Wal-Mart opened a huge discount department store in Columbia County last spring, no one tried harder than Pamela Taylor-Farrell to warn mom-and-pop businesses that their survival was at stake.
But nearly eight months later, Ms.
Taylor-Farrell, the former president of the downtown merchants association, has been won over by the other side: Now a self-described "Wal-Mart groupie," she roams the gleaming aisles of the store after work on each payday.


Corrections
The listing of winning lottery numbers yesterday carried erroneous dates in some copies.
Corrected results appear on page B7.


Topics of The Times; Fatter and Fatter
Americans continue to grow fatter and fatter at rates that are truly alarming.
Last July, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that 33 percent of all American adults -- one in every three -- were estimated to be overweight.
That was a sharp rise from the already high levels of 24 to 25 percent of all adults recorded as overweight in surveys between 1960 and 1980.
Overweight means about 20 percent or more above a person's desirable weight on standard weight tables.


NATO SET TO BOMB SERBS IN CROATIA
Responding to Serbian nationalist air attacks, NATO has decided to bomb an airfield in a Serbian-held area of Croatia, Western officials said today.
Western officials said that NATO warplanes were ready to bomb the Udbina airfield today, but that the attack was postponed because of bad weather.
Nationalist Serbs have used the airfield as a base for air strikes against the Muslim town of Bihac and other areas of northwest Bosnia, in violation of the United Nations no-flight zone over Bosnia.


Death Penalty
Governor-elect George E. Pataki has promised to restore the death penalty in New York.
But if the experiences of New Jersey and Connecticut are any indication, it will be well into the next century before anyone is actually executed.
Any new death penalty law is likely to be tied up by court challenges for years; most subsequent death sentences will probably be continuously appealed.
In New Jersey, no one has been executed since the state reinstated the death penalty in 1982.
Of the 37 people who have received death sentences since then, 29 have had them reversed on appeal and only 2 others have exhausted their state appeals.
No one has been executed in Connecticut since 1960, but there are growing calls to strengthen the state's death penalty statute.


No Headline
"I never imagined it, not until the AIDS thing came about. I was thinking about going on a motorcycle and touring the United States, but when it happens, you're there. All grandmothers are." -- KATHLEEN BUETE, who cares for her grandson, 8, dying of AIDS, the disease that killed his mother.  [ B6:2. ]


Why Neil Simon Decided to Turn His Back on Broadway
In his still-definitive 1969 book about the Broadway theater, "The Season," William Goldman predicted that virtually all straight plays would soon be Off Broadway.
The reason, he argued, was simple: the high costs "make doing anything but mass appeal plays a lunatic Broadway venture."
There is no playwright with more mass appeal than Neil Simon, and it has taken 25 years for the prediction to come true for him.
But America's richest, best-known playwright is hunting for a 500-seat Off Broadway theater for his newest comedy, "London Suite."


The Balance Sheet: A Broadway Villain
As Emanuel Azenberg, Neil Simon's producer, puts it: "Off Broadway, 400 seats at $40 makes me a smash. On Broadway, 400 seats at $55 closes me down. You tell me -- what makes sense?"
Producers have moaned for decades that they cannot make money on Broadway, but two recent events suggest that the final act may have arrived: Mr.
Simon decided he would open his new play, "London Suite," Off Broadway, and "Angels in America," the lavishly praised play, announced that it would close at a loss of $660,000.


15 Completions Do the Talking For Reed and Kelly This Week
Bills 29, Packers 20
They fight like children on the sidelines and bicker across the radio dial.
On the field, though, Buffalo's Jim Kelly and Andre Reed are always together.
Kelly and Reed connected for 2 touchdowns and 191 yards yesterday to beat visiting Green Bay by 29-20 and revive the Bills' playoff hopes.


Patriots Play Parcells's Plan to Perfection
This was Bill Parcells's type of game.
He must have been pinching himself to keep from exploding into a smile watching New England running back Marion Butts plow into the San Diego defensive front like a bulldozer and seeing linebacker Chris Slade do a darn good impression of a young Lawrence Taylor.
One week after quarterback Drew Bledsoe set National Football League records in passes (70) and completions (45) to rally New England from a 20-0 deficit to a 26-20 victory against Minnesota, the Patriots were in control this afternoon in a 23-17 victory over the San Diego Chargers.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Assisted Living Concepts, Portland, Ore., an initial public offering of 3 million shares.
Natwest Securities Corp.


Art Lover's Guide to Noses in the Piazza
To the Editor:
Re "1 Million Italians in Piazza to Protest Government Budget" (news article, Nov. 13): You prove yourself not to be not as well versed on Italian art history as on Italian budget problems when you refer in the photo caption to the masked figures as people "wearing Pinocchio noses."


Here's the News From Lake Wobegon: Jets Upset the Vikings
Go figure.
The Jets are not only in the thick of the playoff race, but thanks to today's smart and tough upset victory over the Vikings, they will be playing for a share of first place in the American Football Conference East next Sunday.


3 Correction Officers Suspended at Rikers
As sporadic food and work strikes by inmates at Rikers Island continued, three correction officers were suspended on Saturday after refusing to fill in for striking inmates assigned to the food service detail, a Department of Correction spokesman said yesterday.
Tom Kelly, the department spokesman, said that after about two dozen officers at the Anna M. Cross jail in the Rikers complex were ordered to deliver food to the prisoners -- a job usually performed by inmates -- one officer refused, another overturned a cart of food and a third complained of a back injury.
He said the three were suspended pending a hearing.


When Shorty and I Played Taps in the Bronx
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 9 obituary on the jazz great Shorty Rogers brought back warm memories.
When I was 14 in 1936, the 12-year-old Miltie Rajonsky moved into 1414 Bronx River Avenue in the Bronx.
I lived at 1402.
He was a short, curly-haired kid with a friendly locked-on smile.
He proudly unwrapped the battered bugle he had brought from Lee, Mass.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Houston Symphony Offers Premiere of a Prelude  Carnegie Hall
In the finale of the Prokofiev Fifth Symphony on Thursday evening, the Houston Symphony Orchestra demonstrated that it can play extroverted, brassy music as loudly and as thrillingly as anyone.
Earlier in the work they handled softer-edged string scoring nearly as ably.
It was in the broad range between those extremes that slackness of ensemble and intonation grew troublesome.


MCI to Offer One-Stop Shopping on the Internet
In the clearest sign yet that the quirky, anarchistic activities of the Internet are giving way to corporate packaging, MCI Communications Inc. will announce on Monday a broad package of access services that includes an electronic shopping mall for consumers and high-speed connections for businesses.
The move by the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier is the first attempt by a major telephone company to capitalize on the growing popularity of the Internet, an interconnected federation of computer networks around the world that use a common language to communicate with one another.


Filing Raises New Questions About Borden
New information in a regulatory filing about Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company's proposed acquisition of Borden Inc. shows that a financial adviser to Borden had a $10 million incentive to complete the deal with Kohlberg, Kravis at the same time another suitor was trying to meet with the Borden board.
The filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission also suggests that the board did not seek counsel from its two financial advisers about the legal and legislative liabilities of tobacco when considering the proposed swap of Kohlberg, Kravis's RJR Nabisco stock for Borden.


N.J. Transit Seeks 4 New Electric Rail Lines on Abandoned Tracks
In their glory at the turn of the last century, trolley cars thrived in New Jersey.
They were quieter than locomotives and cleaner than horses.
Now, modern-day economic and environmental concerns may put electric trains back on their old tracks, at least on four suburban routes being considered by New Jersey Transit.
Some of the service proposed for Passaic, Essex and Union counties would run on active railways, but most would require restoration of dozens of miles of track now buried by weeds or tar.


Corrections
An article on Friday about Angus King, the independent who was elected last week to be Maine's next governor, referred incorrectly to the site where governors were gathering over the weekend.
It is is not a town but a resort, in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.; its name is spelled Greenbrier.


Bonilla Is Willing to Switch
Bobby Bonilla says he is ready to be the good soldier for the Mets. Again.
Aware that the club is considering moving him back to the outfield just one season after they converted him to third base, Bonilla said yesterday that he loved third base, but would do whatever Mets management asked of him.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; It's Frank Lloyd Wright's work on display, but Chrysler's Cirrus sedan is Exhibit A.
THE tag line for advertisements plugging many Chrysler Corporation cars these days is "form follows function." But the auto maker's hope is that dealers' sales forms will follow social functions.
To push its new Cirrus sedan, Chrysler has teamed up with House Beautiful magazine to create a traveling mini-exhibit of work by Frank Lloyd Wright.
Each by-invitation-only opening of the show features plenty of shrimp and grilled chicken bits, a full and free bar, and test drives of the sedans.


Remembering the Kennedys


Japan Admits It Bungled Notice of War in '41
After decades of obfuscation, Japan stated today for the first time that bungling within the Foreign Ministry 53 years ago was responsible for Japan's failure to declare war on the United States before launching its attack on Pearl Harbor.
The acknowledgement came in documents that were released to clear the air on outstanding questions from the war in advance of the 50th anniversary of Japan's surrender, next Aug. 15.
But the documents are unlikely to resolve the basic issue: why Japan acted as it did.


AIDS Toll on Elderly: Dying Grandchildren
For a long time, Kathleen Buete feared a telephone call saying that her daughter Florence had died of an overdose.
That call never came, but Florence did come home pregnant and with AIDS.
She eventually died and Ms.
Buete is caring for her 8-year-old grandson, who grows weaker and thinner every day from the same virus that killed his mother.
"I scream sometimes for no reason," Ms.
Buete said.
"I have my crying fits. I go into the bathroom so he doesn't see me, but he catches me sometimes."


Arafat Aide Appeals to Israel and Other Nations for Help
In an urgent plea for economic help, the beleaguered Palestinian self-rule government called on Israel today to lift its "siege of starvation" of the Gaza Strip and West Bank, and told foreign countries that the time was "now or never" to carry out their unfulfilled pledges of aid.
Still reeling from fighting that killed at least 13 Gazans and wounded about 200 others on Friday, officials turned their attention to what many here regard as a basic cause of unrest: embedded poverty despite all the hopes raised when Yasir Arafat's Palestinian Authority came into being half a year ago.


Africa Tunes In to a BBC Beacon
Every afternoon at 5:05, local time, work in many offices throughout this continent comes to a halt when a staccato trumpet burst signals the beginning of "Focus on Africa," a hard-hitting BBC news program broadcast on shortwave radio.
Much of Africa has experienced a democratic renewal in this decade, with the sprouting of opposition parties and the creation of a diverse and often highly critical news media.
This situation has sorely tested the relevance of the London and Paris press, and other shortwave broadcasters like the staid Voice of America and Radio France International.
For decades, these organizations provided the news that many African journalists were not free to report in their own countries.


Looking for Meaning in Parents' Deaths, Finding It in History
FAMILY  By Ian Frazier  Illustrated. 386 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.
In the sad aftermath of one's parents' deaths, a sweet recompense is the gradual crystallization in memory of the best of those parents.
Ian Frazier's father and mother died in their late 60's almost within a year of each other, he in 1987 of Alzheimer's disease and pneumonia, she in 1988 of liver cancer.
The memories evidently came back with such force and sweetness that Mr.
Frazier was driven beyond mere recollection to an appetite for his family's entire history.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Ax and Serkin Unite For Brahms and Schoenberg  Carnegie Hall
Brahms was the most radical of conservatives, Schoenberg the most conservative of radicals.
In a series of well-thought-out concerts this season, the pianist Emanuel Ax is putting the two composers on equal terms.
On Wednesday night, Mr.
Ax was joined by Peter Serkin for a two-piano program that brought together Brahms's Variations on a Theme of Haydn, Schoenberg's Chamber Symphony No. 2 (the composer's own arrangement) and Brahms's Sonata in F minor (Op. 34, not Op. 5).


Have Meat Cleavers. Will Juggle.
The simple, striking set for "The Flying Karamazov Brothers Do the Impossible!" is a mountain of cardboard boxes piled at the rear of the Helen Hayes Theater's stage.
During the new show starring the popular West Coast troupe of comic jugglers, boxes are tossed, juggled, stacked, and balanced precariously on people's chins.
Before the show is over, the cardboard mountain, as if sick and tired of being treated as a plaything, spontaneously erupts, burying everything, including the performers.
The Flying Karamazov Brothers, who first appeared on Broadway 11 years ago, have always made it a point to create theater from humble materials.
Having started out on the streets of San Francisco, they convey the cheerfully anarchic attitude of unreconstructed hippies.
And in the show's more exuberant moments, the troupe, which includes a ragtag street band called the Kamikaze Ground Crew, makes the audience part of its extended family.


CHRONICLE
ELEANOR BERGSTEIN is a movie director and screenwriter who likes to incorporate aspects of her real life into her films.
For the last seven years she has worked around the city as a volunteer for the Coalition for the Homeless, distributing food from vans to people on the street.
She is weaving her experiences into the new movie "Let It Be Me," which she wrote and is directing.


Back to Business


DOLE TIES SUPPORT OF TRADE ACCORD TO TAX CONCESSION
Seeking to wring concessions from a politically weakened White House, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas said today that he had told Clinton Administration officials that he would be more inclined to vote for a worldwide trade pact if the White House dropped certain objections to a cut in the capital gains tax.
Administration officials said today that they had promptly dismissed the offer made by Senator Dole, the likely majority leader.


CHRONICLE
DAVID CROSBY of the rock group Crosby, Stills and Nash received a new liver yesterday in a seven-hour operation.
A spokesman for the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center, Warren Robak, said that Mr.
Crosby was in critical condition after the operation, which was normal for organ transplant patients, The Associated Press reported.


Tortoise, Hare and Corporate Japan
If Aesop had written business school case studies instead of fables, he could have hardly done better than the tale told last week by the Sony Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company about their forays into movie making.
When the two Japanese companies acquired major Hollywood studios five years ago, Sony -- innovative, flashy and far more comfortable in the international arena -- was viewed as the better candidate of the two for success.
Matsushita -- a cautious giant that stressed conformity -- seemed to be bogged down in ways that were antithetical to the ethos of Hollywood.


At Conference Of Governors, Pataki Makes A Quiet Debut
A year ago, when the Republican Governors' Association met in Phoenix, it was Christine Todd Whitman's show, a coming-out party for a new political star who had toppled a Democratic incumbent by promising deep cuts in state income taxes.
This year, Governor-elect George E. Pataki of New York used a similar playbook to unseat perhaps the most prominent governor in the country.
But he is just a face in the crowd at this year's meeting, just one of 11 Republicans about to take over statehouses that were previously Democratic or independent.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Senator Jesse Helms's comment that President Clinton was not up to the job of being Commander in Chief misstated the given name of a former Army officer who was critical of Mr.
Helms.
He is William J. Taylor, not John Taylor.


What Now for Mr. Clinton?
Give President Clinton and his associates this.
They are not blaming the baseball strike or sun spots for the election results.
They are also taking Representative Newt Gingrich and his "Contract With America" seriously.
For anyone who cares about the two-party system, these are good signs.
There are, of course, delusional Democrats who believe that the new Republican majority will turn out to be so right-wing that all Bill Clinton has to do is stand aside and wait for Mr.
Gingrich to self-destruct.
That is a shaky and probably suicidal premise on which to base the revival of the Democratic Party and Mr.
Clinton's Presidency.
The Congress Mr.
Gingrich promises will not be a do-nothing bunch like the Republicans Harry Truman savaged 46 years ago, but a do-something Congress in Mr.
Gingrich's radical mold.
If the President wishes to salvage any honor from the next two years, he is obliged to do something in return.


Poor Families Will Pay for the G.O.P. Victory; Food or Health
To the Editor:
Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Kansas Republican, slated to be chairwoman of the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, proposes to federalize Medicaid to improve health services for the poor.


Poison in the Earth: A special report.; Nuclear Roulette for Russia: Burying Uncontained Waste
For more than three decades, Russian scientists have disclosed, the Soviet Union and now Russia secretly pumped billions of gallons of atomic waste directly into the earth.
They say the practice continues today.
Though the Russians defend the practice as safe, it is at odds with accepted global standards for nuclear waste disposal and is contrary to what they have previously said they were doing.
The disclosure has set off a debate among experts over the likely consequences of the radioactive injections, which some experts say represent a new kind of nuclear danger that might haunt the planet for centuries.


Inmate Accused of Plot to Kill Two Prosecutors and a Judge
A 33-year-old convicted killer has been arraigned on charges he conspired to assassinate District Attorney Richard A. Brown of Queens, an assistant prosecutor and the judge who handed him a life sentence.
The suspect, Armando Hernandez, was arraigned on Saturday in Queens Criminal Court in Kew Gardens on charges of conspiracy to commit murder and criminal solicitation, officials said yesterday.
He was arrested on Friday at the Bronx House of Detention, where he was awaiting transfer to a state prison, according to documents filed at the court.


Ewing Still In Doubt For Knicks
When David Robinson of the San Antonio Spurs goes up for the game-opening tap against the Knicks at Madison Square Garden on Monday night, it may be Herb Williams instead of Patrick Ewing who goes along for the ride.
Ewing, who sat out Saturday night's 92-79 Knicks victory over Atlanta at the Garden because of soreness and swelling in his right knee, did not practice with the team today and is questionable for the San Antonio game.


Topics of The Times; The Economics of Prenatal Care
Fearing that purely altruistic social arguments would never carry the day, health care advocates have long claimed that the expense of offering prenatal care to poor women would be more than offset by the savings in preventing premature births and other costly problems.
But now Dr.
Frederick Cornell, who directs maternal and child-health programs at the University of Washington in Seattle, and Dr.
Jane Huntington, a Seattle internist, have analyzed the more than 100 papers on which that contention was based -- and found them flawed.
Those who do not receive timely prenatal care are predominantly poor minorities at high risk of having premature and low-birth-weight babies.
Reducing that risk, the doctors say, takes a kind of care -- identifying and treating drug and alcohol abuse, for example -- far more comprehensive than that provided by the average prenatal program.
That takes more money.


Insurance Plan for Gay Partners
California regulators are pushing insurance companies to change their rules so that a member of a homosexual couple may buy life insurance on the other partner, and name himself or herself as beneficiary.
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company recently agreed to pay the state $125,000 to settle charges that it had denied insurance coverage to people who wanted to name an unrelated person as beneficiary.
The Allstate Life Insurance Company and The Jackson National Life Insurance Company had earlier paid similar fines.


An Annual Review By Turkish Tourism
The Turkish tourist office in New York is conducting a review, required annually, on its North American account, which has been handled by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Toronto.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.
Leyla Ozhan, director of the office, said last week that D.M.B.&amp; B. had been invited to participate along with seven or eight other agencies.
A decision is expected by the end of December or early January, she added.


Last-Play Block Saves Nets an Embarrassment
P.
J.
Brown managed a faint smile as he quickly jogged off the Byrne Meadowlands Arena floor tonight.
Myriad hands reached out from the stands for him to slap jubilantly as he headed for the tunnel to the locker room.
He had saved the Nets from an embarrassing defeat with a last-second block of a Pooh Richardson layup, but he had trouble relating to the euphoria the fans were feeling.


Seinfeld as Opening Act For Abbott and Costello
Odd as it may seem, NBC's hit series "Seinfeld," usually identified as the most contemporary approach to the television sitcom, owes a lot to Bud Abbott and Lou Costello.
It may be hard to imagine how that comedy pair from the 1940's and 50's, often written off by critics as lowbrow slapstick merchants, could influence the comedy show that has come to be considered a cultural signpost for relationships in the 1990's.
But Jerry Seinfeld himself has no qualms about making the connection.


Angolan Government and Rebels Sign Treaty to End 19-Year War
The enemies who have fought since 1975 for control of Angola signed a treaty here today promising to end the last war in southern Africa and to collaborate in rebuilding their rich and devastated country.
The accord, which calls for the guns to fall silent on Tuesday, is the third such pledge to end Angola's relentless fratricide.
But it is the first to guarantee a share of power to the Unita rebel movement, and the first to be backed by plans to deploy thousands of armed United Nations peacekeepers.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Fitch Has No Victories And No Heartburn
BILL FITCH might have had a tearful reunion yesterday morning with Derrick Coleman, if only Coleman had shown up for the Nets' shoot-around at Meadowlands Arena.
"Diarrhea," said Butch Beard, the Nets' coach, embellishing Coleman's phoned-in excuse with a roll of the eyes.


Abroad at Home; Dr. Esma's Lesson
If the leaders of the Western alliance want to understand the challenge we face after the cold war -- one they show no signs of having understood so far -- they should meet Dr.
Esma Zecevic.
Dr.
Zecevic is the chief pediatrician of the Kosevo Hospital in Sarajevo, Bosnia.
In a column last month I described how she worked under appalling conditions -- and how she was herself gravely wounded by a sniper's bullet that pierced her lung.


G.O.P. GOVERNORS CAUTION CONGRESS ON SOCIAL AGENDA
Buoyed by their biggest victory in 25 years, the nation's Republican governors and governors-elect sought today to put some distance between themselves and the Republicans who will control Congress.
They urged the new Congressional leaders not to be distracted by social issues like school prayer and warned that they did not want the Federal budget to be cut at the expense of the states.


New York State Senate Keeps Power Balanced
To the Editor:
Since the New York State Senate, like the Assembly, is now apportioned by population, Philip S. Glickman urges adoption of a unicameral legislature (letter, Nov. 14).
He argues that the State Senate is useless, having lost its sole purpose of protecting less-populous rural areas.


METRO DIGEST
GRANDPARENTS IN THE AGE OF AIDS
As the AIDS epidemic rages, grandmothers across the nation are increasingly thrust into an old role with a new twist: they are caring for adult children dying of AIDS and for the grandchildren, in some cases also dying, who are left behind.
Heterosexual AIDS infection jumped 130 percent from 1992 to 1993 (an increase due in part to a change in definition), and experts estimate that as many as 125,000 children will lose their mothers to AIDS by the year 2000.
These children are increasingly left in the care of relatives, family friends and social agencies.


Clinton's Grip On '96 Ticket Isn't So Sure
It is still only a question, but a politically portentous one, and it is on the lips and in the minds of prominent Democrats across the country: Can Bill Clinton -- should Bill Clinton -- be the party's Presidential nominee in 1996?
So sweeping was the Democratic defeat in the elections 13 days ago, and so deep is the Democratic dejection in its wake, that the President's place at the head of the ticket two years from now is no longer taken for granted.
The odds are strongly in his favor: he is still the President, and he has few obvious challengers.
But the doubts are there.


Time for a Global Criminal Court
After extensive and complicated preparations, the United Nations ad hoc tribunal to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslavia is just now getting started.
Two weeks ago, the massacres in Rwanda were added to its jurisdiction.
But these two examples of human rights disasters are by no means the only ones deserving the attention of the international community.
What of the crimes of the Haitian junta?
The Indonesian Army in East Timor?
Turkish and Iraqi persecution of the Kurds?
It would be impossible to convene ad hoc tribunals to investigate all these -- yet it seems inherently unfair that some conflicts are singled out for world attention when others, whose victims are every bit as human, are ignored.


Cam Lo Journal; In the Free Market, Vietnam's Poor Pay a Price
In the poorest part of the poorest part of the country, all the talk about Vietnam as Asia's newest economic power is a distant whisper.
The rice farmers who tend the arid, gritty soil along Vietnam's central coast say they are thankful that their crops can fetch higher prices in newly free markets.
But the land here in Quang Tri Province is so unproductive that even when prices go up the effect for most farmers can be measured in pennies.


Apple Lawyer Will Become New Director Of Gay Group
The nation's largest gay political organization has reached into the corporate world for an executive director to guide it through what promises to be a tumultuous period in the gay-rights movement.
Elizabeth Birch, the 38-year-old chief litigator at Apple Computer Inc., is to be named today as executive director of the Human Rights Campaign Fund, an organization that is based in Washington and claims more than 80,000 members.
The fund fights discrimination against homosexuals through organizing, lobbying and financial support for political candidates.


Accounts
*
Kenworth Truck Co., Kirkland, Wash., to Volkamer &amp; Simmons, Bellevue, Wash., to handle its account, previously at Floathe Johnson, Kirkland.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million. *
State University of New York, Farmingdale, L.I., to Sanna Mattson MacLeod, Smithtown, L.I., as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Extended Family Of Immigrants Mourns Victims Of Van Accident
Balbir Singh's family left the Indian state of Punjab in the kind of serial migration that has been an article of faith for immigrants to the United States for more than a century.
First came his brother-in-law, then his sister and her son, and then, in 1989, Mr.
Singh.
Looking for economic opportunity and an escape from the civil strife in Punjab, they settled together in Flushing, Queens, and became part of the Sikh community whose life revolves around a temple in the Richmond Hill neighborhood.
Mr.
Singh delivered newspapers until two years ago, when his sister, Kulwant Singh, got him a job at the National Wholesale Liquidators Store where she worked, in Bethpage, L.I.
He quickly rose to assistant manager, and frequently drove a company-owned van in which other store employees who lived in Queens rode to work in a car pool.


St. John's Weathers Exhibition
St.
John's got through its dress rehearsal Saturday night with a victory and a brief scare.
But St.
John's Coach Brian Mahoney said yesterday that Zendon Hamilton, the highly regarded freshman center who injured his left wrist scrambling for a rebound in a game against a Russian team, had been given medical clearance to play.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S SOCCER  Ninth Crown in Row for North Carolina  North Carolina's women's soccer team captured its ninth consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association title in remarkable style yesterday with a 5-0 rout of Notre Dame as midfielder Tisha Venturini, a senior, scored two goals.
Except for the loss to George Mason in the 1985 championship game, North Carolina has captured the title every year since the N.C.A.A. instituted the women's tournament in 1982.
After a fairly close game before intermission, the Tar Heels erupted for four goals in the second half to hand Notre Dame (22-1-1) its only loss of the season.
The Tar Heels finished at 25-1-1, with their only loss coming against Duke and their tie against Notre Dame earlier in the season.
MEN'S SOCCER  Two Upsets as N.C.A.A.
Play Starts  Two big upsets marked the first round of the N.C.A.A.
Division I men's tournament yesterday.
North Carolina defeated host South Carolina, last year's runner-up, 1-0, on a goal by Mark Jonas in the 17th minute and fourth-seeded North Carolina-Charlotte suffered a 1-0 overtime loss to the College of Charleston.
Virginia, the defending by beat North Carolina-Greensboro, 3-0.
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Tennessee Takes Tip-Off Classic  Dana Johnson scored 10 points in a 14-2 run that started the second half yesterday, helping top-ranked Tennessee to a 69-62 victory over Louisiana Tech at the State Farm Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic in Jackson, Tenn.
The run pulled the Lady Vols (1-0) ahead, 45-32.
They built the cushion to 60-43 before the Lady Techsters took advantage of 5 turnovers to score 11 straight points and cut the lead to 60-54 with 47 seconds left.
Debra Williams, who finished with 23 points, had 5 during that run.
Louisiana Tech was forced to foul at that point, and point guard Michelle Marciniak hit 4 straight free throws to put Tennessee out of reach, 68-59, with 30 seconds left. (AP) FIELD HOCKEY  James Madison Triumphs in Overtime  Gwen Stoltzfus's shot in overtime clinched James Madison's 2-1 victory over top-ranked North Carolina for the N.C.A.A. field hockey championship yesterday in Brookline, Mass.
After two scoreless 15-minute overtimes, Stoltzfus clinched James Madison's first crown in the stroke-off when she beat North Carolina goalkeeper Jana Withrow with a hard, low shot.
The Dukes (20-3-1) won the shootout, 4-2.
No. 1 North Carolina finished 21-2. (AP) HORSE RACING  Tabasco Cat Up Track in Grass Debut  Tabasco Cat, the Preakness and Belmont Stakes winner, failed miserably in his first attempt at grass racing.
He finished eighth yesterday, more than six lengths behind the victorious River Flyer, in the $400,000 Hollywood Derby at Hollywood Park in Inglewood, Calif.
After settling into fourth place early in yesterday's mile-and-an-eighth race, Tabasco Cat, the 2-1 favorite with Pat Day aboard, found room to rally along the rail at the top of the stretch, but he had no punch and dropped back.
River Flyer, ridden by Chris Antley, won his fourth straight race on the turf in 1:472/5 and paid $10 for $2 to win.
Dare and Go took second.
GOLF  3 Weeks, 3 Championships for Ozaki  Jumbo Ozaki birdied the final hole yesterday for his third victory in three weeks, a one-shot triumph over Tom Watson in the Dunlop Phoenix event in Miyazaki, Japan.
The 47-year-old Ozaki came from behind with a seven-under-par 65, finishing at 15-under 201 in the tournament, which was shortened to 54 holes because of rain.
Watson missed three birdie putts in a row from less than 8 feet on the 15th, 16th and 17th holes and left a tying 25-foot eagle putt on the last hole 2 feet short. (AP) GYMNASTICS  Romanian Women First, U.S.
Second  Romania won the gymnastics world team championships yesterday in Dortmund, Germany, and the United States finished second despite the withdrawal of Shannon Miller, the world champion.
The Romanians took the gold with a combined score of 195.8476 to the United States' 194.645 and Russia's 194.546.
The silver medal was decided on the last routine as Dominique Dawes, the United States all-around champion celebrating her 18th birthday, turned in a 9.887 on the vault. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  St.
Anthony's Wins C.H.S.F.L.
Title  Tony Williams ran for 146 yards as St.
Anthony's rallied to defeat Chaminade, 21-18, in the C.H.S.F.L.
AAA-AA Championship yesterday at Hofstra University.
With his team trailing by 18-8 late in the third period, St.
Anthony's Shawn McDonald returned a kickoff 95 yards for a score.
On their next possession, the Friars drove 68 yards for the winning score.
Williams, who ran for 58 yards on the drive, scored the touchdown on a 1-yard plunge.
He also scored the 2-point conversion.
"When we were behind in the third, I knew we needed a quick strike to turn things around," said St.
Anthony Coach Richard Reichert.
"McDonald gave us that strike with the kickoff return." Chaminade's James Byrne threw for 197 yards and a touchdown.


Suit by 2 Partnerships Says Ousted Official Won't Give Up
Whoever coined the phrase "you can't take it with you," apparently never looked closely enough at Leonard Levine's career.
In September, Mr.
Levine, then president of two limited partnerships serviced by his real estate company, the Banyan Management Corporation, was dismissed by the partnerships' directors for what they said was conflict of interest.
But Mr.
Levine is far from out of their lives.


Nepal Votes Communist, But Few Seem Worried
Icons of Marx and Lenin are the decor of the hour in Nepal, where a reformist Communist Party has outpolled 23 other parties by taking more than 40 percent of the votes in a general election.
Well-wishers who thronged to the grimy backstreet headquarters of the Communist Party of Nepal (United Marxist-Leninist) today were ushered into rooms dominated by portraits and plaster busts of the Communist deities.
Even the wall clock was a flag-red, made-in-Moscow model, with a hammer and sickle on its face.


L.S.U. Has Its Eye on a Giants Aide
The Giants enter Monday night's game against the Houston Oilers as the losers of seven straight games.
Is it possible they could lose their defensive coordinator as well?
Sources on the Giants and in the National Football League said over the weekend that Mike Nolan, the highly respected 35-year-old defensive coordinator for the Giants, is a candidate to become the head coach at Louisiana State University.


Hang On, the Holidays Are Coming


Cutting Medicaid Will Not Be Easy
THERE is no debate about it.
New York's Medicaid system, the kudzu of health-care programs, needs pruning.
It is one of the most expensive and expansive Medicaid programs in the country, and Governor-elect George E. Pataki has pledged to cut it.
But how?
New York has done such a masterly job of wringing dollars out of the Federal Government, which pays half of all Medicaid bills, that the program has spawned a vigorous lobby of clients and providers.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Monday about companies that buy the life insurance policies of the terminally ill characterized the Transamerica Corporation's involvement in the business incorrectly.
Transamerica, through a subsidiary, only made loans to companies that buy the policies; its life insurance operations do not directly participate in that business.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about the sale of furniture from the Queen Elizabeth 2 at Salvation Army thrift stores misstated the origin of the ship's name and that of the original liner Queen Elizabeth.
The Queen Elizabeth was named for Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, not for the Tudor ruler.
The QE2 was named for the first liner.


Filing Raises New Questions About Borden
New information in a regulatory filing about Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company's proposed acquisition of Borden Inc. shows that a financial adviser to Borden had a $10 million incentive to complete the deal with Kohlberg, Kravis at the same time another suitor was trying to meet with the Borden board.
The filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission also suggests that the board did not seek counsel from its two financial advisers about the legal and legislative liabilities of tobacco when considering the proposed swap of Kohlberg, Kravis's RJR Nabisco stock for Borden.


The Measure of His Days


16 Completions and 3 Touchdowns Do the Job for Rice and the 49ers
49ers 31, Rams 27
Jerry Rice made up for a fourth-quarter fumble by catching his third touchdown pass from Steve Young, an 18-yarder with 1 minute 56 seconds left, as the San Francisco 49ers rallied to beat the Los Angeles Rams, 31-27, last night at Candlestick Park.


Young Democrats Brace For Life Beyond the Hill
The worst part of the way things are going in Congress nowadays, said Regina Wood, is the way Republicans keep barging into her office to size it up.
"It's a little disturbing that they don't wait until we're out," said Ms.
Wood, a 23-year-old staff assistant to the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, who was defeated by his Republican opponent after 32 years in Congress.
"They're bidding for our office space."


Army Critique By Young Gore
As a college student writing home to his father, Vice President Al Gore called the Army an example of "fascist, totalitarian regimes" in a letter described in the new issue of The New Yorker.
Mr.
Gore now dismisses that notion as "a college kid's silly language."
The letter was among others obtained by the magazine from Mr.
Gore's parents and described in its Nov. 28 issue.
After writing the letters, Mr.
Gore enlisted in the Army and served in the Vietnam War, an experience he now says "allowed me to shed that nonsense."


Melvin Eggers, 78, Syracuse University Chancellor
Melvin A. Eggers, the chancellor of Syracuse University from 1971 to 1991, died yesterday at his home in DeWitt, a suburb of Syracuse.
He was 78.
He had a long illness, said John Harvith, a spokesman for the university.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Federal Budget . . .
Oct.
Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Thursday  None  Friday  None


Mental Patient Is Accused of Killing Another
A man who by reason of insanity was acquitted of murder 10 years ago walked out of a state psychiatric center in Brooklyn Saturday evening, then, after returning almost 12 hours later, stabbed a fellow patient to death, most likely with a knife obtained while roaming the city, the police said.
The ease with which Daniel Alvarez, 48, escaped from the Kingsboro State Psychiatric Center and then was able to get a knife past officials raised new questions about the security and operation of the aging, state mental health center at 681 Clarkson Avenue in Flatbush.


World Economies


Takeover Fight Transfixes the Swiss
In Switzerland, discreet finance and genteel business manners are a way of life, and the rare corporate takeover is quietly handled behind closed doors.
But now the Swiss are getting their full share of a knock-down, drag-out fight over control of the country's largest financial institution, the Union Bank of Switzerland.
The bank is so big that its global assets nearly equal Switzerland's gross national product, but that has not put off Martin Ebner, a rich, brash Swiss financier whose actions are in the tradition of American takeover specialists like Carl C. Icahn and T. Boone Pickens.


In an Idea Town, Publications Rush to Fill Niches
A new crop of publications has sprouted here in the last year or so, a wide-ranging collection of quarterlies, bimonthlies and weeklies.
"Washington gets a lot of grief for being a cow town, but along with being slower paced, it's a more thoughtful place," said Steven G. Smith, editor of Civilization, a new bimonthly.
"It's a place that lends itself to reflection on issues and the nature of society. It's an ideal place to sit back and make sense of things."


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Asthma Zero Mortality Coalition, New York, and the National Medical Association, Washington, to Jerry &amp; Ketchum, New York.


A Rescue Goes Awry


A Peace Pact? Only If It's Genuine
The Likud movement firmly supports Israel's peace treaty with Jordan.
In Camp David as in Madrid, we sought an end to war.
What we seek today are peace agreements that will endure beyond the ceremonies of yesterday and those of tomorrow.
Happily, this is the prospect offered by the treaty with Jordan.
This peace is a blessing, yet it is not immediately obvious.
History is replete with examples of real peace alongside frequent examples of false peace.
Some peace agreements have pushed back war, others have ushered in the most horrific tragedies.


What Do You Read In a Prague Cafe?
To the Editor:
"In Prague, a New Daily for English Speakers" (news article, Nov. 14) repeats the claims of a new publication, The Bohemia Daily Standard, that the existing English-language weeklies in the Czech Republic "do not cover local or foreign news in depth." This is untrue.


Takeover Of Kemper Is Dropped
Unable to finance its proposed takeover of the Kemper Corporation and having seen its stock price plunge 27 percent since it made the offer, Conseco Inc. yesterday called off the $3.25 billion deal.
The move came after Citibank, the lead lender, indicated that it probably would not be able to finance even a lowered bid, one person close to the negotiations said.
Rising interest rates had made the loans needed to complete the deal more expensive while depressing the value of Kemper's brokerage and mutual fund businesses.


When a Composer Turns Opera Upside-Down
Robert Ashley's "Now Eleanor's Idea" is opera seen in a mirror.
Its musical stagecraft operates backward.
Here's one nice role reversal that runs through these four one-act pieces at the Brooklyn Academy of Music: Projected surtitles in the opera house ordinarily tell audiences what singers onstage are saying.
In Mr.
Ashley's scheme of things, surtitles appear as chapter headings or topics, often mysterious.
The performers fill you in on what they mean.


Essay; Self-Deportation?
The victory in California of the movement to deny schooling and medical services to illegal immigrants who are not actually bleeding to death is the first skirmish in the war on unwed welfare mothers.
That's because both Proposition 187 (punishing some 300,000 alien schoolchildren for the sins of their fathers) and the Gingrich approach to welfare reform (withholding support when unemployed single mothers have additional children) are based on this philosophy: the most cost-effective way to change behavior is to make life unbearable under present behavior.


INSIDE
USAir Takes Steps on Safety
Trying to reassure customers after five fatal crashes in five years, USAir is adding a safety director and has scheduled an independent audit of flight operations.
Page A10.
Urgency on Palestinian Aid
Self-rule leaders urged other countries to make good on aid pledges to address the poverty that is at the root of Gaza's tension.
Page A3.
Deal for Kemper Canceled
Conseco called off its $3.25 billion takeover of Kemper, after it was unable to finance the deal and saw its stock price plunge 27 percent since it made the offer.
Page D1.
Two Tests for Letterman
David Letterman faces the challenge tonight of proving himself and holding up a faltering network -- not once, but twice.
Page D1.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NUCLEAR DANGER FROM RUSSIA
Russian scientists have disclosed that for decades the country has been disposing of nuclear wastes by directly pumping them secretly into the earth, which is at odds with global safety standards.
A1


Cowboys Win One, Lose Two (Passers)
The Dallas Cowboys' suddenly fragile quarterback situation came down to this today at Texas Stadium: Tight end Jay Novacek was one injury away from playing quarterback for the first time since he earned all-state honors at Gothenburg High School in Nebraska.
Sound funny?
It wasn't to the Cowboys, who easily defeated the Redskins, 31-7, before 64,644, but saw Troy Aikman leave the game late in the second quarter with a sprained left knee and his backup, Rodney Peete, depart in the fourth quarter with a sprained right thumb.
The emergency third-string quarterback, Jason Garrett, seeing his first action of the season, survived until the finish.
If he had gone down, Novacek would have been called on to direct the Cowboys' offense.


Death Outruns a Play From 1977
"You get tired of keeping it all inside," says a terminally ill man in "The Shadow Box," the Michael Cristofer play that has been revived at the Circle in the Square Theater, "but it's like nobody wants to hear about it."
In 1977, when "The Shadow Box" opened on Broadway, American audiences generally didn't want to hear much about their own mortality, and certainly not in clinically specific terms.
Mr.
Cristofer's play, which portrayed three cancer patients facing death in a California hospice, seemed to represent a significant breakthrough in subject matter if not in form.
While critics expressed reservations about its dramatic contrivances, nearly everyone agreed it was a moving and worthy effort, and it won a Pulitzer Prize.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Gap Inc Genuine Parts Co PHH Corp TUESDAY  Beckton Dickinson &amp; Co Bell Atlantic Corp Bre Pptys Inc Calmat Co Century Tel Enterp Conn Nat Gas Cousins Pptys Inc Ethyl Corp Kellwood Co New England Elec Sys Westvaco Corp WEDNESDAY  Foxmeyer Corp New Pennsylvania Pwr&amp;Lt Co Sbarro Inc Washington Natl Corp


CBS Hopes That Letterman Can Help Prime-Time Woes
For David Letterman, who revolutionized late-night television a year ago, the pressure to keep winning is unrelenting.
Tonight he faces the challenge of simultaneously proving himself and holding up a faltering network -- not once, but twice.
"We recognize that we have to keep on hammering," Mr.
Letterman said in a telephone interview late last week.
"We don't want anybody to take it away from us."


Rightist Coalition Falters In Local Italian Elections
More than 2.6 million Italians voted today in local elections, and early computer projections seemed to confirm that Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and his Forza Italia party had lost some glitter since the party came to power in March.
The ballot for mayors and local councils in 242 cities and towns involved just over one-twentieth of Italy's 47 million voters.
The political battle was fought on matters ranging from the allure of local personalities to national issues.


In 'Jihad in America,' Food for Uneasiness
The review tape of "Jihad in America" was heralded by a complaint from the Council on American-Islamic Relations, a Muslim organization in Washington, that PBS had denied requests by Arab and Muslim journalists to screen the program in advance of tonight's scheduled showing at 10:10 P.M. on Channel 13.
The council charged that Steven Emerson, the documentary's executive producer, had shown animus toward the Palestinian cause as a journalist and was promoting "a wild theory about an Islamic terrorist network in America."
Whatever the predilections of Mr.
Emerson, who has made a specialty of investigating Muslim fundamentalist terrorism, the protesters' concerns prove understandable (which is not to say the pressure to change or cancel the documentary was justified), since "Jihad in America" is likely to awaken viewers' unease over what some some Muslim groups here may be up to.


In California, Uncertainty Chills Illegal Aliens
She said that her name was Maria R. and that she had slipped across the border from Mexico three years ago, without immigration documents but with the hope of finding work and making a better life, even if it was the furtive life of an illegal alien.
No one, she said, had ever asked her for any proof of legal residence.
In her world, she explained, one does not go where people ask questions.


THEATER
Searching for Answers In a Topless Club  Manhattan Class Company
The mysteries of life, death and survival in the city, of friendships among women and relationships between the sexes, are explored by an excellent cast in Jacquelyn Reingold's "Girl Gone."


Patents; Through Genetic Engineering, Soil Bacteria Develop An Appetite for Sulfur and Help Clean Up Fossil Fuels
GENETIC engineering is frequently used to create drugs or practice biomedicine.
Now a Texas company has patented a recombinant gene that it hopes will help eliminate acid rain.
When sulfur is burned, sulfur oxides are produced; when these are released into the atmosphere they mix with rain, snow or mist and become sulfuric acid.
This falls back to earth to pollute lakes, kill plants and even eat the paint off cars.
A good deal of sulfur gets into the skies through the emissions of power plants, cars, trucks, trains or ships and other devices that burn fossil fuel.


Erwin Griswold Is Dead at 90; Served as a Solicitor General
Erwin N. Griswold, the United States Solicitor General under two Presidents, and for more than 20 years dean of the Harvard Law School, died on Saturday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 90.
Mr.
Griswold was a resident of Belmont, Mass., and Washington.
The Harvard Law School announced his death on Saturday night, but the cause was not given.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Conseco called off its $3.25 billion takeover of Kemper.
The move came after Citibank, the lead lender, indicated that it probably would not be able to finance even a lowered bid, one person close to the negotiations said.  [ Page D1. ]
Sony and Matsushita have charted different paths into movie making, and at different paces.
And the race has not gone to the swiftest.
The flashy Sony has reported big losses on its studios, while the cautious Matsushita has enjoyed profits.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Wednesday about a communications satellite system planned by TRW Inc. and Teleglobe Inc. incorrectly referred to the venture.
It is a partnership that will use 12 satellites; it is not a 12-company partnership.


Yet More Intraparty Strife Among Republicans, This Time in the City Council
For a while, they seemed a fairly merry little band of legislators.
But through a combination of smoldering animosities and the fallout from other political feuds, the seven Republicans on the City Council are demonstrating that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Governor-elect George E. Pataki are not alone in bitter bickering within their party.
The dispute erupted openly last week over the position of minority leader on the Council.
Since February, the position has been held by Michael J. Abel, a Republican from Bayside, Queens, who supports Mr.
Giuliani.
But last week Thomas V. Ognibene, a Conservative who represents Middle Village and Glendale in Queens, declared himself the new minority leader after gathering the signatures of four of the Council's seven Republicans on a petition.


After 30 Months of Nearly No Luck, Sabatini Finally Gets All the Breaks
In less than two hours yesterday, Gabriela Sabatini ended two and a half years of frustration.
Sabatini broke the serve of Lindsay Davenport 10 times in 14 games, in one stretch breaking the teen-ager six times in a row, en route to a 6-3, 6-2, 6-4 victory in the final of the season-ending Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden.


U.S. to Sell Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's auctions of two-year notes and three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, the Government will auction five-year notes.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.33 percent and on the six-month bill, 5.78 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 7.28 percent and the five-year at a rate to yield 7.81 percent.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; When the 'Best' Must Be the 'Best' One More Time
When the Jets had to win, they produced their best game this season and their best game in Boomer Esiason's two seasons.
But with first place in the American Conference East at stake next Sunday against the Miami Dolphins at "the Meadowlands," the Jets now must play that "best game" again in order for yesterday's 31-21 triumph over the Vikings to mean much.


School Board To Face Cuts Of 800 More
In response to continuing budget cuts by City Hall, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines plans to reduce the Board of Education's administrative staff by additional 800 employees by June, a board official said yesterday.
As a result, the central staff will have been cut by about a third since the beginning of this year -- almost as much as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has demanded.
Mr.
Cortines is to announce the reductions in testimony this morning before the City Council, which is holding hearings on the effects of Mayor Giuliani's plan to close a $1.1 billion gap in the city's budget for the current fiscal year.
The Mayor has called for a $190 million cut to the school system.


An Airline Fears Cairo Will Kill It With Rules
Amir Zarkani set out 13 years ago to establish a private airline company in Egypt.
But like many businessmen who have tried to buck government monopolies, he feels that he is being driven out of business by capricious regulations intended to safeguard the Government-owned Egypt Air.
The latest campaign against the ZAS airline illustrates why significant foreign investment still eludes Egypt and why the huge state corporations continue to dominate 80 percent of the Egyptian economy.
More important, it highlights the lucrative concessions paid by Government-owned industries to relatives of high officials, including the two sons of President Hosni Mubarak, and the lavish salaries paid to the managers of these industries, although many are losing money.


STEEL PRICE DISPUTE CONTINUES WITH AUTO MAKER
The automotive and steel industries continue to argue about price increases.
The trade journal Automotive News reported yesterday that the General Motors Corporation had broken off steel pricing talks with an important supplier, the Inland Steel Company.
But other people close to the negotiations said yesterday that the companies were back at the bargaining table.
The demand for steel is booming this year, and steel companies are trying to improve their profitability by pushing through price increases.
Earlier this year, the Chrysler Corporation signed agreements that steel industry consultants said included percentage increases averaging in the high single digits.


Stocks Dive Steeply in Last Minutes of Trading
For much of yesterday, stock prices simply drifted downward for the third session in a row, but then suddenly plunged headlong in the last 15 minutes of trading.
A closely watched price index fell below a critical level, setting off computer programs to sell huge blocks of shares.
"Don't just blame the computers, though," said Todd Clark, senior director of equities trading at Mabon Securities Inc.
"There was real selling going on here by human beings, and the computers came in at the end."


Pier 1 Hunts For a Media Buyer
Pier 1 Imports Inc. said yesterday that it was searching for an advertising or media services agency to handle a new national broadcast buying account.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $30 million.


COOPER INDUSTRIES PLANS PURCHASE AND MERGER
Cooper Industries said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with Abex Inc. to acquire the Abex Friction Products division for $207.4 million in cash.
Abex Friction Products, based in Winchester, Va., produces asbestos-free brake friction materials for passenger cars, light trucks, heavy-duty trucks and off-road vehicles.
Revenues for this year are expected to total about $160 million.
Abex Friction Products will become part of Cooper's Automotive Products segment.
Cooper makes automotive products including Anco windshield wipers, Champion spark plugs and Moog chassis parts.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.43
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.33
3.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.85
5.78
3.30
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
8.00
5.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.12
8.12
6.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.94
7.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.36
7.35
5.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Pivotal Day for Talks To Save Hockey Season
Today could be a pivotal day in the 53-day National Hockey League lockout.
Bargainers will meet early this morning in Boston to try to save the season.
Negotiations between the two sides broke off around 11 P.M. last night after a seven-hour session.
If no agreement is reached today, it is expected they will be recessed until after the Thanksgiving holiday.


Carjacking Defendant Says Victim Is Lying
In an uncommon display of irritation on the witness stand, Edward L. Summers today called the surviving victim of a January carjacking a liar and a fraud for telling authorities that Mr.
Summers had commandeered the Jeep and murdered its driver.
However, when Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, asked him to enumerate the lies that Scott Nappi, wounded in the carjacking, told in his testimony, Mr.
Summers seemed to focus on relative trivia.


With Cuomo's Loss, Speaker Is Top Democrat in Albany
The day after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was defeated and Congress changed hands and the world seemed lost for Democrats, Sheldon Silver got on the phone.
Mr.
Silver, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, called his 94 remaining Democratic members.
He called the four incumbents who lost their seats.
He called party leaders across the state and, and in his deep and fatherly monotone, reassured them.


By Design; Like a Corset, Only Less So
Back in Victorian days, the lady's maid laced her mistress into a corset to give her the hourglass figure that fashion dictated.
Now designers build corselets right into party dresses (after all, who has a personal maid?).
And because women today don't want to suffer too much discomfort to be fashionable, the corselet dresses depend more on clever seaming than on stiff boning to slenderize the torso.
Bloomingdale's has all kinds of bustiers, corselets and corselet dresses in its windows this week. (There's even a corselet swimsuit by Gottex in silver or gold for $126 that can actually go in the water.)


Agent Shoots Man With Knife on Subway
An F.B.I. agent shot a knife-wielding passenger on a subway train in lower Manhattan yesterday after the agent ordered him to drop the knife and the man continued to approach the agent, law enforcement officials said.
The man, identified as Joseph Santulli, 43, of Brooklyn, was hit in the stomach by one bullet from the agent's 9-millimeter pistol.
Mr.
Santulli was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital, where he underwent surgery and was in critical condition last night in the intensive-care unit.


Mercy Killing in Canada Stirs Calls for Changes in Law
The second-degree murder conviction of a Saskatchewan farmer in the death of his disabled daughter has kindled debate in Canada about mercy killing and has increased pressure for changes in the law to soften such judgments in the future.
Robert Latimer's daughter Tracy, 12, was in near-constant pain from the severe cerebral palsy she was born with.
Diaper-clad and weighing 38 pounds, she could not walk, talk or feed herself.


McWhorter Technologies Inc.(MWT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Renewed Modern: More of a Museum Or More Modern?
Gertrude Stein is supposed to have said, "A museum can either be a museum or it can be modern, but it cannot be both." That has been the Museum of Modern Art's dilemma for all of its 65 years, and it is truer today than it ever was.
How is the archetypal museum of the 20th century to survive into the 21st?
Or to put it as Stein might have, how can the Modern remain modern after modernism?


Film-Preview Channel Set
The New York Times Company and the Torstar Corporation, the parent company of The Toronto Star, said yesterday that they were developing a cable network called the Popcorn Channel.
The companies said the network, which is scheduled to start at the end of the first quarter of 1995, would show previews of new motion pictures.
In addition, it will use the bottom portion of television screens for local movie theater listings, showing when and where movies are playing near subscribers' homes.
The companies have not yet decided how local the listings will be, a spokeswoman for the Times Company said.


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oneita Industries(ONA,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Jets Have Linked Up Their Psychic Hot Line
Finally, Esiason-to-Mitchell.
It took 11 games, psychological counseling and tarot card readings by Boomer's sister, but quarterback and tight end each produced his biggest game of the season.


Goldman, Sachs to Cut Bonuses Sharply
In the latest evidence of growing distress on Wall Street, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company announced yesterday that it would slash the annual bonuses that it doles out to most of its employees.
In a memo circulated to Goldman's 9,200 personnel around the world, the investment firm said secretaries, assistants and other support staff would receive only 8 percent of their salaries as a year-end bonus, the lowest percentage since the early 1970's.


Homedco Group (HOME,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Ciba-Geigy agreed to buy a 49.9 percent stake in Chiron for $2.1 billion.
The deal, which ends two weeks of market speculation, would give Chiron financial and technical resources, while providing the Swiss company a pipeline of future products.  [ Page D1. ]


Sports of The Times; The Bullets May Now Be Loaded
AMONG the sellout throng of over 18,000 to see the Bullets-Celtics game in the USAir Arena in Landover, Md., Saturday night, sat a man in sweater and sneakers, a laborer from Detroit.
This was Mayce Edward Christopher Webber Jr. who, like most of those in the crowd, had come to observe the two newest and hottest acquisitions of the Washington Bullets basketball team.
One was his eldest son and namesake, the 22-year-old multimillionaire Chris 3d, and the other, Juwan Howard, a former classmate of Chris's from the University of Michigan, or, in basketball argot, 40 percent of the Fab Five.


Concord Fabrics Inc.(CIS,A) reports earnings for Year to Aug 28


Jurors Find Couple Guilty In Bank Fraud
A Federal jury today found Robert and Susanna Scaretta guilty of using their armored car company to defraud several major banks of more than $30 million to pay off the couple's Atlantic City gambling debts.
Mr.
Scaretta, who had been free on $500,000 bail, was ordered to jail immediately by Judge Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court here, pending sentencing.


Predictability With Surprises
Perhaps the key to the success of Ellen Taaffe Zwilich's music is its predictability.
Normally, that would not seem an ideal attribute for new music, but Ms.
Zwilich's work appears to proceed from the assumption that too much has been made of the need for novelty, and that listeners actually hate being entirely in the dark.
So in her Concerto for Violin and Orchestra, which was given its New York premiere at a New York Chamber Symphony concert at the 92d Street Y on Saturday evening, listeners could tap their feet without tripping on many rhythmic snares, and could usually guess how stretches of the piece would play themselves out.
But Ms.
Zwilich also played a competing card.
By avoiding standard structural forms and allowing her two movements to unfold episodically, she retained occasional elements of surprise.


Terror Conspiracy Trial Delayed
A Federal judge yesterday again postponed the terror conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 11 other men, accused of plotting to blow up New York City landmarks in a war of urban terrorism against the United States.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey, who will preside in the case, said at a hearing yesterday that the trial, in which jury selection had been scheduled to begin next Monday, would start on Jan. 9.


Where's 42d St. Grit? Around the Corner; Slow Change Along Eighth Ave. Strip
Come midnight, Eighth Avenue in midtown is a street of neon thrills, lurking dangers and impossible expectation, a Felliniesque montage where a group of giggling theatergoers crowds into a peep booth to have something to talk about on the ride home.
But there is pain in the face of the old man jiggling two quarters in a paper cup, and an odd frenzy in the voice of a man passing out handbills for a topless bar.
Doris Brown, a 41-year-old prostitute looking for business across from the Port Authority Bus Terminal recently, said life wasn't getting any easier.


Bank United of Texas FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brown Group Inc.(BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
N.C.A.A. Tournament
The Atlantic Coast Conference justified one more time its reputation as the strongest league in the country.
Four of the five teams from the conference survived the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Ukraine Leader, Dogged by Economic Woes, to Meet Clinton
When the Ukrainian leader, Leonid Kuchma, meets with President Clinton at the White House on Tuesday, he will very likely be praised for moving in the last month to reform the economy and to persuade his truculent Parliament to rid the nation of nuclear weapons.
The Parliament's ratification last week of the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear arms means that the long-sought goal of eliminating those weapons is a done deal.
But living up to tough economic conditions set by the International Monetary Fund last month is hitting road blocks.


Tadiran Ltd.(TAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chekhov Through a New Dimension
Nearly 20 years after its inception, the Wooster Group is looking eerily prophetic.
The company, a longtime bastion of downtown hipness for experimental theater devotees, has always specialized in mixed-media collages that reflect a world of ever-shifting, technologically generated ephemera.
Today, of course, this is the stuff, however unwittingly, of mainstream entertainment.
People go the racetrack to watch the races on televisions positioned in trees.
At rock concerts, an audience's attention wanders between what's onstage and the close-ups of performers on giant monitors.
And in Broadway musicals, mechanized amplification has made it increasingly difficult to tell from which actors the voices are coming.


World News Briefs; U.N. Chief Asks Troops for Rwandans
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in a report, urged the Security Council today to send up to 12,000 troops to counter the growing violence from armed gangs in camps for Rwandan refugees in Zaire and Burundi.
The gangs are said to consist largely of soldiers of the defeated Rwandan Army.
United Nations officials have said that as many as 30,000 of these former soldiers and the militias allied with them may be in the camps controlling the distribution of food and relief supplies and terrorizing the hundreds of thousands of refugees living there.


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York City's Budget Cuts
The New York City budget for the current year is at least $1 billion out of balance.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has proposed cuts to balance it, and City Council members seem ready to accept his overall estimate.
But they do not accept each and every cut he would make to reach that total, especially cuts in social service programs.
Negotiations to resolve their differences are under way -- in secret.
Past practice indicates that a settlement will be reached and immediately approved with no more than a momentary public glimpse of what was agreed.
Given the huge impact of cutting so much from programs that have already been cut once this year, the public deserves thorough hearings on the agreement and the rationale behind its cuts.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Senator Bob Dole's linking of support for a world trade pact to a cut in the capital gains tax referred incorrectly in some editions to the relationship between a tax cut and a change in Federal budget rules.
If the overall economic effects of a tax cut are counted in a manner suggested by Republicans, it can be enacted without matching cuts in Federal spending.


The Right Thinkers: Some Voices in the New Political Conversation
It was only two years ago that the hottest think tanks, the most sought-after strategists and the most visible political organizations were the ones devoted to charting bold new directions for the "New Democrats." They talked about "third ways" and "reinventing government." They talked about spending government money -- "strategically," of course.
No more.


Simpson Hearing Delayed
A hearing was postponed today on whether the wife of Lance A. Ito, the judge in the O. J. Simpson trial, should be called as a witness.


Bombed in New Haven
Have you been invited to speak at next year's Yale Daily News banquet?
Before you accept, let me tell you about my experience as this year's guest speaker.
Though my idea of a good time is not giving a free speech 300 miles from home on a Saturday night, The Yale Daily News was a big part of my life, so I said sure.
I'd been the guest speaker before; it was great fun and a chance to meet bright and interesting seniors and juniors.


Williams-Sonoma Inc.(WSGC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


G.O.P. Splits on Dole Threat on Trade Pact
Republicans split today over the decision of Senator Bob Dole of Kansas to hold a worldwide trade agreement hostage to tax concessions from the White House.
While a prominent Republican strategist warned against the move, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, a supporter of the pact, said he would not interfere with Mr.
Dole's effort.
Meanwhile, Democrats worried that the uncertainty over whether the Senate would ultimately approve the pact could erode support for the agreement in the House, where it previously seemed headed for an easy victory.


Chess
Tournaments and matches with predesignated openings were not uncommon a century ago, but they are rare nowadays.
One current exception was the Polugayevsky Tournament in Buenos Aires, Oct. 12 to 31.
In this event, sponsored by the Dutch entrepreneur Joop Van Oosterom to celebrate the 60th birthday of the Russian grandmaster Lev Polugayevsky, everyone had to play the open lines of the Sicilian Defense in every game, and, of course, with White, they had to start with 1 e4 and cooperate to create Sicilians.
Both the site and the choice of opening came at the request of the honored guest, Polugayevsky, who has been famous throughout his career for adopting the Sicilian and has a major variation of it named for him.


Gene Technique Could Shape Future Generations
For the first time, a scientist has developed a technique that can allow the alteration of genes in sperm, passing the changes to the animal's progeny.
It is a development, ethicists say, that brings the brave new world of gene manipulation hurtling closer and raises troubling questions about what science has wrought and how society should deal with new technologies that have enormous potential for relieving human suffering but also have enormous potential for misuse.


Does Ordinary Baker's Yeast Hold Secret to Curing Common Cold?
ORDINARY baker's yeast may harbor a cure for the common cold, according to a scientist who says he made the discovery by accident.
Hidden in the genetic machinery of yeast is a newly discovered molecule that prevents cold viruses from replicating inside human cells, said Dr.
Asim Dasgupta, a professor of microbiology and immunology at the University of California in Los Angeles.
When this molecule is diffused into human cells -- so far this has been done only in a laboratory dish -- the virus is stopped dead in its tracks; it can no longer spread to other cells, he said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Purchased the contracts of Matt Karchner and Isidro Marquez, pitchers, from Nashville of the American Association; Mike Bertotti, pitcher, Chris Tremie, catcher, and Chris Snopek, infielder, from Birmingham of the Southern League; and Jimmy Hurst, outfielder, from Prince William of the Carolina League.


Coram Healthcare Corp.(CRH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Children Find Their Parents Slain in Home
A 6-year-old girl and her 4-year-old brother woke this morning to discover their parents dead in an apparent murder-suicide, the New Haven police said.
The girl then dialed 911 for help.
"Under the circumstances, the children are doing remarkably well," said Lieut.
Robert Lawlor, who is conducting the investigation.
"They were counseled by members of the Yale Child Study Team and they are now with their maternal grandmother."


Hayes Wheels Int'l.(HAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Market Place; As Kemper's crown jewel fades, so do hopes of a high sale price.
SO, Conseco Inc. could not raise the cash to buy the Kemper Corporation for $60 a share, much less the $67 Conseco originally bid.
So what?
After all, General Electric offered $55 a share last March, and other insurance companies are said to be interested.
All an investor has to do is wait for the white knight, right?


Honda Motor Co.(HMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Computer Systems Inc.(NLCS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Dolphins' Offense Is One Jets' Defense Could Love
With two consecutive losses, and an important game Sunday against the Jets, the Miami Dolphins appear to be doing a fade hauntingly similar to the five-game losing streak that ended last season.
But one element is different this time: Dan Marino is still healthy.
The quarterback is just not getting Marino-like results.
The passing yardage is still there, as Miami's No. 1 ranking in National Football League offense attests.
But the touchdowns have stopped flowing.


3 Killed in High-Speed Crash After a Party in Manhattan
Hurtling through the darkness at 100 miles an hour after a night of partying for a friend facing drug charges, a driver with a suspended license lost control of a car on the Henry Hudson Parkway early yesterday, the police said.
He and two companions died when the vehicle bounced off a curb, flew into the air, ricocheted off a tree at a height of 15 feet, spun around and hurtled another 25 feet into a second tree.
Two other occupants of the vehicle were critically injured.


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust (MRT,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Mahler Goes on Trial: Genius or Fraud or Both?
It was partly in jest that on Sunday in Weill Recital Hall an English journalist named Norman Lebrecht accused America of manslaughter in the death of Gustav Mahler. ("I assume you will be calling in Professor Dershowitz for the defense," he said.) But in a startling, often gripping symposium that gathered some of the world's most important Mahler scholars at Carnegie Hall over the weekend, the image of a trial did not seem completely out of place.
Speaker after speaker found villains and victims in what seemed, at first glance, to be a rather sober academic topic: "Mahler in America, 1907-1911."
Like one of those ersatz folk melodies in a Mahler symphony that soon grow into a heaven-storming exclamation, there was a lot going on in the period defined in that title.
Those were the years, after all, in which Mahler composed his late, death-haunted masterpieces: "Das Lied von der Erde," the Ninth Symphony and the unfinished 10th.
In 1907, he was at the peak of his career, but was stunned by the death of his young daughter, the diagnosis that he had an often fatal heart condition and the continuing anti-Semitism in Vienna.


Region News Briefs; Prosecutor Says Officials Took Developer's Bribes
Three former Brookhaven officials accepted thousands of dollars in cash and deals on cars from a developer, John McNamara, in exchange for supporting his projects, a Federal prosecutor said today in opening arguments at the trial of the officials.
Mr.
McNamara is expected to be the chief prosecution witness against the three, Donald Zimmer, 60, and Anthony Losquadro, 54, former town board members, and Anthony Aliperti, 56, a former planning board member.


L. T. Provides the Inspiration Again
Thirteen mostly brilliant National Football League seasons weren't enough for Lawrence Taylor to forget the one that frustrated him the most.
That was in 1983, when the Giants labored through a 3-12-1 campaign in Bill Parcells's first year as head coach.
It was the memory of that dismal campaign that brought the Hall of Fame-bound linebacker to the Astrodome tonight in an attempt to scold the Giants out of a seven-game losing streak.
Taylor may have retired, but he still feels a part of the Giant family and this Giants team.
That's why he came to Houston this weekend and asked Dan Reeves if he could speak to the team before it took the field for tonight's game against the Oilers.


Browns Have Power, but Not Performance
Some Cleveland Browns sat at their lockers wearing a mean scowl, slowly cutting tape from their ankles.
Some sat staring aimlessly at the floor.
Others shuffled about the locker room, speaking to no one and making it clear that they were not to be spoken to.
You would have thought that the Browns had just lost the Super Bowl.


Pulling Punches; NATO Hits Serbs, But Not Too Hard
By military standards, the NATO attack carried out today against a Serbian-controlled air base in Croatia was the equivalent of a nasty note.
The air strike, trumpeted by NATO as the biggest in the alliance's brief combat history, involved 39 attack and reconnaissance planes from four nations.
The targets were hit.
There were no allied casualties.


Biochem Pharma
Shares of Biochem Pharma Inc., a Canadian drug company, established a new 52-week high of $13.625 in Nasdaq trading before closing at $12.75, up $1.125.
Over the weekend, Biochem announced promising, but still preliminary, results for an anti-AIDS treatment.


Well, Somebody Had to Win: Giants Snap Streak
Lawrence Taylor -- yes, that L. T. -- was on the Giants' sideline for tonight's monumental Monday night game with the Houston Oilers.
He cheered.
He high-fived.
He even did a little coaching.
There was, however, one thing he didn't do: block for quarterback Dave Brown.
Who knows, maybe if Giants Coach Dan Reeves turned to the greatest linebacker of all time and asked him to go into the game and block for Brown he could have done a better job than the linemen did.
That didn't happen, and a blown assignment led to Oiler linebacker Lamar Lathon getting a 10-yard head start before smacking Brown under the chin with his helmet, hitting him so hard Brown's helmet almost came off.


3 Planes Make Emergency Landings
Two commuter planes made emergency landings at Philadelphia International Airport today within 15 minutes of each other.
"We didn't even have to move our emergency equipment," said an airport spokesman, Mark Pesce.
"It stayed right there on the runway and waited for the second plane." Both planes landed without any trouble, he said.


INSIDE
U.S. Indicts Chinatown Gang
In what officials called a blow to the last of the traditional criminal gangs in Chinatown, 33 suspected members of the Flying Dragons were indicted on racketeering charges.
Page B1.
Living the 5th Century Life
An isolated Siberian tribe lives much as it has for 1,500 years, offering archeologists clues about early Arctic peoples.
Science Times, page C1.
Math and Molecules
Using DNA as a personal computer, a scientist gets a quick answer to the possible paths between seven points.
Science Times, page C1.
Banned Company Seeks Job
A company barred from seeking New York City contracts after the 1980's corruption scandals may get a $17 million transit contract.
Page B1.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $125 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes, which are noncallable, carry an interest rate of 7.68 percent and are priced at par.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., said its G.E.
Aircraft Engines unit had been awarded a $200 million, 10-year engine maintenance contract by Continental Airlines for the overhaul and repair of the airline's new G.E. engines.
PHYSICIAN CORP.
OF AMERICA, Miami, a managed health care company, agreed to buy Health Plus Inc., a health maintenance organization in Puerto Rico, for about $20 million.


Sudan's Long Civil War Threatening to Spread
The battle front is almost invisible here, lost in an endless expanse of lush green elephant grass of the southern Sudan and marked only by the muddy meander of the Aswa River as it meets the White Nile.
Yet in trenches less than a mile and a half apart, the Sudan's 11-year-old civil war continues, with rebels and Government troops pounding each other with artillery, mortars and heavy machine guns.


House Appointee Favors Tobacco Over Health; Butt Out
To the Editor:
Peter F. Vallone, New York City Council Speaker, in attempting to impose on New Yorkers the most oppressive antismoking law in the country, personifies the meanness of government and its interference in people's lives, which has been overwhelmingly rejected by the voters.


Nasdaq Proposes Changes Aimed at Individual Investor
The National Association of Securities Dealers announced changes in its system yesterday that are expected to make it easier for individual investors to get better prices when they buy and sell Nasdaq stocks.
In some cases, the changes will make it easier for investors to trade directly with each other, rather than only with brokers, who are called market makers.


CLINTON IS OPEN TO RABIN'S PLEAS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel went to the White House today and came away with firm commitments from President Clinton for most everything he sought: generous foreign aid, further military assistance and the prospect of American peacekeeping troops in the Golan Heights should Israel and Syria make peace.
But even Mr.
Clinton's firmest commitment is shakier these days, as Republicans assume control of the foreign aid purse strings in Congress.
And so the usual exchange of praise at today's session was followed by something new: a defense of the Middle East peace talks against a pointed attack by the prospective chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Jesse Helms of North Carolina.


Biologists Master the Treetops, The Real Scene of Forest Action
FROM the treetops of the Pacific Northwest to the heights of the steamy Sri Lankan jungle, biologists can be found heading upwards in record numbers into the forest canopies to mine the richness of this once remote habitat.
Previously restricted to intrepid climbers willing to risk life and limb, the frontier of the canopy has in the last decade opened to many who instead float through the upper reaches of the forest on dirigibles or take rides similar to ski lifts.
Others can now explore it easily from towers, platforms and giant cranes.
And with these new, somewhat less death-defying methods available, researchers say they have at last begun to paint a more scientifically rigorous picture of this world.


Q&amp;A
Tiny Bubbles
Q.
Do some beverages raise blood alcohol levels faster than others with the same alcohol content?


Crew Member Dies as Coal Ship Burns


Bob Dole, Trade Bully
Senator Bob Dole, the next majority leader, is exploiting his new political power by withholding approval of a world trade agreement that has taken seven years to negotiate.
One reason, he says, is that the accord will threaten American sovereignty.
That at least sounds noble, though Mr.
Dole is wrong.
His other reason is narrow and crass.
As he told ABC on Sunday, he may block the trade accord unless the Administration swallows a cut in the tax on capital gains -- the profit from selling stocks, bonds and other investments.
Mr.
Dole's behavior mirrors what the electorate decisively rejected two weeks ago: politicians who say they stand for one set of principles but act according to another.
The Republican Party has proudly put the U.S. in the forefront of nations negotiating for open trade and investment.
Mr.
Dole supported past free-trade pacts because he recognized that they contributed mightily to world growth.
The new accord would give the U.S. economy alone a boost of between $70 billion and $200 billion a year.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gingrich May Delay School Prayer Vote
After protests from fellow Republicans over the idea of an early Congressional vote on school prayer, Representative Newt Gingrich seemed to soften his position on the issue today.
"I'm certainly negotiable on deciding at what point we move to a vote on school prayer," Mr.
Gingrich, who is expected to become Speaker of the House in January, said at an airport news conference here.


NATO Pushes Back on Bosnia
Serbian forces may now take NATO enforcement of United Nations resolutions on Bosnia a bit more seriously.
In contrast to the pinprick air strikes of recent months, waves of NATO aircraft bombed an airfield yesterday in Udbina, Croatia, that the Serbs were using to launch attacks against the besieged Bosnian city of Bihac.
Still, the Udbina mission was intentionally limited to cratering the airfield, leaving Serbian planes and fuel dumps intact.
NATO also avoided targeting the Serbs' artillery, which poses a more immediate threat to Bihac.


No Headline
"My landlady wanted somebody who could pay the rent. It doesn't make her a porn queen; it makes her a business person." -- RICK TRAVIS, owner of an Eighth Avenue sex shop.  [ B4:6. ]


Top International Trade Official Urges U.S. to Approve Accord
Failure by the United States Senate to ratify the proposed new global trade agreement, the world's top trade official said yesterday, would destroy the existing world trading order, return international commerce to "the law of the jungle" and deprive the world of an estimated $500 billion in economic gains by the year 2005.
Addressing a press conference at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, the official, Peter Sutherland, who heads the Geneva organization that regulates international commerce, said it was inconceivable to him that the Senate could reject an accord that has been supported by both Republican and Democratic administrations.


The Dances of Norway
Dinna Bjorn, the artistic director of the Norwegian National Ballet of Oslo, and Fredrik Rutter, the director of the Nye Carte Blanche of Bergen, are to be featured in "An Afternoon of Norwegian Dance" on Dec. 7 at 3 P.M. in the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
The program, which includes lectures, demonstrations and films, is part of Art Norway, a festival produced by the library in collaboration with the Edvard Grieg Society.
Information: (212) 870-1605.


Arafat Says He Means to Wield Control
Yasir Arafat summoned thousands of his supporters into Gaza's streets today to deliver a blunt message to violence-scarred Palestinians that he has political control and intends to keep it.
To drive that point home, hundreds of young men came heavily armed to a rally organized by Mr.
Arafat's Fatah faction, some firing automatic rifles in the air and warning Islamic militants that if challenged, they were ready to fight.


Smucker (J.M.) Co.(SJM.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.(CIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins Bring 20 Years of Letters to Life
"Vita and Virginia" is an evening in need of a playwright.
It has two fascinating characters, the British writers Vita Sackville-West and Virginia Woolf.
It has two superb actresses, Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins, to portray them.
And it has a wealth of material to draw upon: the letters, prickly with intelligence and passion, that the women exchanged for some 20 years, beginning in the early 1920's, when Vita first took a fancy to the older author.


138 Nations Confer in Italy On Rise in Global Crime
In a city as famed for its gangsters as its pizza chefs, a group of government ministers and crime fighters from 138 countries gathered here today for a United Nations conference aimed at forging a united front against the increasingly widespread menace of international crime.
"Organized crime has become a world phenomenon," Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said in an address to the conference.
"In Europe, in Asia, in Africa and in America, the forces of darkness are at work and no society is spared."


Talbots Inc.(TLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Ciba-Geigy Deal With Chiron Set
Continuing the consolidation of pharmaceuticals and biotechnology companies, Ciba-Geigy Ltd. of Basel, Switzerland, agreed today to acquire a 49.9 percent stake in the Chiron Corporation for about $2.1 billion, or $117 a share.
Chiron is one of only a handful of profitable biotechnology companies, and it was the second-largest remaining independent, after Amgen Inc.
But Chiron shares have fallen in recent months, amid a general decline for biotechnology stocks and concern about a forthcoming rival to its drug for multiple sclerosis.


Brown-Forman Corp.(BF.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Field of Dreams Is an Unfinished Lawn; Baseball Strike Is Bringing a Pause at The House That Kent Built
There are windows that stretch from floor to ceiling in the living room, a deep green carpet -- and nothing else.
The front room is empty.
So are three bedrooms upstairs.
The master bedroom, in the back, has a bed with no headboard, an ironing board and a basket, and a tiny stand for a television set.
There is laundry on the floor.
Jeff Kent lives here.
That fact is hard to believe.
The second baseman for the Mets, Kent is as well known for his perfectionist nature as he is for his drive for the game.
Each at-bat is treated like a scientific experience.
Each rose bush in the front flower bed must be perfectly pruned.


3 Are Killed in High-Speed Car Crash


Ancient Weights in The Andes
IN 1921, the anthropologist Erland Nordenskiold proposed that the pre-Columbian inhabitants of the Andes had their own system of standard weights.
He hypothesized that they were measured in multiples of a basic unit that he called "H," for huarcu, the word for weight in two Andean languages.
He cited nine pebbles in a cloth bag and four additional weights from Andean sites, all of which, he said, conformed to the system.
His proposal was generally dismissed.


CBS to Get 3 Stations In NBC Deal
In the latest reshuffling of network-owned television stations, CBS and NBC completed a complicated trade yesterday that gave NBC a station in Philadelphia in exchange for two stations the network owns and another it had planned to buy.
CBS will get the NBC stations in Miami and Denver, as well as a Salt Lake City station that NBC planned to purchase.
NBC will acquire WCAU in Philadelphia.
CBS will also get $30 million in cash from NBC.


Brooklyn Gets Shortchanged on Subway Station Renovation
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 15 news article on renewal of subway work in Flushing, Queens, raises great concerns for the residents and commuters of Brooklyn.
For the New York City administration to target a single renovation project in one borough is an oversight that needs correction.


CHRONICLE
On the plane, off the plane, on the plane . . .
And so it goes these days for EDWARD ALBEE, the three-time Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright.
He returned from London to New York on Thursday.
The next day he gave a speech.
By Sunday he was in Boston for another speech.
Sunday night, it was back to London to accept The Evening Standard Drama Award for best play for "Three Tall Women" yesterday.
"About two weeks ago I learned I would probably win the award and wouldn't it be nice if I were there," he said.
"I couldn't reschedule events."


The Future Lies Ahead, Perhaps Far, Far Ahead
LAS VEGAS is the perfect spot for the country's biggest computer convention.
Like the enormous marquees for shows like "Sooper Dogs," computer ballyhoo greatly exceeds reality.
A city literally built on silicon and chockablock with hotels masquerading as tropical islands, showboats and pirate dens seems a particularly fitting place to promote boxes once devoted to staid scientific calculations but now decked out in hardware and software trappings that can simulate even aerobatics so realistically that airsickness bags may become useful peripherals.
Year after year, fall Comdex charmingly demolishes the myth of the universality and importance of the information highway.
No matter how wired they might be, more than 190,000 hardcore infomaniacs and salespeople insist on abandoning virtuality and transport their physical persons to the desert to press buttons and the flesh.


Thinkers on the Right
In the ebb and flow of hot political strategists in Washington, the Republican victory on Nov. 8 has seemed to turn the clock back to 1980, when Ronald Reagan was elected and conservatives gained the opportunity to set the terms of the nation's political discourse.
Article, page B7.


Novel Kind Of Computing: Calculation With DNA
IN a bold experiment that is provoking investigators to reconsider what a computer is and what it means to compute, a researcher has used DNA, the genetic material, as a sort of personal computer.
Exploiting the extraordinary efficiency and speed of biological reactions, he translated a difficult mathematical problem into the language of molecular biology and solved it by carrying out a reaction in one-fiftieth of a teaspoon of solution in a test tube.
Conventional computers perform operations on logical symbols, which are represented inside the machine by the flow of electrons.
Dr.
Adleman's idea is to set up a system of symbols whose tangible expression is not electrons but the chemical units of DNA.
The idea is not so far fetched given that DNA is a rich repository of information and that living cells are processing the information all the time.
In Dr.
Adleman's test tube system, he sets up a problem by synthesizing particular molecules of DNA, and he processes the information through the chemical reactions that take place when the molecules are mixed together.


Battle Goes On as Rent Control Is Defeated in Massachusetts
Landlords here have complained for years that this city's rent-control laws are ruinous.
But when they tried to change the system at the local level, they were always outnumbered by the tenants.
So this year, even though only two other communities in Massachusetts have rent control -- Boston and Brookline -- the landlords decided to challenge the system at the state level.
They introduced a ballot question asking voters across the state whether rent control should be prohibited.
On Election Day, they won narrowly, 51 percent to 49 percent.


Younkers Inc.(YONK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Helms Shouldn't Take Hard Line on Russia
To the Editor:
Senator Jesse Helms and the Republican-dominated Foreign Relations Committee should be forewarned against following a hard line against Russia (news analysis, Nov. 13).
Although the relationship between Washington and Moscow has become more complicated recently, a tougher policy toward Russia will only exacerbate those trends.


Arbitration for 3 Postal Unions
After weeks of unsuccessfully negotiating a union contract that expired at midnight, the United States Postal Service today entered into binding arbitration with the three unions that represent most of the service's 600,000 employees.
Although the contract has run out, mail service will not be affected.
It is illegal for Federal workers to strike.


Corrections
The weather map yesterday forecasting the day's high temperatures and precipitation carried an incorrect date.
The forecast was for 2 P.M. on Nov. 21, not Nov. 20.


Out of the Mythic Mists, Then Back Into Them
The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X  By Michael Eric Dyson  215 pages.
Oxford University Press. $19.95.
In the almost three decades that have passed since his assassination in 1965, Malcolm X has become one of the most hotly debated figures in recent American history, alternately romanticized and reviled, deified, demonized and commercialized.


Toro Co.(TTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Some Aristide Supporters Seek Abolition of Military
Friday was Armed Forces Day in Haiti, a national holiday usually marked with great pomp and display.
But in recognition of the new political realities here, the elite army honor guard that paraded before President Jean-Bertrand Aristide marched without weapons.
And to a growing number of Haitians, it appears that merely humbling and disarming the military, which has ruled for all but a few months of the last decade, is not enough.
A campaign to abolish the armed forces is quickly gaining support among a populace weary of the corruption and brutality associated with the military.


Stein and Toklas as Symbols Of Creative Partnership
The relationship of Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas is the springboard for Amy Pivar's rambling and inventive dance piece "The Modest Typist." Here again, Ms.
Pivar, an experimental choreographer and dancer, combines movement with text as she has in recent collaborations with Freda Rosen, a social therapist who is the co-director of Amy Pivar Dances.
The theme of the new work, given on Friday at Performance Space 122, appears openly stated.
"Behind every successful woman, there is a woman -- often herself," Ms.
Pivar says early in the piece.
But the modest typist of the title is Toklas, who reportedly typed and edited Stein's writings.


Sizzler Int'l.(SZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 16


Hans M. Kolstee, Engineering Professor, 74
Hans M. Kolstee, a retired professor of engineering at Queensborough Community College, died on Nov. 12 at North Shore Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
A resident of Glen Cove, he was 74.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Superintendents Get the 'Depressing' News
At 7:30 yesterday morning, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines gathered nearly 40 school superintendents from every part of New York City to tell them the bad news: the city's proposed cuts of $190 million from the schools budget would be felt in the classroom, even though Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had promised that they would not.
The meeting was the first step in a day that the Chancellor spent lobbying for the restoration of $30 million in cuts.
By the end of the school day, the word had spread to schools around the city that classrooms would suffer if the city did not find the money.


Banned Unit Of Lockheed May Get Pact
A data-processing company that was barred from seeking New York City contracts because of its role in the corruption scandals of the 1980's has been selected by transit officials to receive a $17 million contract from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Transit officials will ask the board of the M.T.A. today to approve a three-year contract with the company, Lockheed Information Management Services, to provide a computerized billing operation as part of a new electronic toll-collection operation for the city's bridges and tunnels.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 15 about plans to renovate the Main Street-Flushing subway station in Queens referred to the station incorrectly in some editions.
It is not elevated.


Valspar Corp.(VAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Fresh Del Monte Produce N.V. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Accused of Assault
A New York City police officer was arrested on assault charges yesterday after shoving and punching his girlfriend in the face outside a Brooklyn nightclub, the police said.


Proffitt's Inc.(PRFT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Amid Midwest Roar, Inflation Sleeps
Business is booming all across the major industrial centers of the Midwest.
In a region that only a decade ago was dubbed the Rust Belt, companies are running at top speed, hiring temporary workers, demanding overtime of employees and straining to meet deliveries.
These are some of the signs that worry the Federal Reserve, which raised interest rates last week for the sixth time this year out of fear that a fast-paced economy points to a re-emergence of rising wages and prices.
But amid this outbreak of inflation's symptoms in the nation's heartland is a curious phenomenon: so far, there is no disease.


Donaldson Co. (DCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Desegregation Study Is Ordered in Bergen
After years of futile attempts to integrate the heavily minority Englewood school district with its primarily white neighboring districts, the State of New Jersey today handed the problem of drawing up a racial-balance plan to a private company.
The State Department of Education has hired Applied Data Services, of Flanders, N.J., to conduct a six-month study of the racial makeup of schools in Englewood and 19 nearby eastern Bergen County towns.
The company is to produce at least seven different plans to redraw some or all of the 20 school districts so that the percentage of black students here will be reduced.


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
CORTINES SAYS PLAN COULD CUT TEACHERS
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines told the City Council that the latest round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Giuliani could force local districts to eliminate, on average, two teachers from every city school.
A1.
By the end of the school day, the word had spread to schools around the city. B2.


William Duff-Griffin, Stage Actor, Dies
William Duff-Griffin, an actor who frequently appeared in productions by the New York Shakespeare Festival, died on Nov. 13 at the Manhattan home of his companion, the actor Robert Joy.
He was 54.
The cause was prostate cancer, Mr. Joy said.


Repeated Deals Confuse Bridge Match
A furor erupted during Sunday night's play at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall National Championships here when a player discovered that she had played the same deals before and could remember them.
A major procedural failure had put into play in the Women's Board-a-Match Team Championship 16 deals that had been played four months earlier in the Women's Knockout Team Championship in San Diego.
The player who brought this to the attention of officials was Janice Seamon of Miami, but 19 other players had the same opportunity.
It seems unlikely that any of them gained any advantage from this strange case of deja vu, but there was considerable official embarrassment.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An oil company tries to enliven one of the basic purchases -- gasoline -- with a light touch.
IT has been decades since the enthusiastic uniformed Men from Texaco sang their way through hard-charging sales pitches and Esso insistently promised it would "put a tiger in your tank." Today's gasoline advertising tries selling in a far softer, more low-key manner, as demonstrated by a humorous, at times even winsome, campaign for the Sun Company.
Broadcast commercials and print advertisements by Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York focus on products like Sunoco gasoline and a new "co-branded" credit card linking Sunoco and Mastercard.
The campaign for Sun, which spends $13 million to $14 million annually on promoting its Sunoco brand and service stations in the East and Midwest, is intended to put gasoline in its proper place, so to speak.


Modern Moves and a Cabaret Touch
Tim Hadel cleverly combined modern dance and cabaret in "Momentary Lapses" on Friday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
This suite of sketches resembled a miniature revue, and Mr.
Hadel's choreography was sharp, but never snide, and sentimental without being corny.
Four pieces with "Love Song" in their titles featured Cindy-Lee singing pop songs: sometimes unaccompanied, at other times to recorded accompaniment.
Two vignettes found her torn between suitors.
In another, a man who courted her desperately tried to clean his messy apartment before she arrived.
In still another, her companion adored liquor as well as love.


Will Real Nets Please Step Up
His team had just won for the third time in four games, but as Butch Beard prepared to leave for a four-game trip against the Western Conference, he wore the look of a frustrated first-year coach.
The Nets tormented Beard for more than three quarters of a 98-97 victory over the hapless Los Angeles Clippers at the Meadowlands Sunday night.
The trend he saw developing worried him.
"It could be a rough trip," Beard said.
"We just are not mentally ready to play sometimes. We're growing, but we've got a long ways to go."


G.O.P. PROPOSAL WOULD OVERHAUL WELFARE SYSTEM
The Republican team taking over the House of Representatives will propose a welfare bill that eliminates a decades-old guiding principle of poverty and food programs: that anyone who qualifies for these benefits automatically gets them.
Under the proposal drafted by House Republicans for submission in January, Congress would set an overall annual limit on welfare spending and replace food stamps and child-nutrition programs with a lump sum payment to each state.


Region News Briefs; No Memory of Stabbings, Carpenter Tells Jury
The defense rested today in the case of Paul Cox, a Larchmont carpenter charged with killing the couple who bought his childhood home.
During cross-examination of Mr.
Cox today, the prosecutor tried to point out inconsistencies between Mr.
Cox's testimony and the stories he told fellow members of Alcoholics Anonymous and several psychotherapists.


Prayer in Public Schools? It's Nothing New for Many
As President Clinton and the new Republican leadership in Congress consider measures that would return organized prayer to public schools, it is worth remembering one thing.
Prayer is already there.


Cortines and a Chorus of Others Plead Against Giuliani's Budget
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, told the City Council yesterday that the latest round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani could force local districts to eliminate, on average, two teachers from every city school.
Mr.
Cortines's warning was the most dramatic but hardly the only threat of dire consequences on a day in which negotiators for the Mayor and for the City Council sought an agreement on how to close a gap of more than $1 billion in the city's current $31.6 billion budget.


Martin Keino Takes a Crown
Keino, a legendary name in distance running, was back in the winner's circle again today -- this time at the National Collegiate Athletic Association cross-country championships here.
Martin Keino, son of the Kenyan Olympic champion, Kip Keino, won the men's individual race in 30 minutes 8.7 seconds.
The University of Arizona senior took a commanding lead midway through the 10,000-meter race on the way to his first N.C.A.A. title.


Brooklyn Gets Shortchanged on Subway Station Renovation; Nothing to Teach
To the Editor:
On Nov. 15 Alan F. Kiepper, New York City Transit Authority president, addressed British transportation experts at London Transport's 10th annual lecture, titled "Meeting Future Mobility Needs With Yesterday's Transit Infrastructure."


Iraq Sanctions Plunge U.S. Into Murky Waters
To the Editor:
United States foreign policy gets into murky waters when we refuse to eliminate sanctions imposed on Iraq four years after hostilities with the United States.
The reason given is that Iraqis build palaces while the population remains impoverished.


Ameritech Forcefully Stays Home
Richard C. Notebaert, the chairman of the Ameritech Corporation, opened a newspaper here last May to find a startling full-page advertisement by AT&amp;T.
"Check your phone bill -- you may be surprised at what you're paying," the ad said, offering a 10 percent discount from Ameritech prices for calls to points farther than 15 miles.


Treasuries Vary Little in Trading Lull
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday, with trading basically directionless in the absence of any economic news.
Worries of higher oil prices as OPEC nations meet this week and a large supply of government issues coming to market discouraged buying.
But a slightly stronger dollar and lower gold prices helped support the market.


Cowboys May Wish Upon a Quarterback
Barry Switzer is hoping for a fairy tale ending, but others might consider it a horror story.
With Troy Aikman likely to miss one to three games with a sprained left knee and his backup, Rodney Peete, sidelined with a sprained right thumb, Jason Garrett will make his first start of the season and the second of his career when the Cowboys play the Green Bay Packers on Thanksgiving Day.


CHRONICLE
There's an element of risk in having your portrait painted on Madison Avenue, AL HIRSCHFELD learned on Friday.
His self-drawn caricature, complete with five concealed Ninas, had been replicated in paint on the avenue between 62d and 63d Streets to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Margo Feiden Galleries, which represents him.
But then it rained.


Ethicists Wary Over New Gene Technique's Consequences
ETHICISTS said new work on sperm stem cells could have a variety of consequences, ranging from potentially beneficial to deeply troubling.
The research is giving some ethicists pause because it could enable scientists to add or delete genes in sperm stem cells.
Since any genetic manipulations will be inherited in perpetuity, this sort of germ-line gene therapy has always been regarded with trepidation.


Big Board's Uncovered Short Sales Drop by 1.1%
The volume of uncovered short sales in the latest month fell for the first time in a year on the New York Stock Exchange, the Big Board said yesterday.
Short sales on the American Stock Exchange also declined.
On the New York exchange, short interest positions fell by 1.1 percent, to 1.77 billion shares, from 1.79 billion the previous month.
The American exchange reported a 5.2 percent decline, to 113.5 million shares, from 119.7 million reported in mid-October.
Short interest positions on the Amex have fluctuated a bit in the last year, even as the size of short positions has risen steadily on the Big Board.


Autodesk Inc.(ACAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday, about the status of the death penalty in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, referred incorrectly at one point to the most recent execution in Connecticut.
The date was May 17, 1960, not 1980.


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


American Express Unit Settles Laudering Case
A banking arm of the American Express Company settled for $32 million today a Federal money-laundering case that involved Mexico's largest drug cartel, also a principal conduit for Colombian cocaine entering the United States.
Prosecutors said it was the largest civil penalty ever assessed against an American financial institution for laundering money.
The American Express Bank International was accused of laundering drug money through Cayman Islands accounts for the Juan Garcia Abrego gang, also known as the Gulf cartel.
Two bank directors were convicted in June.
In a prepared statement, the company admitted no wrongdoing but said that it had legal responsibility for its employees' actions, and agreed to forfeit $25 million in laundered money, pay a $7 million penalty and spend $3 million to improve a compliance program that a prosecutor said existed only on paper.


Roman Catholic Bishop Denounces Repression in East Timor
About 135 Timorese protesters against Indonesian rule were arrested last week, and many of them were taken from their homes and beaten by security forces, the religious leader of East Timor said today.
"The military soldiers entered the houses and arrested young people without any kind of explanation," Bishop Carlos Felipe Ximenes Belo said in an interview.
All of those arrested were beaten, and two or three were hospitalized, he said.
Twenty-two were still being held, he said.
The police have acknowledged 80 or so arrests.


Pair of Baseball Meetings Set
Major league club owners plan to meet in Chicago Dec. 5 to discuss their strategy for declaring an impasse in negotiations and unilaterally implementing a salary cap, but their plans could be short-circuited by the union, whose executive board meets that same week in Atlanta.
The owners ideally would like to have a new system in place before the Dec. 7 deadline for clubs to offer salary arbitration to their players who have become free agents.
Their second choice would be to implement a new system before the Dec. 20 deadline for clubs to tender contracts to the unsigned players on their rosters.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp.(RESC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pataki Asks Cuomo's Help In Holding Down Spending
Showing increasing concern about the state's fiscal condition, Governor-elect George E. Pataki asked Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today to freeze state hiring, delay signing new contracts and impose a moratorium on other major spending commitments until he takes office on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Pataki's request came on a day he said New York's deepening fiscal problems would make it "more difficult" to fulfill his campaign promise to cut taxes deeply without noticeably reducing government services.


Beijing Journal; It's Time, Again, to Talk of Cabbages, Not Kings
"How much do you charge for delivery?" a customer asked, leaning on the handlebars of his bicycle in front of a truck- sized heap of cabbage on the side of the street in western Beijing.
"Charge for delivery?" Wang Zhenping fired back in a mocking tone that turned a few heads in the Horse Tail Gully vegetable market.
"Did you just crawl out of a cave or something? It's free!"


Meet the New Routine, Same as Old Routine
What did we learn from NBC's telecast of "The Gold Championship" Saturday night, the latest made-for-TV figure skating exhibition-as-competition?
1.
The event, created by the multitentacled International Management Group, operated in its own little vacuum.
Example: No mention was made that five of the six skaters had competed on CBS's two-night "Ice Wars" the week before, or that Kristi Yamaguchi and several other skaters repeated some CBS routines on NBC.


Trident NGL Holdings Inc.(NGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Xtra Corp.(XTR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Adam Smith, Please Call
Reading an article on popular music the other day, I was halfway through before realizing I was asleep.
This was not the article's fault.
A primitive conviction that anything can be learned if you have the patience to read about it remains with me despite long experience to the contrary.
Another primitive impulse, however, has lately been sending me into dreamland whenever I delve into difficult subjects.
As a result, I now spend a lot of time sleeping in prose which I have entered in search of knowledge.


Overtime Is Money, but G.M. Assembly Workers Say They've Had Enough
If for many workers the American dream is drifting out of reach, the 4,800 General Motors workers here have nailed it down.
They own homes, cars, big-screen televisions, sometimes boats.
They have the assurance of secure pensions and good medical care.
Many of these men -- and most are men -- earn enough that they can comfortably support their families; their wives don't have to work.
But these workers, whether young and building families or older and planning for retirement, say they cannot enjoy what their labors have bought.
G.M., they say, asks them to put in extraordinary stretches of overtime.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  NATO HITS SERB BASE  NATO retaliated against nationalist Serbs who have been bombing sites in northwestern Bosnia by hitting a Serbian-controlled air base in Croatia, taking NATO's involvement in the conflict to a new level.
A1


Appellate Ruling Called a Threat to Endangered Species Act
IF the United States Supreme Court does not overturn a ruling from a Federal appeals panel, the Endangered Species Act might itself be threatened with de facto extinction, conservation groups, biologists and the Justice Department argue.
The department filed a petition with the Supreme Court this month asking it to reject a ruling from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia that the act does not prevent the destruction of the habitat of an endangered species, even if destroying the habitat means exterminating the animal.
The lower court ruling, called Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Greater Oregon v.
Babbitt, shocked conservationists and made them run for legal ammunition to protect the teeth of an act that is considered one of the most effective pieces of environmental legislation ever passed.


A Would-Be Takes a Seat With Winners Of G.O.P.
The name cards on the table all read "Governor" or "Governor-elect," followed by the last name and state.
Except one.
The title line on the card in front of the woman in the red plaid suit read simply, "Ellen."
The Republican leadership was in an awkward spot today as Ellen Sauerbrey of Maryland insisted on appearing at the meeting of the Republican Governors Association with her new colleagues -- although it seems highly unlikely that they are her new colleagues.


Arctic Tribe's Hard Life Unchanged For Centuries
A NOMADIC tribe of reindeer herders who dress in skins, practice ritual sacrifice and have been using the same types of homemade tools and wooden sleds for more than 1,000 years may hold the key to a mystery that has long baffled archeologists.
The Nenets, who wander across the northernmost reaches of the Siberian Arctic, eat raw fish, drink reindeer blood and live year-round in reindeer-skin tepees called chums.
Last summer archeologists came upon a group of about 1,000 Nenet reindeer herders who have had almost no contact with Western culture.
Archeologists long eager to connect the ancient peoples of Scandinavia to the Eskimos of the New World thousands of miles away say that this group may help provide the essential missing clues.


Screen Savers As Art, or Vice Versa
WILLIAM H. GATES 3d, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, wants to share his art collection with you, in your home; not the Leonardo da Vinci notebook he bought this month for $30.8 million, but 48 Impressionist and post-Impressionists for less than $25.
With Impressionists Collection, you can browse through the works of Cezanne, Monet, van Gogh and others, which look more like stained glass than canvas, or use them as screen savers.
A Pissarro screen saver for Windows may seem a bit much, but it surely looks good.
You almost hate to touch a key or move the mouse and make it disappear.


House Appointee Favors Tobacco Over Health
To the Editor:
Re "Gingrich Moves Quickly to Put Stamp on House" (front page, Nov. 17):


Patterns
Fashion Awards: Not Oscars
Journalists have lazily taken to calling the Council of Fashion Designers of America Awards the "Academy Awards of fashion."


Reliance Electric Agrees to Deal With Rockwell
After a month of resistance, the Reliance Electric Company agreed today to be acquired by its hostile suitor, the Rockwell International Corporation, rather than pursue a friendly merger with the General Signal Corporation.
Rockwell will pay $1.6 billion in cash, or $31 a share, to Reliance's shareholders in a deal that is sweeter than the $1.5 billion, or $30 a share, that the company offered in late October to break up a merger with General Signal.
To terminate that deal, Reliance will pay General Signal a fee of $50 million, as well as $5.2 million to cover expenses.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Utah Upsets Indiana  Brandon Jessie scored 23 points last night and Utah withstood foul trouble to beat No. 11 Indiana, 77-72, in the opening round of the Maui Invitational in Lahaina, Hawaii.
The game, the season opener for both teams, was intense, and Utah's depth helped quite a bit.
Jessie, a junior college transfer, made both ends of a 1-and-1 with 19 seconds left for a 75-70 lead.
Indiana freshman Michael Hermon scored on a rebound with 10 seconds left to again make it a three-point game.
Sophomore Keith Van Horn, the Utes' leading scorer and rebounder last season who was saddled with foul trouble throughout, made both ends of a 1-and-1 with 9 seconds left.
A 3-pointer by Hermon bounced long off the rim and the Utah players jumped in a celebration circle near midcourt as a fan ran around the court with a school flag.
Utah will play No. 7 Maryland, which beat Chaminade, 95-67, in tonight's semifinals.


CHRONICLE
Oh, what a diplomat is DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
At a dinner given by Ambassador ITAMAR RABINOVICH of Israel in honor of Secretary of State WARREN CHRISTOPHER on Sunday evening, she found herself seated next to Israeli Prime Minister YITZHAK RABIN.
The Prime Minister smoked through the evening, the only guest in the room to do so, she said yesterday.


Artificial Liver Study Findings Are Premature
To the Editor:
Re "Artificial Liver Shows Promise in British Study" (Science Times, Nov. 15): The preliminary findings on successful use of artificial livers are premature as well as preliminary.
They neither rule out that the treatment might work nor demonstrate that the treatment does provide a benefit in terms of survival.


Greeks Say, 'No, Thanks'
To the Editor:
"Deadly Gifts to Greece and Turkey" (editorial, Nov. 13), opposing transfer of weapons to Greece and Turkey, and Nov. 19 letters, miss the strings attached.


Well-Known Trend-Spotter Joins Limited
Ellin Saltzman, who helped define fashion for the country's most exclusive retailers for two decades, will now put her keen eye to use spotting trends for a retailer that caters to Middle America: the Limited Inc.
In joining the Limited, which operates the Limited stores, Express and Victoria's Secret, Mrs.
Saltzman is stepping off Fifth Avenue and into the regional mall, a move that surprised some designers.
Her previous stints in retailing were at Saks Fifth Avenue, Bergdorf Goodman and R. H. Macy &amp; Company, which owns I. Magnin, another exclusive specialty store chain with a big designer business that is being closed.


Sensible Style, Imported From France
Ines de la Fressange considers herself a lucky woman.
Lucky to be tall and thin and pretty enough to have been Chanel's top model for six years.
Lucky to find partners to finance a small boutique in Paris that has grown into a worldwide business.
Lucky to be able to fly the Concorde into New York last week to celebrate the first anniversary of her boutique at Saks Fifth Avenue.
But it takes more than luck to be successful in the fashion world.
It was Ms. de la Fressange's vivacity as much as her beauty that made her shine on Chanel's runways.
And it's a combination of flair, taste and practicality that has propelled her business.


Arlington Burial for Woman Killed as Navy Flier


B.C. to Try To Repeat A Victory Of the Past
Ten years ago tomorrow, time had expired on the clock in the Orange Bowl as Doug Flutie's desperation pass from midfield sailed toward the University of Miami end zone.
Gerard Phelan caught the ball in a crowd and Boston College was a 47-45 winner.
It was a memorable game, one that produced almost 1,300 yards of total offense, 472 from Flutie's passes and 447 for the opposing quarterback, Bernie Kosar.


Accounts
*
High Bar Productions Ltd., New York, to Katz Dochtermann &amp; Epstein, New York, to handle corporate and consumer product advertising for the producer of the "Body Shaping" fitness television program, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $6 million. *
Edwards Super Food Stores, Windsor Locks, Conn., to Mintz &amp; Hoke, Avon, Conn., to handle the supermarket chain's account, previously at Wyse Advertising, Cleveland.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million to $4 million.


Ewing's Knee Holds Up; Knicks Win, Too
The Knicks had Patrick Ewing back in uniform last night.
Not on the bench.
Not in a designer suit.
Not clapping like a cheerleader.
Luckily for Ewing and the Knicks, they had a lot more going for them than merely their sluggish center against the San Antonio Spurs because they needed every available weapon.
Ewing and his sore right knee returned to the lineup after a one-game respite and the Knicks were thrilled because the dazzling David Robinson was at Madison Square Garden.
Even though Ewing was instrumental, he was not fully responsible for the Knicks beating the Spurs, 92-88.


NATO, Expanding Bosnia Role, Strikes a Serbian Base in Croatia
NATO warplanes bombed a Serbian-controlled air base in Croatia today, destroying its runway and its antiaircraft defenses and taking the Western alliance's political involvement in the Bosnian war to a new level.
Adm.
Leighton W. Smith, the American who commands NATO forces in Southern Europe, said 39 aircraft from the United States, Britain, France and the Netherlands had taken part in the attack against the Udbina airfield in Croatia.


Carey's Advice To the Mayor: Maintain Grace
Message to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani from a former Governor of New York: apologize!
Well, the former Governor -- the ever gregarious Hugh L. Carey -- did not volunteer that word.
But he zeroed in on the idea that Mr.
Giuliani should apologize to Governor-elect George E. Pataki with the radar-like instincts of a homing pigeon.


Orchard Supply Hardware Stores Corp.(OSHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Bridge Gunman Thought of Beirut, Witness Says
A defense witness testified yesterday that the man who killed a Hasidic student and wounded three others in an attack on the Brooklyn Bridge in March started firing when he momentarily thought he was back in Beirut, Lebanon, and fighting for his life.
"These were clearly Jewish passengers, and he really perceived them as the enemy," said the witness, Dr.
Numa Abudabbeh, a forensic psychologist.
"He really thought it was me or them."


Snippets From a Decade When Confidence Ruled America
The compactor school of television programming is operating at full throttle in "The Fun and Feel of the 50's," a two-part Disney Channel presentation that begins tonight and concludes next Tuesday.
The production, compiled for Reader's Digest Home Entertainment, skitters over the history and culture of an entire decade with material retrieved largely from what it calls the "indelible record" of an emerging medium called television.
While the memory of Proust's Marcel was exquisitely unlocked by the taste of a single madeleine dipped in lime tea, this documentary whisks viewers back to the past for a bombardment of images that generally end up little more substantial than cupcake crumbs.
With just about no narration, the assorted clips from private collections and archival vaults are allowed to stand on their own and, as is television's wont, everything winds up on a level playing field.
Ed Sullivan equals Korea equals Lucy's baby equals Sputnik equals Miss Clairol hair coloring. ("Does she or doesn't she?")


Marsh Supermarkets (MARSA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 15


Rolls Will Buy Allison To Broaden Engine Line
Rolls-Royce P.L.C., the British jet-engine manufacturer, said today that it would make a major expansion into the United States by acquiring the Allison Engine Company of Indianapolis for $525 million.
By purchasing Allison, a leader in helicopter and large military turboprop engines, Rolls-Royce is broadening its product line and trying to make itself a more muscular competitor against larger rivals like the General Electric Company and the Pratt &amp; Whitney division of the United Technologies Corporation.


Rolling Stones Live on Internet: Both a Big Deal and a Little Deal
What was the first rock band in cyberspace?
In a well-publicized gambit to promote their pay-per-view broadcast on Showtime this Friday, the Rolling Stones broadcast 20 minutes of live audio and video from a performance at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas on Friday last week on the Internet, becoming the first major rock band to do so on that network of millions of computers.
But their moment in the limelight was tarnished by a little-known band called Severe Tire Damage.
Knowing that the channel carrying the Stones was open to anyone, and wanting to take advantage of the worldwide audience the Stones would attract, the group broadcast an impromptu performance from the Xerox PARC offices in Palo Alto, Calif., directly before and after the Stones concert.


Samuel H. Wilen, Chemistry Professor, 63
Dr.
Samuel Henry Wilen, a professor of chemistry at the City College and a specialist in stereochemistry, died on Wednesday at Englewood (N.J.)Hospital.
He was 63 and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Emerson Radio Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sinatra Library? Hoboken Ho-Ho-Holds Its Breath
IT was supposed to change, but Frank Sinatra is still this town's great unrequited love, the one that got away, got famous, came back, but won't commit.
He doesn't call, he doesn't write.
He just hangs there, high-cheek-boned and dewy-eyed, an icon on the walls of Hoboken's restaurants and barber shops.
A year and four days has passed since Nancy Sinatra Lambert came to town raising hopes that a forever thing between Frank Sinatra and Hoboken was possible.
Squired by the Mayor, she toured possible sites for a Frank Sinatra music library and museum and said prospects looked promising.


Figgie International Inc.(FIGIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ladder's Failure Bewilders Fire Experts
New York City's Fire Department has more aerial ladder trucks and uses them more frequently than any other fire department in the country, fire safety experts said yesterday.
But until Sunday -- when a fully extended ladder buckled and then careened six stories to the ground, killing one person and seriously injuring four others -- no aerial ladder had ever collapsed in New York, city fire and union officials said.
Those facts contributed to the befuddlement of fire officials yesterday as they began investigating what caused the ladder's deadly failure at a fire in an apartment building in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, on Sunday afternoon.


PHH Corp.(PHH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


33 Suspected Chinatown Gang Members Are Indicted
In what law-enforcement officials called a major blow to the largest and last of the traditional criminal gangs in Chinatown, 33 suspected members of a group called the Flying Dragons were indicted yesterday on Federal racketeering charges.
Two separate indictments described three murders, 12 attempted murders, heroin trafficking, illegal gambling, arson, extortion and robberies that stretched from Manhattan into Brooklyn and Queens.
Among those arrested was Mui Bon Shek, described as a 52-year-old businessman and high-ranking member of the gang, who prosecutors said was audacious enough to set up and operate an illegal gambling business inside the state's Offtrack Betting Corporation office in Chinatown.


Giant Food Inc.(GFS.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


Sonics Win Game, Nets Pass Blame
That big happy family that had won three of its last four games is squabbling again.
While Butch Beard criticized the Nets' lack of composure during the final minutes of their 104-97 loss to the Sonics tonight, Kenny Anderson was blaming his coach for not letting him get into the flow.


The Cheering Over, Haitians Face New Trials
To the Editor:
Having lived in and reported on Haiti on and off for five years, I've found your coverage reflects an exclusively Northern perspective.


Seeing the Future, Darkly
"I am Michel de Nostradame," the French actor Tcheky Karyo says in English, his impassive face and monotone suggesting he might be an android.
But no.
"I am a scientist," he says.
"Nostradamus" is an overstuffed historical soap opera about the 16th-century doctor, astrologer, prophet and all-around great guy.
Its silly, anachronistic dialogue must have been hard to take seriously, which may account for the entire cast's poker faces.
Fighting the plague, Nostradamus gently puts little tablets made from rose petals under his patients' tongues.
Though he has alarming visions (World War I is much on his mind, shown in sepia-toned scenes of German soldiers and tanks), his prophecies are less important at first than his persecution by the Inquisition.
And, of course, there are his hot romances.
You knew Nostradamus made prophecies -- interpreted as foretelling everything from the French Revolution to Armageddon -- but did you know he was irresistible to women?


A Separate Pathway Slowly Carries a Caress To the Brain's Attention
RESEARCHERS have discovered the scientific basis for enjoying a caress.
People, it seems, have a special pathway of nerves that send pleasure signals to the brain when the skin is gently stroked.
The pathway is present at birth and may help human infants distinguish comfort from discomfort.


So Witty, So Sophisticated, So Lonely
Famed for their stinging wit and conversational savagery, the wags of the Algonquin Round Table would undoubtedly have had claws out for a drama like "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle," Alan Rudolph's name-dropping celebration of their heyday.
Surely Dorothy Parker herself, a caustic critic who lacerated even "The House at Pooh Corner," could have had a field day with this film's pretensions, omissions and overweening literary lights.
But that would miss the fascination of a film with a charismatic, unforgettable heroine, stunningly well-played by Jennifer Jason Leigh.
"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" has its flaws, but it also has a heartfelt grasp of what set Dorothy Parker apart from her fellow revelers and makes her so emblematic a figure even today.
The film lives up to Mr.
Rudolph's observation (cited in production notes) that "the 20's seemed to me the source of many contemporary notions, only with better language."


Market Place; Small Power Producers Brace for Consolidation
The California Energy Company's attempt to take over the Magma Power Company has put the spotlight on the young industry of independent power producers.
Spawned largely by a Federal law in 1978 to spur alternative sources of energy, the industry has grown rapidly, with scores of new companies going public in the 1990's.


CHRONICLE
When 9-year-old JULIE GAL arrived here from Austria in 1961 speaking no English, she started taking classes at the Rudolph Steiner School in Manhattan.
And the only child who would speak to her was Beth Rudin, she recalled yesterday.
The friendship lasted, and on Monday evening, Beth Rudin, now BETH RUDIN DEWOODY, gave a party for her old school chum to celebrate Ms.
Gal's documentary, "Islamic Fundamentalism and Democracy."


Kellwood Co.(KWD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Saatchi to Absorb A Campbell Office
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide said yesterday that it would absorb the troubled New York office of Campbell Mithun Esty, which like Saatchi Worldwide is owned by the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C.
Effective Dec. 1, Campbell Mithun's New York office, which has lost large accounts like Travelers Insurance and Texaco, will be renamed Compton Partners, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, operating independently of Saatchi Worldwide's New York office.
The Compton name comes from Compton Advertising, a shop acquired by the Saatchi brothers as they formed Saatchi Worldwide.


Varlen Corp.(VRLN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


A Lawyer Who Spoke Up
The privilege against compelled self-incrimination, said the dean of Harvard Law School, is "one of the great landmarks in man's long struggle to make himself civilized." Forty years ago, when Erwin Griswold spoke out in that manner, not many were willing to defend the Bill of Rights against Senator Joseph McCarthy, who railed against what he called "Fifth-Amendment Communists" -- traitors, he charged, hiding behind their rights.
That defense of liberty, by a lifelong Republican whose patriotism not even Mr.
McCarthy dared challenge, was one of the brightest achievements of Mr.
Griswold, who died last week at the age of 90.
There were other peaks and, in an extraordinarily long career, a number of valleys.


When Does a Sting Become Entrapment?
So, what do Marion Barry, Harrison A. Williams Jr. and John Z. DeLorean have in common?
Right!
All were caught by hidden cameras in the throes of apparent illegality.
Tonight's edition of "American Justice" brings back those embarrassing yet entertaining tapes in the course of a report on sting operations by the law.
The question is, at what point does a set-up become entrapment?
Or, where is the line between making an illegal act available or luring someone into it?
Let's go to the videotape.
Mr.
Barry, then -- and soon to be again -- the Mayor of Washington, made national television when he was shown taking a toot of crack cocaine, offered by a female friend who was doubling as a police plant.
Mr.
Williams, then a United States Senator from New Jersey, was among a pride of legislators caught by the camera accepting cash from a supposed Saudi Arabian sheik for some immigration favors, the famous Abscam sting.
Mr.
DeLorean, then a flamboyant automobile maker, showed up as a performer in a drug deal arranged by the Drug Enforcement Agency.
And in another, less celebrated but wackier case recalled tonight, a Federal agent played a gorilla to ensnare Mexican officials trying to smuggle him or it out of the United States.


METRO DIGEST
NEW JERSEY PLANS CUT IN HOSPITAL AID
New Jersey officials said that they planned to cut the amount of money hospitals receive to care for Medicaid patients by 20 percent starting in March.
William Waldman, the State Human Services Commissioner, said he expected a court challenge but was confident that the move, which will reduce hospital reimbursements by $135 million annually, would be upheld.
A1.
COUNCIL PANEL BACKS CURBS ON SEX SHOPS
City Council members agreed to Mayor Giuliani's plan for a one-year moratorium on opening or expanding any sex-oriented video store, theater or bar.
The move is the first step in restricting adult-entertainment businesses, an effort that the Mayor has made part of his drive to improve the quality of life in New York.
A1.


PetSmart Inc.(PETM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


What Women Can Teach Men
By now, the benefits of single-sex education for girls and women have been reported so often and so fully that you might think the advocates of women's institutions could snap their briefcases shut and declare the case closed.
But we can't.
It isn't enough to cite the familiar statistics showing that graduates of women's colleges succeed in traditionally male fields -- business, government, academia -- far out of proportion to their numbers in the population.
Unless we understand the reasons for the success of single-sex education for girls and women, we risk missing some important lessons about education, society and the sexes today.


Film in Review; The Many Lives of a Man, All of Them Odd
Maurizio Nichetti, the director and star of the mildly funny and excruciatingly whimsical "Stefano Quantestorie," should not be confused with Nanni Moretti, the director and star of the current "Caro Diario," a far more sophisticated and droll film.
Both have been compared, wrongheadedly, to Woody Allen, but a taste for one does not translate to the other.
Mr.
Nichetti, whose "Stefano Quantestorie" opens today at Film Forum, once studied as a mime.
He has a tendency to cast himself in the role of a mournful clown, and to load his films with multiple, overlapping stories that sound cleverer than they are.


California Tells Insurers to Pay $1.25 Billion
California's Insurance Commissioner, John Garamendi, followed up today on a promise to go after car insurers, ordering 28 of them to pay premium rollbacks totaling $1.25 billion.
The move follows a unanimous decision in August by the California Supreme Court that authorized the full institution of Proposition 103, the 1988 voter initiative that required insurance rate changes to be approved by the commissioner and gave him broad powers to control prices and profits for insurers doing business in the state.
It also follows a payment in 1991 of $799.7 million in rollbacks to more than seven million California car policyholders.


Expedition to Houston Leaves a Good Taste in Reeves's Mouth
It was about 1 A.M. and the Giants, fresh off a 13-10 victory over the Houston Oilers on Monday night, were stuck in traffic en route to the airport and the flight home.
A car fire was raging up ahead.
The Giants were sitting on the bus.
But Dan Reeves couldn't wait.
He was too hungry.
So he and three of his assistant coaches, upon seeing a McDonald's about a mile up the highway, decided to hoof it.
How hungry were they?
Reeves, in a coat and tie, decided to climb a highway overpass, the golden arches looming.
A homeless man was so shocked at the sight that he told Reeves he had never seen anyone dressed in a tie in his neck of the woods.
Reeves and crew finally found salvation in the form of 10 burgers.


Out of Cash, Eastern European Health System Has a Relapse
In the shabby maternity ward of the county hospital in this Black Sea port, Dr.
Veronica Niculescu threw a greasy slab of brown soap onto a table.
Crudely made from cheap fat, the soap smelled like a barnyard.
"This is the only soap we have and it has no disinfectant properties," she said with disgust.
"We are told by the Government: hospitals and medicine are not productive so you get no money from us."


Bryan Ferry in Concert: Old Times Remembered
"Though your world is changing," Bryan Ferry vowed from the stage of the Beacon Theater on Monday night, "I will be the same." In the song, he's a steadfast lover, but he could also have been describing his first New York concert since 1988.
Now, as then, he performed in a ceremonial haze of frankincense, which was burning in a large urn on stage.
And as in 1988, he played the careworn, genteel, pensive lover, his hair falling over his eyes, his voice progressing from humble croon to troubled bleat.
Every so often, he'd reveal his younger self: the arch, brittle voice of Roxy Music in the early 1970's, ricocheting between consumer cravings and romantic desire in songs like "Virginia Plain" and "In Every Dream Home a Heartache." But Mr.
Ferry gradually subdued the irony in his love songs, and ever since Roxy Music released "Avalon" in 1982, he has been working variations on its elegantly restrained yearning.
Between pulsating bass lines and rippling guitars, he sings the role of someone who is lost in love, swept away by a passion that promises exaltation or immolation.
He has just released "Mamouna," (Virgin), his first album of new songs in seven years, further refining one of rock's most specialized styles.


Down in the Street, a President Was Killed


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Mexican Attitudes Shift In Flood of U.S. Goods
The Marlboro Man rode off American television years ago, but in Mexico he is still galloping hard, part of a stampede for products from across the border that is changing and challenging Mexico's modest advertising industry.
The elimination of tariffs by the North American Free Trade Agreement has brought hundreds of American products, from Kellogg's Pop-Tarts to the new Ford Mystique, to join standbys like Marlboro cigarettes on Mexican shelves and in showrooms.


More Scrutiny of a Microsoft Merger
The Microsoft Corporation and Intuit Inc. said today that they had received a second request from the Justice Department for information on their proposed merger.
Both said the request had been anticipated and that they were cooperating with the Government.
"We were by no means surprised to get a second request," said William H. Neukom, Microsoft's senior vice president for law and corporate affairs, adding that second requests were not uncommon in mergers of companies with overlapping products.


Holiday on Thursday
Thanksgiving is tomorrow.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West.
Travels south on Broadway to 34th Street.
Concludes at noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and local offices are closed.
POST OFFICE: Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue for Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side street cleaning regulations suspended or Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No street cleanings and recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways and buses and the Long Island Rail Road will run on a Sunday schedule.
Metro-North trains will be on a holiday schedule, including extra service to New York City between 6 A.M. and 10 A.M. and from New York City between 12 P.M. and 2 P.M.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and rail service are on holiday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and rail service are on holiday schedule.
Traffic Alert TODAY  THANKSGIVING DAY PARADE: Preparations for the parade will close several streets: 77th and 79th Streets between Central Park West and Columbus Avenue will be closed at 3 P.M., and Central Park West from Columbus Circle to 86th Street and Broadway between 34th and 35th Streets will be closed after 10 P.M.
TOMORROW  The parade will close Broadway between Columbus Circle and 34th Street from 9 A.M. to noon and 35th Street between Fifth Avenue and Broadway.
In addition, Seventh Avenue between 34th and 40th Streets and 34th Street between Fifth Avenue and Broadway will be closed until 1 P.M.
Dismantling until about 3 P.M. will affect those streets where preparations occurred on Wednesday.


Bank of Montreal (BMO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mayor and Council Break Off Negotiations on Budget Cuts
The City Council broke off negotiations yesterday with the Giuliani administration over how to cut spending to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget, and each side said it would proceed without the other.
The Council said it would pass its own budget plan, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that he had already begun carrying out some of the cuts he proposed last month and would freeze any new spending the Council tried to send him.


Algoma Central reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Poor Showing by Massachusetts Students


Clinton Praises Ukrainian


COMPANY BRIEFS
HAWKER SIDDELEY CANADA INC., Toronto, has a preliminary agreement to sell the assets and some liabilities of its Canadian Steel Foundries unit to Atchison Casting Corp., Atchison, Kan.
Terms were not disclosed.
ELI LILLY &amp; CO., Indianapolis, said it had completed the $4 billion purchase of PCS Health Systems Inc., Scottsdale, Ariz., from McKesson Corp., San Francisco.


Kohlberg, Kravis Begins Borden Tender Offer
The battle for Borden's 41,000 shareholders began yesterday as Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company began its expected $2 billion tender offer for the financially troubled consumer products giant.
A spokesman for another suitor, Paul B. Kazarian, said Mr.
Kazarian would bid for Borden next week.
Federal regulatory filings showed that several other parties had approached Borden without making formal offers.


BMTC Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Council and Giuliani At War Over Budget
Bucking some of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposals to trim city spending to close a $1.1 billion budget gap, City Council leaders broke off talks with the Mayor yesterday and pledged to draft their own budget.
The impasse sets up the most serious fight yet over what powers the Council has under the new City Charter, which gave that body expanded responsibilities.
Article, page B1.


Clemente's Widow Keeps His Dreams Alive
The number 21 signifies a lot on the island of Puerto Rico.
It is the number engraved on earrings, emblazoned on T-shirts worn by young men and women, the number sewn on the jerseys of Puerto Rican-born ballplayers such as Ruben Sierra.


Rebelling for the Sake of Rebelling
In "The Wild One," one of the classic portrayals of youthful malcontent, Marlon Brando is asked what he is rebelling against, to which he coolly replies, "What have you got?" If Mr.
Brando's interlocutor had held up a mirror, that would be the current state of punk rock.
At two sold-out concerts on Saturday night, Bad Religion at Roseland and NOFX at CBGB, punk rock not only reacted against its traditional enemies -- society and mainstream rock -- but also against itself.
Now that records by California punk bands like Green Day and the Offspring have broken into the top five on the pop charts, punk rock will have to come to terms with being what it hates most, at least until it slips back into the tightly knit underground scene where it has been thriving for years with few innovations.
This can take the form of parodying Green Day's hit song "Basket Case," as NOFX did, or discussing the ethics of "selling out" to major record labels, as Bad Religion did, or simply refusing to follow the convention of leaving the stage before performing an encore, as both groups did.


Dole and Gingrich Embrace Before Republican Governors
Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich today displayed a bonhomie seldom, if ever, seen between the two Republicans.
In their first joint appearance since the election two weeks ago, Mr.
Gingrich of Georgia, the House Speaker-in-waiting, and Mr.
Dole, who is likely to become the Senate majority leader, appeared at the close of the Republican Governors Association conference here to emphasize how well they will work together.


No Headline
"London is like a piece of Gruyere cheese; there are holes everywhere. If hole  digging were an Olympic sport, I can tell you this:  Britain would win the gold medal every time." GERRY BRENNAN, a cabdriver.  [ A4:3. ]


On Campus; Catholic Group Buys Toronto U. Site
A conservative Roman Catholic organization, Opus Dei, which some former members say uses cult-like practices to recruit college-age students, is opening a branch at the University of Toronto.
Officials of the group bought a 62-room residence last summer for $3.2 million and moved into the heart of the University of Toronto's downtown campus, said Opus Dei's spokesman, Fernando Mignone.
"There was a keen interest in reaching out to more university students," Mr.
Mignone said.


Book Notes
Get Busy, Nicholas Evans
It's hard to work up much sympathy for Nicholas Evans, the British screenwriter and producer whose forthcoming book, "The Horse Whisperer," has been the cause of so much excitement in the publishing and film worlds in the last couple of weeks.
After all, the book, being positioned as "Bridges of Madison County" with an equine flavor, has sold for breathtaking amounts: $3 million to Robert Redford and Disney, $3.15 million to Dell for publishing rights in the United States and Canada, and $537,000 to Bantam U.K.
In addition, publishers in Germany and Italy have each paid more than $500,000 for translation rights.
But the 44-year-old Mr.
Evans is under a great deal of pressure, and not only to see that the project earns back all the money already invested in it, a tricky proposition under any circumstances.
First, he has a more pressing problem: he has to finish writing the book.
The novel has been marketed and sold so far on the basis of what he has produced -- half a manuscript and an outline of the ending -- and the author has holed up in his home in South London with a commitment to finish the rest by the end of the year, so that the publishers can aim to get it in stores by next fall.


Cost-Cutters Reviewing Implants
On a recent trip to a New Jersey hospital, Kevin Weeks was appalled to witness an operation he considers a waste of money.
"I saw them putting a $3,000 hip that will last more than 20 years in a 100-year-old woman," said Mr.
Weeks, director of operating room programs for Premier Health Alliance of Westchester, Ill., a purchasing cooperative owned by 53 large hospitals around the country.
"They should have used a $300 unit that will last five years."


One Nation, One Vote? That's Not Fair
When Congress takes up the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade next week, it should focus on diplomacy, not economics.
It should give particular scrutiny to the treaty's proposed offspring, the World Trade Organization, which could cause immeasurable damage to American diplomacy for years to come.
Contrary to the claims of Vice President Al Gore and other Administration spokesmen, the future of world trade does not depend on GATT.
Whether the treaty is ratified or not, world trade will continue to grow as it has for half a century.
Nor, despite the claims of right-wing isolationists and left-wing consumer advocates, is sovereignty -- ours or anyone else's -- at stake.
By definition, a treaty requires signers to forgo certain exercises of authority or "sovereignty."


Let the Turkey Offer Thanks as Well; A Vegetarian Feast
To the Editor:
There seems to be help for everyone this holiday season in your Nov. 16 Food Notes column unless, of course, you are one of this country's 12.5 million vegetarians.


Clinton Thanks Ukraine With $200 Million
President Clinton offered $200 million in additional economic aid to Ukraine today to thank that country's new President, Leonid Kuchma, for taking politically difficult steps sought by Washington toward free-market reforms and the elimination of nuclear weapons.
Promising a new relationship with Ukraine, which the Administration expects to become a major power in Europe in years to come, Mr.
Clinton also provided Mr.
Kuchma with security assurances in return for having persuaded his Parliament last week to vote to eliminate Ukraine's 1,800 nuclear warheads.


A Feast Waiting in the Aisles


Like Boxer, Like Trainer
Riddick Bowe and Larry Donald are similar fighters with similar builds and similar styles.
That's true, up to a point.
But when Bowe, the former heavyweight champion, takes on Donald in a 12-round HBO fight at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., on Dec. 3, there's one similarity you can bet on: Both fighters will be getting the same kind of calm, studied critiques between rounds.
That's because Donald's trainer, Jancks Morton, learned his craft by studying Bowe's trainer, 83-year-old Eddie Futch.


CML Group (CML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Some Owners Anxious As N.H.L. Talks Recess
So what will happen to the National Hockey League's proposed luxury tax, that penalty for high payrolls meant to slow salary escalation, which is the biggest reason why the owners have locked out the players?
As negotiations broke today for a two-day holiday recess -- and as some owners voiced concern over the effects of the prolonged lockout -- both sides acknowledged that the tax wasn't discussed during four intense meetings in the past six days.
The talks are scheduled to resume Friday with the site to be announced.


Clothestime Inc.(CTME,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Hanukkah's a-Coming: Geese Are Getting Fat
A HANUKKAH goose? With latkes?
Those who assume that a roast goose belongs only on the holly-trimmed Dickensian table on Dec. 25 have overlooked the shtetl.


Personal Health; Making it work when opposites attract.
LAST summer one of my sons, the product of a Swedish-American father from a Lutheran Minnesota family and a mother of Russian-Jewish descent from New York, married a Filipino-born Presbyterian woman from California.
Next spring his twin brother will marry a Korean-born woman who grew up in a Methodist family in Ohio and New York.
But according to the findings of the newest and best survey of sexuality in America, my family's melting-pot mix of ethnic, religious and racial heritages is relatively rare.
Despite the fascination many claim to have with the exotic and the popular belief that opposites attract, this survey found that the overwhelming majority of Americans choose their sexual partners and their lifetime mates from a pool of people very much like themselves.


Suit Faults New York City Over Upstate Homeless Site
New York City was sued yesterday by Orange County officials who contend that a city-run homeless shelter in their county has become a dumping ground for criminals and the mentally ill.
In the suit, county officials are asking the city to conduct extensive checks on the criminal and psychological history of residents before sending them to Camp La Guardia, a shelter for about 700 men in Chester, about 55 miles northwest of Manhattan.


2 Bridge Titles Decided Amid Dispute
Two major team titles were decided Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals amid a controversy that prompted a brief strike by players.
This concerned Sunday's qualifying stage of the Women's Board-a-Match Teams, during which one player reported, correctly, having played the same deals four months ago in San Diego.
A committee of the national board of directors threw out the results of this session, a decision some criticized as based on narrow legalism.
And the committee announced that there would be no carryover score from the session that was not affected, thus canceling some scores that were indisputably valid.


Down Home In Maine
Beal Bean (Patrick McGaw), the stammering backwoods hunk who stomps through the film adaptation of Carolyn Chute's best-selling 1985 novel, "The Beans of Egypt, Maine," brings to mind a Cole Porter lyric from the late 1920's.
In "Find Me a Primitive Man," the hankered-after object is described as "someone with vigor and vim/I don't mean the kind that belongs to a club/But the kind that has a club that belongs to him."
As played by Mr.
McGaw, Beal is a Chippendale's vision of stubbly machismo and not the bearded bear of a man described in the novel.
The fantasy of mating with such a man is lived out by Earlene Pomerleau (Martha Plimpton), the film's plucky narrator.
If her life with Beal brings the excitement of Tarzan-and-Jane sex and a rugged outdoor life, its griefs far outweigh its pleasures.
Dependent on erratic, low wages earned in the timber industry, the couple live in desperate poverty that Beal is too proud to alleviate with the help of food stamps.
When Beal goes hunting, it is as likely to be for dinner as it is for sport.


Federal Judge Permits Entry of Haitian-Refugee Children
A Federal judge ruled today that Haitian children detained in the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay should be allowed into the United States in the same way that Cuban-refugee children were.
The decision by Judge C. Clyde Atkins of Federal District Court here affects 231 unaccompanied Haitians under age 18 who have been in the Guantanamo refugee camps since the summer.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 18
Nov. 11
Nov. 19
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.9
7.6
7.9
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.1
3.5
Gasoline stocks
208.4
203.3
215.4
Distillate stocks
140.5
142.4
138.8
Crude imports, daily
7.1
7.3
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.9
1.9
Crude stocks
339.6
340.8
329.7
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
94.1
90.6
91.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


AT LUNCH WITH: William Shatner; Contemplating Death and the Sequel
HE'S alive. He's wearing a suit. And he's orange.
Captain Kirk is sitting in Orso, ready for lunch, still in full pancake makeup from a morning of television interviews touting his death in "Star Trek Generations." But the great thing about movies and the even greater thing about science fiction is that death means never having to miss a sequel.
Which comes as small comfort to at least one fan, my mother, who has spent the morning at a screening weeping over the brave leader's demise.
For almost 30 years she has had a crush on James Tiberius Kirk, captain of the Starship Enterprise, and now she is bereft.
I am not.
I have watched "Star Trek" under duress since I was a child, and today is no different.


Beauty Queen Is Convicted Of Reduced Charges in Attack
For months, the story of the beauty queen accused of attempted murder has fascinated the two Virginias.
It seemed, as one lawyer in the case put it, a case of "psycho Barbie doll gone bad."
But the tale that emerged here during a five-day trial that ended today was more sad than sordid: an articulate, striking woman who had never found a man who cared enough to put her photo in his wallet; a young man who could not settle for one lover at a time; a middle-class couple whose kitchen was invaded by a furious, wounded woman bent on revenge.


Sceptre Resources (SRL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; Out of the Hands of Babes
Would you buy a rug if you knew that it had been woven in India by 10-year-olds beaten if they didn't work fast enough?
Would you wear a shirt if it had been sewn by a 9-year-old locked into a factory in Bangladesh until production quotas for the day had been met?
Would you eat sardines if the cans had been filled by 12-year-old Filipino children sold into bonded servitude?
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, known as GATT, is the most sweeping free-trade pact in history.
But like many agreements among different nations with different agendas, much has been lost in the translation.
One of the losses in the GATT negotiations was the right of children not to be exploited, overworked and underpaid as a source of cheap and compliant labor around the world.


By Dorothy Parker, From A to Z
THE POETRY AND SHORT STORIES OF DOROTHY PARKER  457 pages. Modern Library. $15.50.
Dorothy Parker always made good copy.
Cole Porter began "It Was Just One of Those Things," his tribute to one-night stands, with the lines "As Dorothy Parker once said to her boyfriend/Fare thee well,/As Columbus announced when he knew he was bounced,/It was swell, Isabelle, swell. . . ." She always made good copy and she still does, what with film tributes, articles and earnest panel discussions.
Ever mistrustful, she would probably greet such attention with the wary opening lines of her story "The Little Hours": "Now what's this? What's the object of all this darkness all over me? They haven't gone and buried me alive while my back was turned, have they?" What she would really want to know is, do they think I turned out good writing?


O.K. Corral Budget; Council, Pressed by Giuliani for Cuts In Midyear, Looks to Test Its Powers
When the new City Charter took effect four years ago, it vastly increased the authority of the City Council, but it also left the Mayor with unrivaled budget powers that most governors or even the President might envy.
But Rudolph W. Giuliani is the first Mayor to vow to use those powers to the hilt.
And so the Council, faced with a second round of enormous budget cuts and with pleading constituents, has now threatened to test the limits of its own budget authority -- a move that could end up pitting the Mayor and the Council against each other in court.


Varity Corp.(VAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about Sheldon Silver, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, misstated the party affiliation of Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky of Westchester.
He is a Democrat.


On TV, a Heightened Gay Presence
As a script in process, it could be titled "The Closet and the Conservative Ascendancy." Few developments over the last decade have been more startling than the growing visibility, proud and demanding, of gay men and lesbians.
But the recent election triumphs of the Republican right have re-energized crusades and catch phrases -- "family values" is one -- that have traditionally been used against homosexuals.
Will gay men and women be forced to step back, even if only part way, into the closet?
The question at the moment is this: Is the door half open or half closed?
The answer, at least as far as television entertainment is concerned, is that the door has never been open wider.
And it is likely to stay that way.
A few years ago, gay groups were complaining, justifiably, that they were tired of seeing homosexuality portrayed on television as a problem.
They wanted to see themselves integrated into ordinary situations.
They wanted to be depicted as being as demographically diverse as heterosexuals.
A survey of recent programs confirms considerable changes.


London Journal; A Tipsy Big Ben Leans Over Bedlam-on-Thames
Westminster Bridge is falling down, or would be if engineers had not just embarked on a project to shore it up.
Across town, near Sloane Square, one of the Victorian-era iron beams supporting the roof of the Underground station is cracked, forcing trains to crawl through at 15 miles an hour.
Even Big Ben isn't standing as tall as it used to.
Last month, engineers reported the 135-year-old clock tower was listing just over a tenth of an inch, a slight tilt that some experts believe is related to nearby tunneling for a rail line extension.


Pilot Offers Explanation For Odd Noise On USAir Jet
A USAir captain says he may have created an unusual noise on a Boeing 737 by accidentally turning on the public address system during a flight a few hours before the airplane crashed near Pittsburgh on Sept. 8, killing all 132 people aboard.
In court papers last week, lawyers for the widow of one of the victims said three people had reported an odd noise aboard the aircraft on its trip from Charlotte, N.C., to Chicago, immediately before its fateful flight to Pittsburgh.
The reports gave rise to speculation that the noise was related to the subsequent crash, which remains under investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board.


From Brooklyn to Staten Island, Through the Clouds


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport is selling $108.6 million of tax-exempt special facility revenue refunding bonds through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are priced at par to yield 8.25 percent.
They are rated Baa2 by Moody's Investors Service and BB+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp


Harnischfeger (HPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.49
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.40
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.85
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.88
8.00
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.02
8.12
6.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.94
7.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.37
7.36
5.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Let the Turkey Offer Thanks as Well
To the Editor:
The Thanksgiving season will soon be upon us.
Traditionally, this holiday has been a joyful celebration of life, liberty and a bountiful harvest.
More recently, the carcass of a turkey has become the centerpiece of the festivities.


Film in Review; Macaulay Culkin Finding Himself in a World of Books
Unless Macaulay Culkin gets lost in some age-defying time warp, "The Pagemaster" has to be one of the last films in which this 14-year-old can play a cute little boy.
He still does it very well as a scaredy-cat named Richard, who is fearful of everything, including his own treehouse.
His father (Ed Begley Jr.) is worried by the way Richard can recite the statistical odds of being injured while playing baseball.
But Mr.
Culkin's charm can't take this children's movie far.
"The Pagemaster" is a pallid film framed at the start and finish by live action and mostly composed of cheap-looking animation.
The movie proclaims that reading is an adventure, and though books literally come alive (one even has Whoopi Goldberg's streetwise voice and personality) the adventure never takes off.


Recalling the Muppet Master
It all began in 1955 with a hand in a sock.
The hand belonged to Jim Henson, whose impertinent puppets on a show called "Sam and Friends" become a local late-night hit on the CBS affiliate in Washington.
From the beginning, Mr.
Henson's attitude toward television was, "Let's play with the medium." How imaginatively and memorably he played is recounted on "The World of Jim Henson," tonight's 90-minute "Great Performances" presentation on WNET.
Proceeding chronologically, the show includes interviews with longtime Henson colleagues like Frank Oz, performer and director, and Jerry Juhl, head writer, along with fans like Ted Koppel ("I think we all see a little bit of ourselves in Kermit and wish we only had Kermit's panache") and Maurice Sendak ("There was something so to the heart, you were astonished that it could be so simple and funny").


Friends Pay Loving Tribute To Tandy and Her Career
Jessica Tandy, whose talent and graceful presence illuminated theater and films for almost 70 years, was remembered with deep affection and admiration at a memorial celebration yesterday at the Shubert Theater.
Tandy died on Sept. 11 at the age of 85.
Mike Nichols, Kathy Bates, Zoe Caldwell and Karl Malden were among those who paid tribute to the actress before an audience that included Tandy's husband of 52 years, Hume Cronyn.
Sir John Gielgud and Sir Alec Guinness were heard on tape.
Sir John recalled their early performances together (Tandy was Ophelia to his Hamlet) and spoke about her "brilliant career" and her "enchanting personal character."


CHS Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Film in Review; Military Coup in Australia
Few areas of the world have inspired more mystically shimmering cinematography than the Australian outback, the setting for "Resistance," a contemporary political thriller directed by Paul Elliot and Hugh Keays-Byrne.
That aura of magical translucence has been heightened by the film's director of photography, Sally Bongers, to evoke a vision of Australian rural life that is hallucinatory in its intensity and precision.
Ms.
Bongers was largely responsible for the surreal ambiance that gave Jane Campion's films "Sweetie" and "The Piano" their otherworldly quality.
And in "Resistance," which opens today at Angelika 57, she has outdone herself in creating beautiful but disturbing cinematic pictures that give the expression "the land down under" a more than geographic resonance.


Nutrition Guides May Be Deceptive for the Aged
IT should surprise no one to learn that people's bodies change in significant ways as they age.
But researchers are just beginning to discover important nutritional differences between the old and young that, if ignored, could adversely affect the health and well-being of older Americans.
In today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, for example, Dr.
Susan B. Roberts and colleagues at the Federal Agriculture Department's Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging in Boston report that older men seem to have trouble balancing the amount of calories they consume with the amount they expend.
When forced to gain weight, they hang on to the extra pounds, and when their weight drops below normal, they do not readily gain it back.
Either way -- overweight or underweight -- this failure to adjust could increase the risk of serious illness in older people, Dr.
Roberts said.


Israelis Ask if Gaza Outpost Is Worth Defending
This Israeli settlement, where farmers grow tomatoes and bearded men study the Talmud, is looking more and more like Fort Apache each day.
At the main army checkpoint leading to Netzarim, a dozen Israeli soldiers hunkered down today behind newly built earth ramparts and concrete barricades with mounds of sandbags on top.
Fingers nestled against the triggers of their M-16 automatic rifles as the soldiers watched Palestinians drive by on the main road a few yards away.


Dow Plunges 91.52 As High Rates Lure Investors to Bonds
In one of the most turbulent market sessions this year, stock prices fell further yesterday than on any other day in the last 10 months.
Almost all the 91.52-point, or 2.4 percent, selloff in the Dow Jones industrial average came in late afternoon trading and left traders puzzling about the reasons.
But many said the heavy sales were a result of the belief that investors, both large companies and average Americans, would now sell stocks to buy bonds because they were becoming a more attractive investment.


Minding the Store On Food Ad Claims
TO some lovers of Haagen-Dazs frozen yogurts, the idea that the delicious desserts were low in fat seemed too good to be true.
The skeptics were right.


Cobra Industries Inc.(COI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Sent Joe Grahe, pitcher, and Steve Hosey, outfielder, outright to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


President Of Lagerfeld Is Replaced
In a move that took the retailing community by surprise, Karl Lagerfeld S.A., the French fashion house, said yesterday that Ralph Toledano, its president for the last 10 years, had left the company.
He will be replaced by Marc Vincent, who will take the title of managing director, the company said.
Mr.
Vincent was the managing director of Valentino, the Italian fashion house, for seven years, and before that was managing director of Yves Saint Laurent's European operations for 10 years.


NEW JERSEY PLANS TO CUT PAYMENTS FOR MEDICAID 20%
New Jersey officials said today that they planned to cut the amount of money hospitals receive to care for Medicaid patients by 20 percent starting in March.
William Waldman, the State Human Services Commissioner, said he expected a court challenge, but is confident the move, which would reduce hospital reimbursements by $135 million annually, would be upheld.
"We cannot be in the business of subsidizing hospitals," Mr.
Waldman told reporters at a meeting in his office.
"We must become the purchasers of services that are delivered efficiently and economically."


Artists Suffer More From Mental Illness
To the Editor:
Daniel Grant, in criticizing my views on the link between artistic creativity and mood disorders ("On Not Doubting Sanity of Artists," letter, Nov. 18), seems not to know or understand the substantial research literature on the subject.
First, no one would claim that all artists suffer from mood disorders, and certainly not that all, or indeed many of them, are "insane." Second, there are studies that compare rates of mental illness in artistic and non-artistic groups.


Knicks Use Old In-Your-Face Tricks
Moments after the Knicks defeated the San Antonio Spurs Monday night at the Garden, Pat Riley praised their defense and intensity, and he basically said they were returning to being the old Knicks.
In a humid and happy locker room, his players echoed those sentiments.
Meet the new Knicks, same as the old Knicks.
After a brief flirtation with increased running was ditched because the Knicks became too reliant on jumpers and Riley became too incensed with watching opponents breeze up and down the court, New York is settling into a familiar routine.
The Knicks are adapting to the new hand-checking rules and trying to play in their old, rugged manner.
It is working.


Administration Says Deal With Dole on Trade Is Near
Administration officials said tonight that they expected by Wednesday to reach a deal with Senator Bob Dole that would pave the way for his support of a world trade agreement scheduled for a vote in a lame-duck session of Congress next week.
After a day of negotiations with Mr.
Dole over his objections to a crucial part of the pact, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said, "We're making great progress and I think we'll have it."


Pilot Offers Explanation For Odd Noise On USAir Jet
A USAir captain says he may have created an unusual noise on a Boeing 737 by accidentally turning on the public address system during a flight a few hours before the airplane crashed near Pittsburgh on Sept. 8, killing all 132 people aboard.
In court papers last week, lawyers for the widow of one of the victims said three people had reported an odd noise aboard the aircraft on its trip from Charlotte, N.C., to Chicago, immediately before its fateful flight to Pittsburgh.
The reports gave rise to speculation that the noise was related to the subsequent crash, which remains under investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board.


On Campus; Fraternity House Is Now Monumental
The Alpha Rho Chi fraternity house at the University of Southern California has been declared a city cultural and historical monument.
The City Council recently gave the designation to the two-and-a-half-story Colonial Revival house at the request of a neighborhood group.


Brady (W.H.) Co.  (BRCOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


TWA Jetliner Hits Cessna in Takeoff In St. Louis, Killing 2
A Trans World Airlines jetliner struck a private plane with its wing during takeoff tonight at Lambert-St.
Louis International Airport today, killing two people aboard the small craft and injuring several passengers on the large jet.
The TWA MD-80, carrying 142 passengers plus its crew, was accelerating when the pilot apparently saw the Cessna 421 in his path and swerved to avoid the smaller plane, an Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman, Sandra Campbell, said from the agency's Kansas City, Mo., regional office.


Jet Rookie Is Hoping His Dance Catches On
Ryan Yarborough had all season to think about what to do when he caught his first National Football League touchdown pass.
Which might explain the dance last Sunday.


INSIDE
Navy Dismissal Upheld
A Federal appeals court has endorsed the United States Naval Academy's dismissal of a midshipman in 1987 after he acknowledged that he was a homosexual.
Page A20.
Pilot May Not Face Charges
An Air Force investigator has recommended dropping all charges against the pilot of an F-15 involved in the shooting down of two American helicopters in April.
Page A14.
Helms Faults Clinton Again
Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina said President Clinton was so unpopular that he would need a bodyguard in his state, then said the comment was a mistake.
Page A19.


Accounts
*
The Desktop Document Systems division of Xerox Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., to Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco, as the first agency to handle its account.
Y.&amp; R. New York is the agency for the worldwide Xerox account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Inspections Conducted at Squatter Buildings


M. T. Jenkins, 77, Doctor Who Tried To Revive Kennedy
Dr.
Marion Thomas Jenkins, the Texas anesthesiologist who tried to resuscitate both President John F. Kennedy and his assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, 31 years ago, died on Monday at his home in Dallas.
He was 77.
The cause was stomach cancer, his family said.


BJ Services Co.(BJS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comptroller Sees Waste In Busing Preschoolers
Every school day, thousands of handicapped 3- and 4-year-old children spend more than two hours a day on buses to get to and from special training programs in New York City that they may not need, the City Comptroller charged yesterday.
A child from Brooklyn might be bused to the Bronx to correct a stutter; one from Queens might be bused to Manhattan for emotional problems.
Citywide, more than 9,000 children attend programs run by a loose network of private centers specializing in treatment of very young disabled children, more than half with speech defects as their sole disability.
Only about 14 percent are wheelchair users.


Victory Helps Frieder Scratch 5-Year Itch
In the Bo Schembechler Bowl tonight, Bill Frieder defeated Steve Fisher.
But it was a grudge match for only one of them: Frieder.
He had once been Michigan's coach, only to have the team pulled out from under his feet by Schembechler five years ago, and this evening was his payback.
His Arizona State Sun Devils pressured Fisher's Michigan Wolverines into a turnover every two minutes, and won their Maui Invitation semifinal, 79-62.


Collins &amp; Aikman Corp.(CKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Evelyn Anderson, Dancer, Dies at 87; A Baker Co-Star
Evelyn Anderson, believed to be the last surviving member of the troupe that danced with Josephine Baker in "La Revue Negre" in Paris in the 1920's, died on Oct. 29 at Misericordia Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 87.
The cause was pneumonia, her family said.


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Charles Baskerville, 98, Dies; Portrait Painter and Muralist
Charles Baskerville, a prominent portrait painter and muralist, died on Sunday in Manhattan.
He was 98.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, said Van der Veer Varner, a friend.
Mr.
Baskerville collapsed in the street after lunching with friends, Mr.
Varner said.


Teacher Advising Education Chief Draws Lessons From Own History
Since Terry Dozier, late of Irmo High School in Columbia, S.C., arrived at the Education Department, meetings have not been the same.
She is the first classroom teacher to become a special adviser to a Secretary of Education, serving as what Secretary Richard W. Riley calls his "reality check" on teaching and bringing to the interminable rounds of department meetings a view from the schoolhouse.


Glimpsing Promise In the Human Voice As an Instrument In the Future of Jazz
In the early 1980's, when the rank and file of young jazz musicians started a pilgrimage to New York, one instrument was conspicuous by its absence: the voice.
In the last decade, one important singer has emerged, Cassandra Wilson, and a few others of less than historic ability are hanging around.
Jazz singing seems to have entered a long, deep winter.
Tonight's vocal competition at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here, held in front of a sold-out audience by the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz, was supposed to warm the climate for singers.
The institute, founded by the Monk family and Maria Fisher, a philanthropist who also started the Beethoven Society of America, has been holding jazz's equivalent of the Van Cliburn Competition for eight years.
It has become one of jazz's institutional powerhouses, a marketing machine that has virtually guaranteed careers for its winners, who include the saxophonist Joshua Redmon and the pianists Marcus Roberts, Jacky Terrasson and Joey DeFrancesco.
It provides a souk where the major labels have been able to do their shopping, a Wal-Mart for an industry notoriously short on scouting ability.


A Classical Music Guide
To the Editor:
When you refer to magazines dealing with classical music, as your Nov. 15 Arts pages did in discussing men's and women's musical preferences, you ought to take note of the American Record Guide.
The magazine, to which I am a contributor, has for nearly three years continued the traditions of the defunct Musical America with a section edited by that publication's former editor devoted to classical music articles and reviews of live performances.


4 at Police Center In Washington Die As Gunfire Erupts
Four people, including a District of Columbia police sergeant and two F.B.I. agents, were killed today in a wild eruption of gunfire inside the Police Headquarters building, the authorities said.
Two other people were reported to have been wounded.
The police said the incident began around 3:30 P.M. and lasted about an hour.
But by tonight many details of what had happened remained unknown.


Sir Ian Potter, 92, a Financier And Philanthropist in Australia
Sir Ian Potter, an Australian financier and philanthropist, died on Oct. 24 at his home in Melbourne, Australia.
He was 92.
Sir Ian, who was knighted in 1962, retired in 1967 from his stockbrokerage, where he had been the principal partner for 30 years after founding it in 1936 as Ian Potter &amp; Company.
Later it changed its name to Potter Partners, and it is now Potter Warburg Ltd.


BASEBALL: A Natural at Filling the Seats; Weak Bat Adds Skepticism to Jordan's Future in Majors
Michael Jordan swung at the first pitch and dumped a double next to the left-field line.
The fans at Scottsdale Stadium cheered lustily, but a group of more dispassionate observers reacted differently.
"That soft line drive was on an 81-mile-an-hour fastball that was right there," a major league scout said a couple of innings after Jordan's hit in a recent game.
"He just got out too early with a soft swing."


The Case for 'Privatizing' Park Wildlife
To the Editor:
"Flood of Rwanda Refugees Is Destroying Ecological Treasure" (Science Times, Nov. 15) omits a significant reason for the threat to wildlife in Zaire's Virunga National Park: It is a common property resource.


U.S., in a Secret Deal, Removes Bomb Fuel in Ex-Soviet Republic
The United States has secretly negotiated the delivery of a large cache of bomb-grade uranium from Kazakhstan to this country for safe storage, Clinton Administration officials said tonight.
The existence of the more than half a ton of highly enriched uranium had not been previously disclosed.
The material, enough to make dozens of bombs, has been a major worry for Administration officials since they learned of its existence.
Officials said the material has arrived in the United States by plane, and will be stored in the nuclear complex at Oak Ridge, Tenn.


Fay's Inc.(FAY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Italy's Premier Named in Corruption Investigation
Italian magistrates told Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi today that he was being investigated on corruption charges because of bribes paid to tax inspectors by his business empire.
Already reeling from local elections in which his conservative Forza Italia party fared disastrously last weekend, Mr.
Berlusconi received word of the judicial move as he played host to an international conference in Naples on combating organized crime.


Jergens Chooses Suissa Miller
The Andrew Jergens Company has selected Suissa Miller Advertising in Santa Monica, Calif., to handle the creative part of its consumer brands account, with billings estimated at $30 million.
That assignment had been handled by Publicis/ Bloom in New York for the last two and a half years until that agency and Jergens parted company in June because of potential conflicts with a larger client of Publicis/Bloom's, Cosmair.


Gay Officials Gather to Share Ideas
Like many colleagues in state capitols and city halls around the nation, the officials who met here over the weekend are concerned about race relations, religious conservatism and re-election.
But what brought about 60 of them together is what sets them apart: they are openly gay, a small but growing presence in local government.
They gathered as they have each year since 1985.


A Bunch Of Bobcats Are Caught In a Cage
It was all the Ohio University basketball team could do to make it to New York.
But for a few moments yesterday, a portion of the traveling party was not sure how long it would take to get out.
Thirteen members of the Bobcats contingent in town for the Preseason National Invitation Tournament -- including Coach Larry Hunter, various assistants and a couple of players -- crowded into a freight elevator on the sixth floor of the New York Athletic Club.


Arden Group Inc.(ARDNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


CHRONICLE
THE REV.
WILLIAM MCDONALD TULLY was instituted as the 11th rector of St.
Bartholomew's Church on Monday evening and began his tenure in the spirit of healing and peace.
A prolonged dispute over whether the church, at Park Avenue and 51st Street, should replace its community house with an office tower had left residues of bitterness.


Helms Takes New Swipe at Clinton, Then Calls It Mistake
Senator Jesse Helms, the likely next chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, created a new uproar today when he was quoted saying that President Clinton was so unpopular on military bases in North Carolina that he "better have a bodyguard" if he visits the state.
Mr.
Helms later called the comment "a mistake."
Asked about the Helms comments at a White House news conference today, President Clinton said, "I think the remarks were unwise and inappropriate."


Corrections
An article in Science Times yesterday about an experiment using DNA, the genetic material, as a form of computer referred incorrectly in some copies to a problem solved that way.
It was to find a path connecting seven cities, passing through each once, when routes exist between only some of them.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With a Nod to Oxford, Stanford Sets Program for Asian Scholars
Stanford University is developing a program modeled after Oxford University's Rhodes Scholarships in an effort to attract top college graduates from Asia, the fastest growing region of the world.
"Our hope is to train generations of leaders who will go back to Asia and shape the direction of their countries' development," said Prof.
Daniel Okimoto, co-director of the Asia Pacific Research Center at Stanford, who is helping develop the program.


Wine Talk
IS there another creature as forlorn as a person staring in obvious and total incomprehension at a wine bottle?
One sees such people in wine shops, alone with their misery amid the cheery bustle around them.


Prices Advance Sharply On Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities surged yesterday, with investors coming out of the stock market to buy bonds because of their attractive returns, traders said.
Demand pushed the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond to a three-week low.


U.S. Limits Gains From Sale Of Mutual Savings Banks
Federal regulators adopted new rules today covering sales of mutual savings banks to other banks or investors as a final step in a 10-month crackdown on deals in which savings executives legally pocketed millions of dollars.
Under the regulations approved today, executives of mutual savings banks will no longer be allowed to award themselves free stock and options in the transactions or buy large chunks of stock in their institutions' initial public offerings.


Appeals Court Upholds Academy's Removal of Gay Midshipman
A Federal appeals court today upheld the Naval Academy's removal of a top-ranked midshipman who had acknowledged his homosexuality.
Lawyers for the former midshipman, Joseph C. Steffan, said later that they had not decided whether to appeal the 7-to-3 decision, issued by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
Any further appeal, to the Supreme Court, would provide the Justices their first opportunity to consider the issue of homosexuals' service in the military.


Venturing Several Steps Past Flamenco's Traditions
The World Music Institute provided fascinating and informative essays on flamenco and its dance forms in the program for "Flamenco Gitano," presented by the institute on Friday night at the New School.
But scholarly notes were of as little use as a road map through a rain forest.
The music and dance was familiar enough, but here the accent was on exuberant improvisation by six skillful, go-for-broke performers, all Gypsies from Spain and nearly all related to one another.
Dressed in simple black suits and dresses and cheerfully sipping wine onstage, they created an atmosphere that was unselfconsciously intimate, chatting easily among themselves and with the audience.


Rabbi Given Prison Term In Kidnapping Of Teen-Ager
In a courtroom rife with rancorous passion, an ultra-Orthodox rabbi was sentenced yesterday to 4 to 12 years in prison for kidnapping a Jewish teen-ager who disappeared from his family for two years.
Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans, the leader of a small Hasidic sect, was given the prison term after he declared fervently that he was the victim of the kind of "blood libel" that had "cost the lives of millions," and after the youth's mother spoke with equal intensity about losing her son to "people who control his mind."


Film in Review; Black Action With Jokes
In the funniest moment of "A Low Down Dirty Shame," a lighthearted detective yarn written and directed by and starring Keenen Ivory Wayans, the star deflects the charge of three dripping-fanged Dobermans by slipping into a James Brown imitation.
From a supercool private eye, Mr.
Wayans abruptly transforms himself into a caricature of the godfather of soul, barking instructions to his backup singers on how to perform "Say It Loud, I'm Black and Proud." Caught up in the spirit, the canines halt their pursuit and begin rotating their heads in time with the beat.
For all its jokes, "A Low Down Dirty Shame" is not an out-and-out spoof of the blaxploitation genre like Mr.
Wayans's 1989 comedy hit, "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka." The film, which opens today, is a good-natured action film that doesn't take itself at all seriously.
Every few minutes the story stops in its tracks to deliver the same sort of broad situation comedy humor found on the star's hit television series, "In Living Color." The movie isn't afraid to offend.
One running gag involves an interracial gay couple who are presented as mincing, lisping buffoons.


City Council Supports Mayor On a Sex-Store Moratorium
City Council members yesterday agreed to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan for a one-year moratorium on opening or expanding any sex-oriented video store, theater or bar.
The move is the first step in sharply restricting adult-entertainment businesses, an effort that the Mayor has made part of his drive to improve the quality of life in New York.
During the moratorium, new zoning laws are to be written to generally banish sex-oriented shops to areas of the city zoned for industry.


In America; At Last, A Truce
The cold war has ended.
Governor-elect George Pataki and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani are going to sit down and talk.
The blood feud, provoked by Mayor Giuliani's decision to cross party lines and endorse Mario Cuomo for re-election, is being put aside -- at least for the time being.
Political egos being what they are, it took nearly a week to negotiate the cease-fire.
The word began to filter out early yesterday:


Tejas Power Corp.(TPC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
The Continental Cablevision Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the cable systems owned by the Providence Journal Company in a deal valued at $1.4 billion.
Continental, the nation's No. 3 cable company, with 3.1 million subscribers, is now privately held, but will become a public company as a result of the transaction, which includes an exchange of its common stock for the Journal Company's cable systems.


Food Notes
A Chocolate Hanukkah
Hanukkah begins at sundown on Sunday, and here's a treat for each of the holiday's eight nights -- and then some.
Perugina Classic chocolate bars are kosher and range from dark to milk to white chocolate.
They come in 16 varieties, including dark chocolate with hazelnuts, milk chocolate with cappuccino filling, milk chocolate with peanut truffle filling, and white chocolate with macadamia nuts.
The complete line is sold at the Perugina shop, 520 Madison Avenue (near 54th Street), for $1.85 a bar.
Fancy-food shops and candy counters around the country carry a selection of the flavors.
Nothing but Doughnuts
Mark Isreal, formerly the manager of Angelica Kitchen, in the East Village, has opened the Doughnut Plant, a tiny wholesale bakery on the Lower East Side.
There, he is putting his grandfather's doughnut recipe to good use.
"He had a bakery in Greensboro, and his doughnuts were the best," said Mr.
Isreal, a native of Greensboro, N.C.
For the last two months, Mr.
Isreal has been exhibiting familial flair for big old-fashioned glazed doughnuts that are not only delicious but also contain superior ingredients.


Oneida Ltd.(OCQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Off the Menu
New Places
The pace of new restaurant openings has intensified with the beginning of the holiday season.
*
The Bowery Bar, 358 Bowery (near 4th Street), has finally opened after having been in the news this summer with its party for James Truman of Conde Nast.
The downtown spotlight is now turned on this former gas station, and the place throbs with energy.
The owners, Eric Goode and Serge Becker, insist the place is about food (new American), not scene.


At Risk in Gaza
Last Friday's fatal clashes in Gaza dramatized the perils that threaten Israel's historic peace with Yasir Arafat's P.L.O.
Fourteen people were killed and more than 200 wounded after Palestinian police fired on street protesters, many of them sympathetic to the militant Islamic organization Hamas.
It is six months since the P.L.O. took over administration of Gaza and Jericho.
Expectations were overly high, international aid has been slow to arrive and Hamas has tried to undermine the P.L.O. at every turn.
But by now the Palestinian Authority should have been able to establish a measure of civil order and start to deliver the fruits of peace to a long-suffering population.
It has not done so, and Palestinians' patience is rapidly running out.


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NNM) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


Preparing to Take Over the Capitol


Sports of The Times; A Father Learns From His Son
THE father was doing time in Federal prison when he realized the cycle of failure is not impossible to break.
On the TV screen, the child he left behind a handful of years before was now 6 feet 8 inches tall, 240 pounds, the best player in a college basketball game.
Dexter Trent remembered days on the Columbus, Ohio, playgrounds when the oldest of his three kids insisted that football was going to be his sport.
Even at 13, Gary Trent was big, like his mother's five brothers, and fast.
He liked the contact, too.


Fred's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Jones Quits as Coach At Oklahoma State
PAT JONES resigned as Oklahoma State's football coach yesterday to let someone else guide a program still trying to recover from National Collegiate Athletic Association sanctions leveled five and a half years ago.
Jones won 62 games in his 11 years, more than any coach in school history.
But the Cowboys had six straight losing seasons and have gone without a victory in the Big Eight during three of the last four years.
Jones said victories and losses had far less to do with his decision than the need to upgrade facilities and improve financing in order to put the Cowboys on equal footing with other Big Eight schools.


Rodman Gets Support
The National Basketball Association players' union has filed a grievance on behalf of forward DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs.
The union says the Spurs had no right to dock Rodman about $105,000 for violating team rules.
Rodman, on paid leave since Nov. 12, was fined $15,000 for showing up late for an exhibition game Oct. 20.
However, league rules stipulate players who miss exhibition games are subject to no more than a $1,000 fine.


Similar, but Separate
RIDDICK BOWE and LARRY DONALD are similar fighters with similar builds and similar styles.
That's true, up to a point.
But when Bowe, the former heavyweight champion, takes on Donald in a 12-round HBO fight at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., on Dec. 3, there's one similarity you can bet on: Both fighters will be getting the same kind of calm, studied critiques between rounds.
That's because Donald's trainer, JANCKS MORTON, learned his craft by studying Bowe's trainer, 83-year-old EDDIE FUTCH.
Both trainers took part in a conference call yesterday, and part of the conversation turned on the similarities of the two fighters, both former Olympians who failed to win their weight classes.
The two fighters have identical measurements in reach (81 inches), neck (17 1/2 ), biceps (17) and expanded chests (50), but at 38 inches, Bowe's waist is 6 inches larger than Donald's (32).


Michaels Stores Inc.(MIKE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Swiss Bank Holds Off Challenger, but Barely
By a tiny margin, Union Bank of Switzerland, the country's largest banking organization, won a shareholder vote today that will keep the $300 billion institution out of the hands of a Swiss financier who had threatened to change management and take control.
Martin Ebner, whose BK Vision investment fund is the largest shareholder of the bank, failed by just 66,000 votes, out of more than 31 million cast, to force the company to halt its plan of changing two classes of shares with different voting rights into one unified class of shares with equal voting rights.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about moves by the New York Police Department to combat prostitution by arresting clients referred incorrectly to a 1979 radio broadcast by Mayor Edward I. Koch.
The men whose names Mr.
Koch read on the air had indeed been convicted, not merely arrested, on charges of patronizing prostitutes.


American Stores Co.(ASC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Pilot in Friendly Fire Case Is Likely to Avoid Charges
An Air Force investigator has recommended dropping all charges of negligent homicide and dereliction of duty against an F-15 fighter jet pilot implicated in the shooting down of two American helicopters over northern Iraq last April, an incident that killed all 26 people aboard.
If the investigator's commanding officer accepts the recommendation, which is likely, only one person involved in one of the military's worst self-inflicted losses will face court-martial.


Baker (J.) Inc.(JBAK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Labor Secretary Urges Cuts For 'Corporate Welfare' Too
Firing back at conservatives who have vowed to trim welfare costs, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich today issued a broad but vague call to choke off as much as $200 billion in "corporate welfare" as a way of finding money for jobs programs.
But he stopped short of identifying any corporate tax break or subsidy as unreasonable or counterproductive.
And though he referred to a study by a Democratic research organization that identifies $111 billion in preferential programs for specific industries, the Labor Secretary said he was not endorsing that report or the suggestions in it.


New Approach Is Tried in Suit Over Homeless
Trying a new strategy to prevent New York City from letting homeless families sleep overnight in offices, a state judge yesterday appointed a mediator to oversee negotiations between the city and advocates for the homeless.
In issuing the order, Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said that for 11 years, the courts have been unable to force a resolution, even though a contempt order barring the city from keeping families overnight in offices was upheld in May by the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court.


More Than 30 Hurt In Highway Crash Of Bus and Truck
A bus carrying about 40 people from New York City to Atlantic City collided with a tow truck on the Garden State Parkway near Holmdel, N.J., yesterday, seriously injuring both drivers and leaving 38 bus passengers with minor injuries, officials said.
The accident occurred about 9:35 P.M. when the bus, which had picked up its passengers in Chinatown, struck the tow truck from behind as both vehicles were southbound just south of Exit 114, said Trooper Rick Valmon of the New Jersey State Police.


Chargers Keep Hearing Tune to 'Kansas City'
Wobbly wheels on the playoff express are slowing some of the division leaders, especially the San Diego Chargers.
The Chargers jumped to a 6-0 start and life looked rosy.
But the Chargers (8-3) have lost three of their last five games and are shaky.
Although San Diego has a one-game lead in the American Football Conference West, the Chiefs (7-4) are bearing down and the Raiders (6-5) are close behind.


SERBS PRESS DRIVE ON BOSNIAN TOWN, USING HELICOPTER
Undaunted by a NATO air raid Monday, rebel Serbs backed by tanks and a helicopter closed in on Bihac today, pounding Bosnian Government forces and leaving several villages burning and hundreds of refugees without shelter, United Nations officials said.
Despite the attack on the Serbian-held Udbina airfield in Croatia on Monday, Bosnian Serb forces fired at least one surface-to-air missile at two British Harrier jets that were on regular NATO patrol near Bosanska Krupa, the officials said.


Times Square Job To Artkraft Strauss
Times Square Center Associates has awarded the Artkraft Strauss Sign Corporation in New York contracts to design, build, market and manage outdoor advertising where 42d Street intersects with Seventh Avenue and with Broadway.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
The contract calls for as many as 10 new illuminated signs on the corners, as well as management of the signs already at those sites.
The signs are part of the redevelopment plan for the Times Square neighborhood.


M.T.A. Board Votes Plan Calling for 10 Fare Rise
Brushing aside the objections of New York City officials, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority approved a long-range strategy yesterday that calls for a 10-cent fare increase next year to help pay for monthly passes with unlimited rides and free transfers between subways and buses.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's two representatives on the M.T.A. board said the plan was unrealistic because it did not take into account the city's decision to cut $113 million from its contribution to the M.T.A.


Resisting O.J.-itis
EARLY next year, when the O. J. Simpson trial kicks off in earnest and full-time coverage returns to television, J. W. Johnson vows that the Cottonwood Cafe will be an O. J.-free zone.
He will not tune the cafe's television to Court TV, nor will he lend an ear to barflies who wish to dissect the latest about Cato Kaylin or Marcia Clark's skirt lengths.
"I just can't take it anymore," said Mr.
Johnson, an owner of the cafe, on Bleecker Street in Greenwich Village.
"This morning when I was eating breakfast, watching CNN, they came on with jury selection and I flipped it to another channel."


No Arms to Indonesia
To the Editor:
I am pleased that a Nov. 15 editorial, "Indonesia's Embarrassment," called on President Clinton to raise the issue of East Timor with President Suharto.
However, perhaps the most important thing Mr.
Clinton could do to show he is serious about protecting the people of East Timor would be to call for an end to arms sales to Indonesia.


Pataki Says He'll Meet Giuliani, And Help Him in a Budget Fight
They still have not spoken, but Governor-elect George E. Pataki offered an olive branch today to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying he would meet with the Mayor one on one next week and that he would help the Mayor next year in Albany to block two bills that would hurt the city budget.
In a press release ostensibly about the potential evils of "unfunded mandates" and "pension supplementation," Mr.
Pataki effectively offered a cease-fire in one of the most visible political feuds the state and city have seen in decades.


Fluke Corp.(FLK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Viola Spolin, 88, a Teacher Who Inspired Improv Theater
Viola Spolin, who as a teacher and author was an inspiration for the improvisational theater movement, died yesterday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 88.
Her sister, Beatrice Lees, said Mrs. Spolin had three strokes in recent years.


Survivors of 2 Different Wars as Kindred Spirits
TAKA, a child who has every reason to be afraid of everything, seems to be afraid of nothing.
Laughing and dancing, he leaps into a stranger's lap and then pulls him by the hand through a tour of his home in Greenwich Village.
The stranger follows, noticing the scars from a machete wound on the side of the child's head, and marvels at the survival of innocence.
The little boy's scalp was seriously injured last summer when a chain reaction of slaughter and rampage surged through his native land, Rwanda.
No one knows exactly how it happened but the doctors who operated on him say the blow was intentional.
No one even knows his last name, or where and when he was born.
Whatever Taka may remember of his injuries he has kept to himself, but last Saturday he put down the toy cars he was playing with and, turning serious, asked in English,


Fab Five? Try Pretty Darn Good Five
Their shorts will be hemmed, their playing time will be monitored and their memoirs will go unpublished.
The new Fab Five is no reincarnation of the old Fab Five -- so help Steve Fisher.
Fisher, the Michigan basketball coach who continues to recruit a handful at a time, will protect his latest freshman class like a school crossing guard.
Juwan Howard, Jalen Rose, Chris Webber, Jimmy King and Ray Jackson were a merchandiser's dream, but Son of Fab Five may never be on a first-name basis with the country.


New York, Beware: The Death Penalty Is Riddled With Iniquity
To the Editor:
Now that the election is behind us, proponents of the death penalty in New York need to reassess the efficacy and the legal and moral consequences of capital punishment.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  SERBS CONTINUE ATTACK  Serbs continued to close in on a northwest Bosnian town, in defiance of NATO after air strikes the day before on a base held by the Serbs, and NATO appeared to be preparing for further air strikes.
A1  An American proposal to protect a Bosnian town.
A13


Levering Rothfuss, Pianist, Dies at 42
Levering Rothfuss, a pianist and vocal coach, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 42 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said his mother, Reva Rothfuss.


Chase Brass Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Julian Symons Is Dead at 82; Author of Stylish Crime Novels
Julian Symons, a prolific and urbane writer known for his finely fashioned crime novels, died on Saturday at his home in Kent.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, said his publisher, Macmillan.


El Paso Electric Co.(ELPAQ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frazier Appeal Denied
Nebraska learned yesterday that quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER won't receive an extra year of eligibility to make up for this season, most of which he missed because of recurring blood clots.
The N.C.A.A. administrative review panel denied Frazier's appeal for medical hardship.
"I feel terrible about him losing a year of eligibility," Coach TOM OSBORNE said.
"This is supposed to be the year of the athlete in the N.C.A.A."


MFP Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Fe Asks Backing For Burlington Merger
The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation asked shareholders yesterday to back a proposed merger with the Burlington Northern Corporation, but hinted that it might change its mind if the Union Pacific Corporation sweetened its rival offer.
The moves were the latest in a protracted bidding war for Santa Fe between Union Pacific, whose overtures have generally not been welcomed by Santa Fe managers, and Burlington Northern, which Santa Fe has said it would like to combine with to create the nation's largest railroad, surpassing Union Pacific.


Furon Co. (FCBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Two women leaving the Grolier Club discover it is raining. No umbrellas.
"I didn't know it was supposed to rain."


Swedes Pick Cup Team
The Swedish Davis Cup team that will play Russia in the finals in Moscow on Dec. 2-4 was named yesterday.
It will be the last one selected by the Swedish captain, JOHN-ANDERS SJOGREN, who said that he would step down after nine years.
The team's coach, CARL-AXEL HAGESKOG, will replace Sjogren, who is 55 years old.
Not surprisingly, Sjogren chose STEFAN EDBERG, MAGNUS LARSSON, JONAS BJORKMAN and JAN APELL to play against Russia, with ANDERS JARRYD as a substitute.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bucks Defeat Celtics  Todd Day scored 23 points and Vin Baker added 20 as the Milwaukee Bucks used a strong second half to cruise to a 116-94 victory over the Boston Celtics in Hartford last night.
Baker, playing at the Hartford Civic Center for the first time since he attended the University of Hartford, scored 14 points in the second half as the Bucks snapped Boston's three-game winning streak.
Glenn Robinson added 17 points and Eric Murdock, activated Monday after missing seven games with an eye injury, came off the bench to score 15.
Rick Fox, who missed the past two games with a hip injury, returned to the lineup and paced the Celtics with 16 points, all in the second half. (AP) Hawks 102, 76ers 99: Stacey Augmon scored 23 points, including a short jumper with 11 seconds to play, as Atlanta beat visiting Philadelphia to keep the 76ers winless on the road.
The loss was the fourth in a row on the road for the 76ers.
Philadelphia led by 98-97 after Willie Burton hit a layup for the last of his 22 points with 1 minute 40 seconds to play.
Grant Long tied the score with a free throw with 1:17 left, and Steve Smith gave the Hawks the lead for good with two free throws with 46 seconds to play. (AP) Hornets 102, Warriors 98: Hersey Hawkins scored 7 of his 18 points in a decisive fourth-quarter stretch, helping Charlotte hold off visiting Golden State.
The Warriors were trying to set a team record for consecutive road victories at the start of the season.
Charlotte tried to help by being whistled for four technical fouls, two in the fourth quarter for illegal defense and a third in that period on the bench.
Golden State literally gave away its shot at five straight road victories, committing 20 turnovers. (AP) Cavaliers 112, Timberwolves 79: Cleveland collected 37 points off turnovers, while giving visiting Minnesota its worst defeat of the season.
Mark Price led Cleveland with 17 points, and Tony Campbell had 16.
Bobby Phills and Chris Mills scored 15 each.
The Timberwolves got 14 points, but only 3 rebounds, from Christian Laettner. (AP) Bulls 105, Clippers 93: Ron Harper scored 21 points against his former teammates as visiting Chicago ran off 18 straight points in the fourth quarter to rally for a victory over Los Angeles.
The Clippers (0-10) remained the league's only winless team after squandering a fourth-quarter lead for the second straight game. (AP) FIGURE SKATING  Russians Win  Defending champions Maria Petrova and Anton Sikharulidze of Russia won the pairs' short program yesterday in the World Junior Figure Skating Championships in Budapest.
In second place were the American sister-and-brother pair of Danielle and Steve Hartsell, who lost points because their side-by-side spins were slightly out of unison.
Their coach, Johnny Johns, said he hoped the pair would take home a medal after today's free program. (AP)


Mr. Helms Must Step Aside
Senator Jesse Helms is out of control, and the Republicans have to do something about it.
What Senator Bob Dole has on his hands is a mean-spirited, loose-lipped legislator who has moved from being an embarrassment to the G.O.P. to being a global liability for the nation.
The chair apparent of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, who jolted the Joint Chiefs of Staff over the weekend when he challenged President Clinton's fitness to serve as Commander in Chief, told The Raleigh News and Observer Monday night that Mr.
Clinton "better have a bodyguard" if he visited military bases in North Carolina, Mr.
Helms's home state.


Sunglass Hut Int'l.(RAYS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Blue Blazers vs. Blue Jeans; Jury in Murder Trial Weighs How Appearances May Deceive
At times, Edward L. Summers has appeared on the witness stand in a blue blazer with a handkerchief tucked elegantly into the breast pocket.
But at least twice during the trial, he has been asked to change into the hooded black sweatshirt, jeans and boots he wore last January when he was arrested and charged with carjacking a Jeep and murdering its owner, a Rockland County teen-ager.
In a way, the jury at his murder trial is being asked to decide which is the real Edward Summers.
Is he, as the defense says, an upstanding 23-year-old premedical student from an industrious Bronx family who was terrorized by a drug dealer named Dino into taking part in a crime from which he ultimately shrank back?


A Sex-Defying 'What If,' Taken to Full Term
Virtual comedy is often the province of Ivan Reitman ("Twins," "Kindergarten Cop," "Ghostbusters"), whose films can look a lot funnier than they actually are.
Big stars, attention-getting stories and bright, shiny backdrops create a comic imprint that has more to do with brand-name manufacturing than with a humorous directorial touch.
Last year's "Dave" was much more ingenious than that, at least before it took the second-hour sentimental turn that is another of Mr.
Reitman's trademarks.
But where "Dave" had the nimble Kevin Kline in a dual role, "Junior" has Arnold Schwarzenegger in a pink maternity dress.
"Junior," about a man who becomes pregnant, proceeds efficiently but never quite lives up to its own potential as a sight gag.


The Schools Chancellor's Future
Even as he struggles to weather the latest budget crisis, New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, has the support of a solid majority of the Board of Education, enough to insure the renewal of his contract -- if he wants it.
But lingering differences between Mr.
Cortines and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani could result in his departure.
Neither Mr.
Giuliani nor Mr.
Cortines should allow that to happen.
Mr.
Cortines, who took office nearly 15 months ago, has moved quickly and professionally to put his stamp on the system.
His biggest challenge, and the main source of hostility with City Hall, has been coping with the impact of the city's budget gap.
Just this week Mr.
Cortines announced that he would find 800 more bureaucrats to let go by next June 30 to meet an additional $190 million cut imposed on the board by City Hall last month.
But he warned that the most recent cut could not be totally absorbed through administrative staff reductions, and that eliminating "two teachers per school" might be necessary.


TCG Int'l. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Backs Off on School Prayer Proposal
One week after he seemed to open the door to a constitutional amendment to allow organized prayer in schools, President Clinton seemed to slam it shut today, saying his earlier remarks had been "over-read."
"I do not believe that we should have a constitutional amendment to carve out and legalize teacher- or student-led prayer in the classroom," Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference today.
"I think that that is inherently coercive in a nation with the amount of religious diversity we have in this country. I think that would be an error."


Two More Young Lovebirds On a Murderous Rampage
As one more gory road movie about gun-toting, media-mad white trash on the rampage, C. M. Talkington's "Love and a .45" has elements of parody.
There's enough of "Natural Born Killers" here to suggest that Mr.
Talkington has read the mind of Quentin Tarantino, or at least taken satirical notice of Mr.
Tarantino's early screenplay for that Oliver Stone film.
On the other hand, maybe murderous teen-age lovebirds yearning to be television stars are simply a staple of our culture these days.
And maybe some ideas are just plain parody-proof.
In any case, "Love and a .45" is too mean-spirited to be funny, and it winds up nastily derivative rather than clever.
Mr.
Talkington shows some visual talent and has assembled a head-bangingly effective soundtrack, but he's short on dramatic inspiration.
Sentimental young sweethearts who take Polaroids of their hostages and are spurred into marriage by the thrill of murder are definitely old news.


Morgan Keegan Inc.(MOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Slovak Folk Troupe in Its New York Debut
Lucnica, the Slovak song-and-dance ensemble from Bratislava, is absolutely first-rate.
Its young dancers sparkle with glittering technique in an eye-opening repertory that remains true to its surprisingly diverse sources.
All the more pity that this fresh and sophisticated professional folk troupe limited its New York debut to two performances on Sunday at Symphony Space.
Somebody should coax Lucnica back.


S.E.C. Widens Partnership Investigation
After years of investigating Prudential Securities' improper sales of limited partnerships, Government regulators are turning their attention to the rest of Wall Street.
The Securities and Exchange Commission's inquiry focuses on partnership sales by several of the country's biggest brokerage firms, including the Paine Webber Group, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, Dean Witter Reynolds and Lehman Brothers, people with knowledge of the investigation said yesterday.


Film in Review; Kieslowski's Trilogy Finale: 'Red'
"Red" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4.
The film opens today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway at 63d Street.
In the dense, archly mysterious films of Krzysztof Kieslowski, bold but ineffable patterns shape the characters' lives.
Coincidences, missed opportunities, overbearing visual clues and strange, haunting parallels: all of these contribute to a gradually emerging sense of destiny.
Stories develop like photographs in a darkroom.
They are sharply defined only in retrospect, when the process is complete.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks plunged in tumultuous late afternoon trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 91.52 points, or 2.4 percent.
Although the steep selloff left many traders puzzling, others saw it as a result of a growing awareness that higher interest rates have made bonds a more attractive investment.  [ Page A1. ]


Abortion Foes Face Enemy At Doctor's Negligence Trial
When a physician who filled in for a murdered abortion-clinic doctor in Pensacola, Fla., came before an administrative court in New Jersey today on malpractice charges growing out of previous abortions, he saw two particularly unfriendly faces in the courtroom.
They belonged to Vicky and Mike Conroy, abortion opponents who had traveled 1,000 miles from Pensacola "to see justice served."


U.S. Proposes More Muscle To Aid Bosnia
The United States today proposed stiffer military action and expanded use of air power to protect the beleaguered area of Bihac in northwest Bosnia.
But Western European nations have yet to agree on whether to take further military action, leaving the fate of the American proposal unclear.


A Day in the Life of a City Potato
THE potato got to the "21" Club at 8:30 in the morning, after having been bounced around plenty in the back of a C &amp; S Wholesale truck.
It was a yellowish Yukon Gold variety, and it did not lack for companionship.
It arrived packed with 300 pounds of kinfolk.
"Lot of spuds," noted Phil English, the C &amp; S driver.
"Man, somebody is going to eat." He had acquired the potato at the Hunts Point market in the Bronx before dawn, and under the now-brightened skies he unloaded the sacks on West 52d Street and entrusted them to Charlie Mottola, who presides over the avalanche of purchasing and receiving for the "21" Club.
Each potato cost the restaurant roughly 17 cents.


Oil Markets Unruffled By OPEC Output Limits
Oil prices reflected little concern among traders today about a decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to freeze current production levels through 1995 in hopes of driving up oil prices.
North Sea Brent, a benchmark grade of crude oil, dropped by a penny, to $16.94 a barrel in London, after the announcement.  [ On the New York Mercantile Exchange, oil contracts for January rose only 26 cents Tuesday to close at $17.82 a barrel. ]


CHRONICLE
A literary squabble between the widow and the ex-wife of Kenneth Tynan, the British drama critic, has heated up.
ELAINE DUNDY, who was married to him first (1951 to 1964), is fighting mad at her successor, KATHLEEN TYNAN (they married in 1967; he died in 1980).
At issue: Mrs.
Tynan included several letters written by Mr.
Tynan to Ms.
Dundy in her compilation, "Kenneth Tynan: Letters," which was published in England last month by Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson.


Chinese Woman Out
The world champion YANG AIHUA of China was banned for two years yesterday for failing a drug test, the international swimming federation, FINA, said.
The federation confirmed that Yang tested positive for an excessive level of testosterone in a random sampling Sept. 30 before the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.
The ban means she will miss the Atlanta Olympics. (AP)


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pfizer Will Buy SmithKline Unit for $1.45 Billion
In the latest in a whirl of billion-dollar deals in the drug industry, Pfizer Inc. agreed yesterday to buy the animal health business of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. of Britain for $1.45 billion in cash.
Under the agreement, New York-based Pfizer would become the world's largest maker of animal drugs, overtaking Merck &amp; Company.
The combined Pfizer and SmithKline lines had $1.2 billion in sales last year, about one-tenth of the $12 billion global market for animal drugs.


Carjacking Jury Visits the Field Where Teen-Agers Were Shot
The jury in the carjacking trial of Edward L. Summers took a bus trip to the brush-covered field where two Rockland teen-agers were shot last January, one fatally, and both the prosecution and defense argued that the visit shored up their cases.
The prosecution argues that on the day of the murder, Jan. 3, Mr.
Summers, a 23-year-old premedical student from the Bronx, took a stolen Jeep from the Nanuet Mall to the field along a route that closely resembled the one he frequently took from the mall to the house of his sister, Alfa.


Executive Changes
THE KELLWOOD CO., St.
Louis, promoted James C. Jacobsen, its executive vice president for administration and chief financial officer, to vice chairman; he remains chief financial officer.
Hal J. Upbin, its executive vice president for corporate development, was promoted to president and chief operating officer.
NEW WORLD COMMUNICATIONS GROUP INC., New York, appointed Arthur H. Bilger president and chief operating officer.


Gibson Suit On Trades Is Settled
Gibson Greetings Inc. and the Bankers Trust Company said yesterday that they had settled Gibson's lawsuit accusing the bank of improperly leading the company to engage in risky financial trades.
Under the out-of-court settlement, Gibson will pay Bankers Trust nearly $6.2 million, or about 30 percent of the $20.7 million that Bankers Trust contended it was owed under the trades.


METRO DIGEST
COUNCIL CREATES AGENCY TO WATCH POLICE
The New York City Council voted to create the first permanent, independent agency to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
The agency would have far more investigative powers than Mayor Giuliani had wanted.
A1.
D'AMATO ALLY HEADS PATAKI TRANSITION
Governor-elect Pataki named Joseph N. Mondello, the Nassau County Republican leader and a loyal ally of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, as chairman of his transition team.
A1.


Joseph H. Reid, 78, Director of League On Child Welfare
Joseph Harold Reid, who was executive director of the Child Welfare League of America for 25 years until his retirement in 1978, died last Friday at his home in Melbourne Beach, Fla.
A former resident of Bellerose, L.I., he was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Making a Film Out of the Horror of Mother Murder
It remains the most sensational murder case ever in New Zealand.
In 1954 two girls, Pauline Yvonne Parker, 16, and Juliet Marion Hulme, 15, were convicted of brutally killing Pauline's mother.
"What attracted me to this story," said Peter Jackson, the 33-year-old New Zealand-born director of "Heavenly Creatures," "was that it was complicated, about two people who are not evil, not psychopaths but totally out of their depth. Their emotions got out of control."


Rowland Team Takes Shape
Connecticut's first Republican Governor in two decades is reaching beyond party stalwarts to form his transition team.
Page B6.


They Just Don't It


Grocer Shot to Death In Brooklyn Robbery
A 40-year-old Brooklyn grocer was shot to death and his cousin wounded yesterday in a holdup at a bodega in Brownsville, the police said.
A man in his 20's, armed with a silver handgun, entered the V &amp; G Grocery at 199 Howard Avenue, between Chauncey and Marion Streets, about 10 A.M. and demanded money, the police said.


When These Old Graduates Miss a Game, It's an Upset
This Thanksgiving morning, Burt Beagle will be preparing for his annual trip from his Pelham Parkway apartment in the Bronx to nearby Murdock Avenue, where Mount St.
Michael will take on Cardinal Hayes today in their 52d annual holiday high school football game.
Mr.
Beagle, 61, has been a fixture on the sidelines of Bronx high schools for more than 20 years, patrolling the field near the first-down markers, clipboard in hand.
By his estimate, he has kept the statistics of more than 800 games, averaging three or four schoolboy matchups each weekend.


Currents; Theater in a Nutshell
WANT to add to the value of your house?
Lou Lenzi, the design director for Thomson Consumer Electronics, says adding a home theater can have roughly the same effect as an improved kitchen or a second bath.
With this as a carrot, Thomson, the French parent of the RCA, Proscan and General Electric brands available in the United States, has begun selling built-in media-room equipment directly to architects and builders.
Thomson asked the architect Michael Graves to make the ever-larger television screen and all that accompanies it, including a VCR and laser-disk player, look homey.
He domesticated the system with folksy shutters and decorated the surrounding wall with an exaggerated wallpaper pattern.
A rusticated base suggests a stone podium.
His "Entertainment Wall," rendered below, may be produced in 1995.
Component sets start at $2,000.
Information: (800) 336-1900.


Currents; That Building Waved! How Did They Do That?
IN Sting's new music video for his single, "When We Dance," the English pop star sings an Elysian two-step among a host of angels in what appears to be a futuristic city of white marble with a vast floor of glass.
Nice song: give it three stars.
But what is the heavenly architecture that seems to float upward like bubbles through champagne?


Amway Contributes $2.5 Million to G.O.P.
The Amway Corporation, the door-to-door sales company, has contributed $2.5 million to pay for a newly built broadcast center at the Republican Party's national headquarters, the party announced today.
The party is using the center, which will be named in honor of Amway, to produce a weekly one-hour television program, "Rising Tide." The program promotes the party, and its candidates and is available on some cable television stations.


A Parting of Ways for Heinz And Morris the Cat's Creator
Morris the cat and Charlie the tuna are leaving home.
The Leo Burnett Company, the advertising agency that created those familiar characters for 9-Lives cat food and Star-Kist canned tuna fish, said yesterday that it had mutually agreed with the H. J. Heinz Company to end their long relationships on those brands.
Burnett is also relinqushing its remaining Heinz accounts, including ketchup, Heinz 57 steak sauce and Homestyle gravy.


After Three Weeks, Lottery Millionaires Confess to Wealth
When it dawned on Zdzislaw Wojtowicz last month that he had suddenly become a multi-millionaire, he went home to Jersey City and casually asked his wife, Henryka, what she would do if he happened to win the lottery.
The next day, he got around to telling her that he had.


Events: Latin American Art, Crafts, Tours, Holiday Trees
Benefit Shops  New York Design Center, 200 Lexington Avenue (33d Street); (212) 255-9877.
"Street of Shops," a series of showrooms, boutiques and interiors by Albert Hadley, David Rockwell, Vicente Wolf and Victoria Hagan, will be open Dec. 1 to 3.
Admission is $10.
A preview reception will be held on Wednesday, from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets start at $100.
Proceeds from tickets and sales will benefit the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS.


U.S. Opposes Lifting Desegregation Controls
The Clinton Administration, taking a position in a school desegregation case for the first time, told the Supreme Court today that it planned to oppose the State of Missouri's request to have the Kansas City public schools declared successfully integrated and no longer in need of Federal court supervision.
Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d asked the Justices for permission to argue on behalf of the black plaintiffs and the Kansas City School District, which have been allies against the state in a long-running case that goes back before the Supreme Court in January.
Since they brought the case 17 years ago, the black families and the school district have sought to hold the state legally and financially responsible for the educational deficits in a district that was segregated by law until 1954 and for many more years in fact.


Mayor Opens Investigation On Jails Chief
Eight months after appointing him, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has opened an investigation into some of the flamboyant executive actions of Commissioner of Correction Anthony J. Schembri amid growing calls from outside the administration for the Commissioner's resignation.
"Things happen when I'm around," Commissioner Schembri once remarked, reflecting the larkish and supremely self-confident management style that opponents say has contributed to his current problems.
The critics, including the Democrats who head the City Council's Public Safety Committee and the State Assembly's Correction Committee, have questioned the Commissioner's effectiveness in managing the teeming system against a backdrop of budget cuts and unrest in the jails.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about Hanukkah events on Dec. 1 -- a party for homeless people who are referred by community agencies, a party for children and a menorah lighting and dinner, all at T, the tea room, restaurant and shop on the lower level of the Guggenheim Museum's SoHo branch -- misstated the telephone number for reservations.
It is (212) 925-3700.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier (STRWA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Schleppers
Several things distinguish New Yorkers from the rest of America's city dwellers, among them the way they walk.
It is not so much that their pace is fast but that their dodges and feints (a dolly to the left of them, a dog walker with seven charges to the right) resemble broken-field running.
Another distinction is their inability to stand on a curb while waiting for the traffic to clear.
Instead they wait in the gutter.
Never mind if that gutter is streaming from a cloudburst.
Standing in it puts them a step ahead of the crowd.


Pamida Holdings Corp.(PAM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Yearling in an Executive Suite; Genuine Risk's First Foal Is Starting Life as a Race Horse
Nobody knows yet if he can run fast or far, but his mother won the 1980 Kentucky Derby and his father was a European mile star, and he is just now getting his first taste of training as the best-known yearling in America.
He is Genuine Reward, the first foal delivered by Genuine Risk after 13 years of miscarriages and misfortunes, and after a long vigil with veterinarian teams, electronic monitoring and hundreds of letters and phone calls from all over the world.


Under Fire, Italy's Leader Says He'll Sell TV Holdings
Trying to seize the initiative in his battle with magistrates investigating him for corruption, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said tonight that he was ready to sell part of his vast business empire, including a majority share in his three national television stations.
He also threatened to force new elections by resigning if the restive partners in his coalition did not pledge complete support for him.


THEATER
When the Word Was All: 6 Short Plays From Radio  Intar Theater


Defying Mayor, Council Offers Budget Cuts
Defying Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted yesterday to adopt its own menu of spending cuts to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget.
The Mayor bluntly dismissed the Council's move as illegal and suggested that he would move ahead with his own cuts anyway.
The Council's vote and the Mayor's refusal to accept it prompted the most significant confrontation yet over the budgetary powers of the Council under the new City Charter, which went into effect in 1990.
With lawyers for each side defending differing interpretations of the law, the dispute appeared headed to court, throwing the fate of the city's $31.6 billion budget into confusion.


City Ballet Starts With Samplings
Appetizers rather than a full-course dinner were on the New York City Ballet's table when the company opened on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
A series of small-scale pieces, mainly pas de deux and including three premieres, made up virtually all of the program, the exception being "Symphony in C," George Balanchine's 1947 Bizet classic.


Boy Who Fled Chemotherapy Is Back Home, His Wish Granted
Billy Best, the 16-year-old with cancer who ran away to Texas last month so that he would not have to undergo chemotherapy treatments, has been granted his wish now that he has returned home.
"Chemotherapy is definitely out," his father, William Best, said today at a news conference at a Ramada Inn near their home.
But he said the family had not yet decided what other treatment would be tried.


Dissident G.O.P. Senators Bid To Topple Marino as Leader
Dissident members of the State Senate's Republican majority have mounted a campaign to unseat Ralph J. Marino as their leader, charging that he is quietly subverting the interests of Governor-elect George E. Pataki.
The challenge is being led by Senator Joseph L. Bruno of Brunswick, a longstanding rival to Mr.
Marino and a leading supporter of Mr.
Pataki in the Senate.
Though some Republican state officials said today that they thought Mr.
Bruno commanded a majority of votes among the Senate's 36 Republicans, others allied with Mr.
Marino expressed confidence that he did not.


Months of Delicate Talks In Kazakhstan Atom Deal
The deal that brought more than half a ton of bomb-grade uranium from Kazakhstan to the United States required months of delicate three-way negotiations and was made possible only after Washington got Russian approval, Clinton Administration officials said today.
Officials said the negotiations began when Kazakh officials approached the American Ambassador to Kazakhstan, William Courtney, in the summer of 1993 and vaguely suggested that they might want Washington to take weapons-grade nuclear material from a nuclear fuel fabrication plant off their hands -- for a price.


Undermanned Suns Make Clippers 0-11
Suns 140, Clippers 109
All 10 available Phoenix players, led by the rookie Wesley Person's 19 points, scored in double figures last night as the Suns beat Los Angeles, 140-109, handing the winless Clippers their 11th consecutive loss.
The Suns had only 10 players for the game because of injuries to Kevin Johnson, Wayman Tisdale and Charles Barkley.


Schumacher Gets Title
MICHAEL SCHUMACHER was confirmed as the Formula One world- champion driver yesterday despite his involvement in a controversial collision in the season's last race.
But the officials who gave their approval want to make sure future championships aren't decided the same way.
After three crashes in the last five years helped to decide the world champion, the International Automobile Federation said it was studying novel options to resolve future cases in which a collision affects the title.
The options include having the drivers continue the race in spare cars or holding a run-off immediately after the race.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


In Rio, Even Schoolchildren Are Targets in Crackdown on Crime


Sun Devils Stop Maryland
Joe Smith's arms do not extend to the 3-point arc.
Playing on a tender ankle, the Maryland center scored 23 points, but Arizona State's lineup of whippets made 4 3-point bombs in the final 6 minutes to escape the No. 7 rated Terrapins, 97-90, in the Maui Invitational title game.


Merrill Corp.(MRLL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Election Harvest Crowds Thanksgiving Table; Relax, Democrats
To the Editor:
Liberal Democrats in hallucinatory moments see the great Democratic social structures of the last half-century crumbling at their feet.
Not to worry, Democrats.
There are a few things working for you:


Ferrellgas Partners (FGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


More Affordable Homes
To the Editor:
Re "The Rich Are Different. They Can Afford Homes" (news article, Nov. 16), about the high cost of housing in Jackson, Wyo.: The Jackson Hole Community Housing Trust, while indeed a fledgling organization, has built 36, not "barely a dozen," homes.
This affordable-housing development has been given an award by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
We have begun work on our second project.
JESS LEDERMAN  Exec.
Director, Jackson Hole Community Housing Trust Jackson, Wyo., Nov. 20, 1994


Flaw Undermines Accuracy of Pentium Chips
An elusive circuitry error is causing a chip used in millions of computers to generate inaccurate results in certain rare cases, heightening anxiety among many scientists and engineers who rely on their machines for precise calculations.
The flaw, an error in division, has been found in the Pentium, the current top microprocessor of the Intel Corporation, the world's largest chip maker.
The chip, in several different configurations, is used in many computers sold for home and business use, including those made by I.B.M., Compaq, Dell, Gateway 2000 and others.


Thanksgiving Day
NEW YORK  PARADE Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West.
Travels south on Broadway to 34th Street.
Concludes at noon.


NATO Jets Hit Missiles as Serbs Gain in Bosnia
As rebel Serbs entered the outskirts of a Muslim enclave in northwest Bosnia, NATO warplanes bombed three Serb-controlled missile sites in the area today in two raids that took the Atlantic alliance a step further into the Bosnian war.
The NATO attacks, by more than 50 American, British, French and Dutch aircraft, came as Serbian forces pressed forward relentlessly in their offensive against the Bihac enclave, entering the United Nations-declared "safe area" that surrounds it.


Exotic Houseplants (Not an Oxymoron)
THE hot-pink flowers and golden leaves of a bougainvillea named Raspberry Ice are aglow in the low autumn sun that is streaming through the greenhouse panes.
"If you've got good sunlight, this is one of the easiest houseplants, yet it has a gracious, pendulous outline," said Rudy Nabel, leaning on an ancient wood counter.
Through spring and summer, gardeners in search of unusual perennials and distinctive shrubs make a beeline for Nabel's Nurseries Inc., in White Plains.
But with winter's approach, the houseplant business has picked up.
Thoughts have turned to indoor greening, preferably with something unusual.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  NATO JETS HIT 3 MISSILE SITES  As rebel Serbs approached a Muslim enclave in northwest Bosnia, NATO jets bombed three Serbian missile sites in retaliation for attacks on NATO planes.
A1  Bosnian Serb leaders have threatened "all-out war." A8


Just When They Need It, the Jets Begin to Live by the Big Play
Without a game-breaking player, the Jets are surging -- thanks to game-breaking plays.
They are creating turnovers faster than any other team in football.
And now they may have an ally in the weather when they face the American Football Conference leaders, the Miami Dolphins, on Sunday.
It has been eight years since the Jets grabbed a share of first place this late in the season.
But that's what a victory would do.


Maryland's Joe Smith Stars by Any Nickname
He screens his phone calls, finally answers to a nickname and has insured his knees for $1 million.
Joe Smith's evolution from naive freshman to hunted sophomore is so complete that he may never be a junior.
The pro scouts crowd the baseline here at the Maui Invitational, and the Maryland center has made it worth their air fare.
He is 19 years old, 6 feet 10 inches and has already checked in with a 33-point, 10-rebound, 4-block game in the Terrapins' 79-62 semifinal victory against Utah on Tuesday.
He is unpretentious, packs surprising muscle under his tank-top and keeps a legal adviser: his mom.


Erick Hawkins Dies


For Giuliani, a Checklist; For Pataki, Opportunities
WHEN the big day finally comes next week, and the pending power of Albany finally meets the reigning regent of New York City, what will they say to each other?
The imagination roars.
Maybe they will exchange home phone numbers so they can reach each other before 9 A.M. and after 5 P.M.
Maybe they will thank each other: Governor-elect George E. Pataki could thank Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for boosting his chances, maybe even for electing him, by endorsing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and campaigning upstate for him.
And the Mayor could thank the Governor-elect for giving him even more acceptance with New York City Democrats than he already had.


Wit and Craftsmanship Give Windows the Royal Treatment
IF curtains are like dresses for windows, then finials and their attendant hardware -- brackets, rods and rings -- are window jewelry, grace notes that lend fabric and glass a dash of style, ornament and fun.
While functional in origin -- something has to hold up the window coverings, after all -- hardware is the window's finishing touch, the wink of curved iron or burnished steel that sets off a billowy silk or heavy brocade.


Bosnian Serbs Warn NATO Not to Impede Advance
Bosnian Serb leaders have threatened "all-out war" if NATO retaliates against their advance on the United Nations-designated "safe area" around Bihac, in the northwest.
The threat came in a telephone conversation late Tuesday night between Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the United Nations military commander in Bosnia, and John Zametica, an aide to the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.


Born in the Camps And Still Kicking
Viktor Ullmann's opera "Der Kaiser von Atlantis" can probably never be divorced from the circumstances of its creation, and perhaps it never should be.
The piece, which was presented in a semi-staged version at Merkin Concert Hall on Monday evening, was composed at the Theresienstadt concentration camp in 1943.
An allegorical portrait of Hitler, the piece was banned when camp authorities saw a rehearsal in 1944.
Soon thereafter Ullmann, his librettist, Petr Kien, and the entire cast were sent to Auschwitz where most, including Ullmann died.
Everything about the work, from its subject to its quirky part-classical, part-cabaret instrumentation, was determined by Ullmann's presence in Theresienstadt.
Yet it must also be said that "Der Kaiser von Atlantis" is also a remarkable, affecting work in purely musical and dramatic terms.
Just under an hour long, it tells a complex story in a concise, direct way and in an omnivorous musical language that draws on both classical and popular styles.
At times it has the archness of Kurt Weill's German theater music.


Dutch Prince Is Robbed of $5,000 Watch
A Dutch prince who braved the New York City Marathon fell afoul of a thief in Times Square the next afternoon and was robbed of a $5,000 gold Rolex watch and about $100 in cash, the consul for press affairs of the Consulate General of the Netherlands said yesterday
The consul, Henry Kol, said 24-year-old Prince Bernhard, whose mother, Princess Margriet, is a sister of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, was walking in Times Square when someone pushed an object into his back and told him to hand over his watch and wallet.
Mr.
Kol could not specify the site or provide a description of the robber.


Lower Stocks Aren't a Worry for the Fed
The steep fall in stock prices this week is not expected to prompt any policy review at the Federal Reserve, where officials have been surprised at the stock market's resilience until now.
While the Fed did not set out last week to bring down the stock market when it raised short-term interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point, its officials have not worried about such a prospect.


Vietnamese Hint the U.S. Could Use Port Again
Fearing China, Vietnam has begun to signal an interest in inviting American naval forces back to Cam Ranh Bay, the large port installation built by the United States during the Vietnam War.
The United States Navy seems interested in returning.
Adm.
Richard C. Macke, the commander of American forces in the Pacific, said on his recent trip to Vietnam that Washington and Hanoi could begin talking about military cooperation after settling their final differences over accounting for missing American servicemen from the Vietnam War.


Catherines Stores Corp.(CATH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Late Season's Greetings From PC Shopping Plans
Everyone knows Santa can deliver his gifts in a twinkle, and overnight delivery services are only hours slower.
The real bottleneck in the holiday shopping season is the time it takes to go shopping.
Two new companies are trying to solve the problem, turning to a combination of computer-based on-line information services and interactive CD-ROM disks that can store dozens of product catalogues.


Mexico City Journal; Don Manuel's Dream Tower: A 50-Story Folly?
No one has shaped the skyline of this vast city more than Manuel Suarez, a famously eccentric entrepreneur who was supposedly a protege of Pancho Villa and whose errant dream -- a 50-story domino of a building -- has loomed over Mexico City for 30 years.
Loom is the only way to describe the physical and symbolic presence of Don Manuel's quixotic vision over the low-rise chaos of the city.
His goal was to replace an old city park with Latin America's tallest building, concrete proof of Mexico's maturity as a nation.
He envisioned athletes of the 1968 Mexico City Olympics lodging there during the Games, themselves intended to showcase Mexico's emergence into the modern world.


COMPANY BRIEFS
NEW YORK BANCORP INC., Douglaston, Queens, said its shareholders had approved the acquisition of Hamilton Bancorp Inc. for $133 million in stock.


Anacomp Inc.(AAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
A romance made in Olympic gymnast's heaven: NADIA COMANECI introduced BART CONNER to her father in Onesti, Romania, yesterday, and Mr.
Conner promptly asked him for his daughter's hand in marriage.
"With all my heart," GHEORGHE COMANECI responded in Romanian as he happily gave his approval, The Associated Press reported.
Both Ms. Comaneci, 33, and Mr. Conner, 36, have won gold medals in the Olympics.


Genesis Health Ventures Inc.(GHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holyfield Receives Clearance to Fight
EVANDER HOLYFIELD, hospitalized for a heart condition after his heavyweight title loss to MICHAEL MOORER, has received medical clearance to fight again.
Holyfield, 32, is in "excellent health," MIKE O'HARA, a spokesman for the Mayo Clinic, said yesterday.
"We have put no restrictions on his activities." Holyfield, who has said he intends to fight again, underwent three days of tests at the clinic in Rochester, Minn.


Lechters Inc.(LECH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Election Harvest Crowds Thanksgiving Table
To the Editor:
Election Day and Thanksgiving are close together on the calendar, but this year they are worlds apart in mood.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Police Commissioner Orders Officers to Wear Seat Belts
Alarmed by a rash of traffic accidents involving police cars, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he would require police officers to wear seat belts beginning Jan. 1.
"I see the use of the seat belt as every bit as important as the use of the bulletproof vest," Mr.
Bratton said.
"I lose a hell of a lot more cops in injuries to auto accidents and failure to use seat belts than I do in shooting incidents."


Anderson Is Unhappy On All Fronts
His left arm was wrapped in cumbersome icepacks on Tuesday night, like a salmon filet prepped for shipping.
Kenny Anderson had just played another night in pain.
If his surgically repaired wrist was bothering him, his pride was throbbing.


Stocks Ride Out a Bumpy Session
The stock market showed surprising resilience yesterday, surviving a tumultuous session in which stock prices swung up, then down 22 times.
But as traders grabbed shares at depressed prices, the market ended little changed, after plunging on Monday and Tuesday.
The nearly unchanged market eased some investor concerns that stocks are in for a long, hard decline.
After some analysts predicted a fall of 30 or more points, the Dow Jones industrial average closed down just 3.36 points, to 3,674.63, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.15 point, to 449.93.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index dropped 4.51 points, to 736.70.


Trent One of the Biggest Names Left in N.I.T.
The big-name schools are long gone.
But at least the Preseason National Invitation Tournament has a big-time player going to the finals.
Ohio University's Gary Trent scored 24 points and grabbed 10 rebounds to lead the Bobcats of the Mid-American Conference past Kwame Evans and George Washington University, 82-76, in last night's second semifinal at Madison Square Garden.


Coach for Iowa State
DAN McCARNEY was hired yesterday as coach at Iowa State after spending four seasons as the defensive coordinator at Wisconsin.
McCarney, 41, replaced JIM WALDEN, who resigned Nov. 3 as his team was on its way to a 0-10-1 record.
McCarney helped with the turnaround of the Iowa and Wisconsin programs. (AP)


Sam Roffe, 85, Dies; Maker of Ski Clothes
Sam Roffe, the founder and chairman of Roffe Inc., one of the nation's largest makers of ski apparel, died on Sunday at his home in Seattle.
He was 85.
The cause of death was cancer of the liver, said Ann Stables, a company spokeswoman.


250 Groups To Share In Grants For Arts
About 250 New York City arts organizations have qualified for matching grants from a $10 million fund set up by the state and city governments in July, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday.
The list includes big institutions like the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Brooklyn Museum, both of which plan to use the promised money -- a total of more than $800,000 each -- to open all of the galleries that have been closed on a rotating basis because of cutbacks in operating budgets.


High School Senior Held in Fatal Shooting of 15-Year-Old Girl
A senior at Mount Vernon High School fatally shot his 15-year-old girlfriend in his living room Tuesday night, then tried to bury her body in his backyard garden before his mother came home, the police said this afternoon.
The police said the senior, Leighton Smith, 17, shot Jennifer Sewell, a freshman at Mount Vernon High, with a sawed-off shotgun and then dragged her body to the edge of a garden in his backyard, where he buried her.
Although officials said they had not yet determined a motive, they said the students had argued before the shooting.


Presenting Opposite Approaches
The double bill on Tuesday night at the Knitting Factory demonstrated two approaches to post-modern jazz: witty and concise compositions from Joey Baron alongside unfettered, sprawling pieces from Roscoe Mitchell.
Mr.
Mitchell is one of the two saxophonists in the Art Ensemble of Chicago, which is performing through tonight at the new Knitting Factory (74 Leonard Street in TriBeCa).
In his early set, his music had more to do with gesture, timbre and stamina than with melody or swing.
His group, the Note Factory, is made for sonic density, with two drummers (Tani Tabbal and Vincent Lewis), two bassists (William Parker and Jaribu Shahid) and a pianist (Matthew Shipp) behind Mr.
Mitchell's saxophones and flute.
Partway through the set, it was joined by A. Spencer Barefield on guitar and Big Black on conga drum.


Communists Plan to Form Government in Nepal
Nepal's Communists appeared today to be on the brink of forming a new Government after winning more seats than the ruling Nepali Congress Party in last week's inconclusive general election.
But as the main Communist bloc met and formally named the man who led them in the election as their candidate for Prime Minister, last-minute maneuvering by Congress loyalists kept open the possibility of the formation of a centrist coalition to deny power to the Communists.


In Trade-Pact War, Clashes Outside Capital Are Heavy
Business lobbyists may be battling for the global trade agreement in Washington, but some of the heaviest combat has come where people produce things more tangible than legislation.
On Tuesday, in Agra, Kan., Dennis D. Hupe took a long enough break from feeding his sows soybean and corn meal to tell Senator Bob Dole's visiting aide why the Kansas Farm Bureau backs free trade.


Starving the Poor
The poor, particularly at election time, are routinely demonized for political gain.
Their exploitation in this way has brought us to a cruel place in the political landscape, a place where Americans -- conservative, moderate and liberal -- are finding it frighteningly easy to blame the poor for their own fate, even though that means condemning millions of children to poverty, hunger and hopelessness.
Given the savagery of the climate, it is useful to note what the Roman Catholic Church is saying in response.
The church, through its efforts to feed and house America's poor, is intimately familiar with the problem of poverty.
Of late, the church's most compelling voice has been that of the Archbishop of New York, John Cardinal O'Connor, who last month lashed out at politicians who caricature the poor for political benefit.
Cardinal O'Connor's observations last month in his column, published in the newspaper Catholic New York, merit extensive quotation:


Penn Traffic Co.(PNF,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Of Older People and Their Need for Love, Sex and Marriage
LATE LOVE A Celebration of Marriage After 50  By Eileen Simpson  208 pages.
A Peter Davison Book/Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.


Dreaming of a White Thanksgiving


Author of Nicole Simpson Biography Finds She's a Prisoner of Her Own Book
Faye D. Resnick sat on the couch of her country hideaway here, 3,000 miles from her home in Los Angeles and 40 miles southeast of the closest Starbucks.
Here, roadside vendors sell maple syrup rather than star maps.
Autumnal trees turn brilliant reds and yellows rather than a dull brown.
The log burning in the fireplace is genuine, not a California model lit by a switch.
Fearful for her safety, muzzled by protective prosecutors, Ms.
Resnick has been hiding here in silence ever since her book, "Nicole Brown Simpson: The Private Diary of a Life Interrupted," was published last month by Dove Books.
Prosecutors have accumulated corroborating testimony that, thus far, seems to have convinced them that she has told the truth.
Whether it will be enough to overcome her considerable liabilities as a witness remains to be determined, however, particularly since other less vulnerable witnesses may be available to paint the prosecution's picture of the Simpsons' tormented relationship.


Corrections
A film review yesterday about "Resistance" misstated a film credit for its director of photography, Sally Bongers.
She did not work on "The Piano"; the cinematographer for that film was Stuart Dryburgh.


Plexus Corp.(PLXS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries(KLIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japan-Korea Ties Weren't Always Hostile
To the Editor:
"Korea-Japan Tension Is Centuries old" by Bradford Trebach (letter, Nov. 14) ostensibly corrects a statement in a Nov. 8 news article that dated tensions between Korea and Japan to World War II.


Republicans in Hartford May Not Get All the Spoils
For the first time in 24 years, a Republican is preparing to take the Governor's office here, and many of the party faithful are clamoring for a chance to serve.
But since his election, John G. Rowland, the Governor-elect, has tried to establish a transition team that could transcend partisanship.


Harwood Simmons; Music Professor, 92
Harwood Simmons, a music professor and director of band music at Syracuse University, died on Nov. 14 at Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 92 and lived in Syracuse.
The cause was a heart attack, said Alfred Balk, a friend.


Gerber Scientific Inc.(GRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Safer Driving or Flying?
To the Editor:
"Concern Over Airline Safety" (editorial, Nov. 16) perpetuates a myth that has surfaced periodically for years.
That is that "flying is still safer than driving to the airport."


Court Curbs Wall Street Journal in Fight on Whitewater Report
A panel of Federal appeals judges has denied The Wall Street Journal's request for access to the secret final report of the former Whitewater independent counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., and at the same time has barred the newspaper from disclosing the details of the decision.
The decision, and the order barring its publication, were handed down a few weeks ago but were not made known until late Tuesday, when The Journal filed a petition seeking relief from Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
The petition, parts of which were filed under seal, asks Justice Rehnquist to lift the order, asserting that it is an improper prior restraint on the paper's First Amendment rights.


Erick Hawkins, a Pioneering Choreographer of American Dance, Is Dead at 85
Erick Hawkins, a major figure in American modern dance who offered a radical new definition of the art form, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, said David Guion, the executive director of the Erick Hawkins Dance Company.


Alfred Jospe, 85, A Retired Director Of B'nai B'rith Unit
Rabbi Alfred Jospe, a retired national director of B'nai B'rith Hillel Foundations, died on Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 85.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Nets Find at Least One Answer
If they had doubts about this, the Nets and their training-camp gamble on a 34-year-old veteran guard, Sleepy Floyd erased them tonight.
He can still play.


Journal; Celebrity Turkey Shoot
Is it possible -- if almost too much to hope for -- that the same angry, depressed, back-to-business electorate behind the revolt of '94 is also throwing out incumbent celebrities?
Note the following phenomena, all of which occurred just before or after the D-Day of Nov. 8:


Oakley's New Shoes Only Create More Pain
Charles Oakley's sneaker saga continued today as a specially designed shoe by Nike failed to alleviate the pain in his toe.
Oakley had waited almost a month for Nike to manufacture a shoe that was supposed to help take the pressure off the congenitally dislocated second toe on his right foot.
But, after a two-and-a-half-hour workout with the size 15 Nikes, Oakley said he experienced more pain in his toe than he had all season and would ask Nike to develop another version that is not as loose.


One Deal Hints at More to Come
Things will not always be so easy, but today's agreement between the White House and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas on the worldwide trade pact demonstrated that the Republican triumph in the midterm elections need not produce two years of gridlock in Washington, with Congress and President Clinton constantly at war.
It will certainly be difficult for Mr.
Clinton to govern, but it will not be impossible, as some shellshocked Democrats had first thought.


U.S. and Europe Adrift in Balkans
Despite the NATO air raids this week on Serbian missile sites in northwestern Bosnia and in Croatia, the United States and its European allies remain divided on the fundamental question of how to respond to the threat to European security from the fighting in the Balkans.
Today's raids, like Monday's strike on a Serbian military airfield in Croatia, were only a tentative answer to a tactical problem caused by the continuing Serbian assault on the Muslim enclave of Bihac, which has been declared by the United Nations to be a protected zone.


Army Says Nerve Gas Incinerator in Utah Is Safe
A team of Army engineers dispatched last month to review allegations that a nerve gas incinerator in Utah was unsafe found lapses in training and management, but concluded that none was serious enough to threaten the safety of workers or the public.
The engineers, who focused strictly on the $450 million plant's management, offered their conclusion in a report made public this week by the Army.
A separate study on the adequacy of the incinerator's design is be completed by Dec. 15.


The Pop Life
Dylan, Unplugged
Bob Dylan sneaked into town to tape an episode of MTV's "Unplugged" last Thursday and Friday night.
Though he once enraged his audience at the Newport Folk Festival by playing electric, Mr.
Dylan is hardly a surprise candidate for the "Unplugged" format, which has brought acoustic music back into vogue.
Of course, it should be noted that not everyone in Mr.
Dylan's band was unplugged.
Brendan O'Brien played a Hammond organ and Bucky Baxter played a pedal-steel guitar.
The rest of the band was made up of other Dylan regulars on acoustic instruments: Winston Watson on drums, John Jackson on guitar and Tony Garnier on stand-up bass.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  A flaw in the Pentium, the top chip made by Intel, can cause inaccurate calculations in certain rare cases.
Intel said the chip would not have to be recalled.
But many scientists and engineers who depend on precise calculations are concerned.  [ Page D1. ] Gibson Greetings and Bankers Trust settled a lawsuit over derivatives.
Gibson agreed to pay Bankers Trust nearly $6.2 million, or about 30 percent of the $20.7 million that Bankers claimed it was owed in the trades between the two.  [ D1. ]


Gingrich's Life: The Complications and Ideals
It was September 1942 when 16-year-old Kathleen Daugherty married Newton C. McPherson Jr., a 19-year-old mechanic in a small town in Pennsylvania.
In three days, the marriage fell apart; nine months later, she gave birth to a baby boy, whom she named Newton Leroy.
When Kathleen remarried three years later, her new husband, Robert B. Gingrich, an Army artillery officer, adopted her son.


Corrections
A brief report by Dow Jones in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about a plan by Asarco Inc. to sell its 23.6 percent stake in a Mexican mining business misstated the company's expected gain.
Asarco foresees a pretax gain of about $200 million, not $420 million.


Versa Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Russia's Nuclear Waste Gamble
For more than three decades, we now learn, Russia and the former Soviet Union have secretly pumped huge amounts of radioactive waste into the earth.
The goal was to sequester the lethal wastes far from possible contact with humans.
But already there are signs that some wastes are seeping beyond the original confines.
Nobody knows whether an environmental catastrophe is in the making -- or whether the Russians have found a waste disposal solution that, in their own context at least, is better than previously tried alternatives.
This is a vast environmental experiment whose consequences may not be known for decades or even centuries.


Moog Inc.(MOG.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Council Creates an Agency To Watch New York Police
The New York City Council voted yesterday to create the first permanent, independent agency to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
The agency would have far more investigative powers than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants it to have, and aides said he is likely to veto the measure.
But the Council's leadership, which supports the proposal, appears to have enough votes to override a veto.


Currents; Inspiration From an Angel
PERHAPS as a grim example of wartime landmarks preservation, the colossal Kolner Dom, or Cologne Cathedral, which took 600 years to complete, was the only building untouched by Allied bombs.
Today, it is a pilgrimage site, both sacred and secular, and the architectural center of the city.
John Hutton, the design director of Donghia Furniture and Textiles in New York, vividly recalled his first visit to the Dom in 1991.
When he saw the cast-bronze handles on the 12-foot-high doors, he stopped in his tracks.
The handles, designed by Hugo Schneider in the late 19th century, depict an enigmatic angel with deep-set eyes, an enormous feathered wing and wind-blown hair (above right).
Mr.
Hutton found a napkin and pencil in his pocket and sketched three studies of the cherub on the spot.


Markets Closed For Holiday
All banks and financial markets in the United States are closed today in observance of Thanksgiving.
But most markets in other countries are open.
Tomorrow, there will be limited trading on the American financial markets.


AT HOME WITH/Ntozake Shange; Native Daughter
AFTER a rough start to a rough morning, Ntozake Shange is settling down.
She has been ill all night and still does not feel well.
She's grumpy at being asked to meet at her home instead of at a restaurant and annoyed that a photographer showed up 10 minutes early.
But Ms.
Shange, the playwright and poet whose play "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf" was a hit of the 1976-77 Broadway season, has a new novel to talk about, so she puts all that aside and turns on her charm.
Extending a manicured hand, she reintroduces herself.
"Let's start again," she says.
"Hi. I'm Zake." Then she pours everyone a cup of amaretto coffee and, heading toward the bathroom, announces that she will return once her makeup is applied.


A Day to Give Thanks for Balloons; A 'Balloonatic' Makes Air Sculptures for Macy's Parade
For 30 years, Manfred G. Bass has dreamed up and guided the creation of the balloons and floats of Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade.
It is the only job Mr.
Bass, a 59-year-old artist, has ever held, and the only one he ever really wanted.
"It's a work of love," he said, as he matter-of-factly fastened his official metal parade badge to his canvas overalls with industrial rivets, as always.
"It's what makes the world go round. They're all giant toys, you know?"


Snowboard: A 'Rosebud' For the 90's
IT'S a Norman Rockwell vision: Thanksgiving weekend, the family ritual of gathering to take stock, give thanks and look to the future.
The Rev.
William Harper, 36, an Episcopal priest on Bainbridge Island, a ferry's commute from Seattle, has planned just such a weekend.


A Family Comes Back From a Slow Descent Into Poverty
Twice a day she leaves the half-light of her apartment and gingerly circles the block, savoring the sharp air and grasping at normalcy after months of illness and loss.
Life as Mary Wolfe knew it ended last October, when the security-guard company she ran with her three sons failed for lack of business.
As they searched fruitlessly for new jobs, hope turned to panic, and Mrs.
Wolfe, 57, developed a heart condition.


INSIDE
Stock Market Fears Ease
After a tumultuous session of zig-zagging prices, the stock market closed little changed, easing concerns after recent plunges.
Page D1.
Preparing for Simpson Trial
Faye Resnick, who wrote a shocking book about Nicole Brown Simpson, has been in hiding in Vermont, getting ready to testify.
Page A14.
Court Curbs Wall St.
Journal
A Federal court has barred The Wall Street Journal from publishing a decision that denied the paper access to a Whitewater report.
Page A25.
Flaw Found in Pentium Chip
Scientists and engineers are growing anxious because on rare occasions Intel's top-of-the-line Pentium computer chip makes errors.
Page D1.
A Tony for Off Broadway?
The two organizations that administer the awards invited submission of a plan under which smaller theaters might become eligible.
Page C11.


Sports of The Times; Some '94 Thank-You Notes
IN a year when sports has too often meant no World Series and no start of the hockey season as well as the mugging of a figure skater, Thanksgiving is time to remember the people who make this little corner of the world a better place.
Joe DiMaggio, who will celebrate his 80th birthday tomorrow as the essence of what baseball once was and is not now.


Economic Scene; Ukraine has a good chance of winning its dash for capitalism.
LEONID KUCHMA, the President of Ukraine since July, made the rounds this week to convince Americans to come to the aid of his country.
To no one's surprise, the blunt, poised politician -- once the manager of the Soviet Union's premier nuclear missile factory -- argued that Ukrainians were finally ready to take the plunge to free markets.
"We have no other choice," Mr. Kuchma said.


House Committee's Report Is Critical of F.B.I. in Ames Spy Case
A draft report by the House Intelligence Committee on the Aldrich Ames spy case criticizes the Federal Bureau of Investigation for taking a "wait-and-see attitude" on the executions in the Soviet Union in the mid-1980's of the bureau's best Soviet double agents, Government officials said today.
The report also suggests that officials of the Central Intelligence Agency may have been less than totally candid in their testimony to Congress about the deaths of the C.I.A.'s leading Soviet sources in the 1980's, they said.


Here, A Mother Can Age Gracefully
WITH her June Allyson-style blond bob and don't-dawdle gait, Irene Bender wears her 74 years lightly.
She still swings a mean golf club.
"But whether anyone would consider it 'playing' is debatable," she said with a self-deprecating laugh.
This week, so that her daughters and sons-in-law can "play their games and drink their cocktails," Mrs.
Bender will have a Thanksgiving sleep-over in her newly renovated house.
The guests?
Her five grandchildren, who range in age from 3 to 9 years.
"She's a zippy broad," said Mrs.
Bender's daughter Barbara Flanagan, a general contractor and architecture critic.
"But eventually, everybody slows down."


Bernard Garniez; French Literature Expert, 69
Prof.
Bernard Garniez, an expert in 20th-century French literature, died last Friday at the Village Nursing Home in Manhattan.
A Manhattan resident, he was 69.
The cause was complications after a stroke, his family said.


Yeltsin Says Russia Won't Yield in Baltic Border Dispute
Less than three months after withdrawing all his troops with fanfare from Estonia, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia stood on his disputed border with the Baltic nation today and promised that he would never yield "one single centimeter" of land.
Saber-rattling on issues like borders has become common for Mr.
Yeltsin, who must constantly worry about the right-wing nationalist opposition in the Russian Parliament.
But this time his remarks were particularly aggressive.


First Harrisburg
Shares of First Harrisburg Bancor plunged yesterday in Nasdaq trading after the company said it was ending merger talks with several suitors because their stock prices were dropping sharply.
First Harrisburg is a bank holding company in Pennsylvania.


Bus Bound for Atlantic City Hits Truck, Injuring Both Drivers
A charter bus en route from Chinatown to Atlantic City crashed into a flatbed tow truck on the Garden State Parkway Tuesday night, critically injuring the bus driver and interrupting a holiday gambling junket for 37 passengers.
The driver, Robert J. Ferguson, 47, of Manhattan, who was pinned in the crumpled front end of the bus for about two hours, had his right leg severed below the knee and had internal injuries.
But his passengers escaped with bumps and bruises and, after examinations in hospitals, many continued on to Atlantic City's casinos in a second bus sent to the scene, the New Jersey State Police said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
American Sensors Inc., Toronto, filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of two million shares.
The lead underwriter will be Paine Webber Inc.
*
Exide Corp., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., filed to sell 4.5 million shares through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


THEATER
When the Punishment Is Worse Than the Crime  National Jewish Theater


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Sounds of a 'Winterreise' Schubert Never Dreamed Of  La Mama E.T.C.


5,000 Palestinians Rally in Gaza to Support Arafat
About 5,000 Palestinians gathered in Jericho today to show their support for the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, whose authority has been seriously frayed by challenges from Islamic fundamentalists and the Israeli Government over the last few weeks.
Mr.
Arafat did not attend the rally.
He remained at his headquarters in Gaza -- largely because months after Israel and the Palestinians negotiated their agreement on autonomy, they have yet to agree on a practical way for him to move between the two self-rule areas, the Gaza Strip and Jericho, which are separated by Israel and the Israeli-occupied portion of the West Bank.


Essay; A Dinner Party
As soon as he arrived at the dinner for him at the Israeli Ambassador's residence, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin took me aside to chastise me for opposing his desire for U.S. troops on the Golan Heights.
"The whole idea was Bush and Baker's," he insisted, as if that were in its favor.
"They proposed a whole division."


Newbridge Networks (NN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 5


A House That Anchored a Child's World
THREE-THIRTEEN South O Street.
I wrote that address on a hundred letters during my childhood, first in shaky print and later in plump, self-conscious script.
I hardly believed you could reach such a fabulous destination with an ordinary postage stamp.
In my mind, the "O" might as well have stood for Oz.
Lake Worth was a little Florida town near the ocean, where my grandparents' house stood, protected by mango, loquat, jasmine and shower of gold trees.
Growing up on the move, an army brat with 17 addresses over the years and none that mattered, I treasured my visits to South O Street.
It was where I could make my memories stand still.
There my grandfather and I built sugar cube Christmas cottages held together with frosting mortar.
There I squeezed "invisible ink" from lemons in the kitchen and ironed it visible again in the wash house out back.
There I hid for hours under the piano, playing with dolls and waiting patiently for the grown-ups to say something worth eavesdropping on.


U.S. Long Distance (USLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
WEIGHT LIFTING  First Gold for Germany  Marc Huster of Germany won his country's first gold medal at the world weight-lifting championships in Istanbul, Turkey yesterday.
Competing in the 183-pound class, Huster lifted a combined total of 842 pounds in the snatch and the clean and jerk, breaking the record set five minutes earlier by Sergo Tchakhoian of Armenia, who lifted 837 pounds.
Tchakhoian won a gold medal for his record-breaking lift of 386 pounds in the snatch, and Sunay Bulut of Turkey won the jerk with a lift of 463 pounds, another world record. (AP)


ALLY OF D'AMATO GETS PATAKI POST
Governor-elect George E. Pataki today named Joseph N. Mondello, the Nassau County Republican leader and a loyal ally of United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, as chairman of his transition team.
While Mr.
Mondello's influence over the shape of Mr.
Pataki's state government will only be seen over time, his appointment made clear that the Governor-elect is not loosening his ties to Mr.
D'Amato and his allies, a relationship that was frequently and sharply attacked during this year's campaign.


Fatal Runway Collision Under U.S. Inquiry
Federal aviation officials were investigating yesterday why a twin-engine propeller plane taxied into the path of a Trans World Airlines jet taking off on Tuesday night from St.
Louis, resulting in a collision that killed the two pilots aboard the smaller plane.
Eight of the 137 people aboard T.W.A.
Flight 427 suffered minor injuries.
The airliner veered to the left to avoid a head-on crash and the jet's right wing sheared off the roof of the smaller plane, a Cessna Conquest.


Tony Administrators May Add an Award For Off Broadway
In a move that reflects the weakness of Broadway and the growing strength of Off Broadway, the administrators of the Tony Awards are considering offering a Tony to Off Broadway productions.
The proposal is still in its initial stages.
The only Tony committee that can change the rules does not meet until Jan. 19.
But the heads of the two organizations that jointly administer the prizes have invited the president of the League of Off-Broadway Theaters to propose a plan under which its productions might become eligible.


Don't Cave In on Myanmar
The Clinton Administration, after struggling messily for nearly two years with the dilemmas of human rights diplomacy, seems at last to have arrived at a consistent approach: Deny reality, declare things are getting better and lower the pressure on authoritarian regimes.
Now, at least, tyrannies large and small, from China to Indonesia to Myanmar, can count on consistent treatment.
Until this month Myanmar, the former Burma, stood out as the principled exception to the Administration's complaisance.
While Asian and European countries cozied up to the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council, Washington refused to forget about the Slorc's record of trampling on elections, complicity with drug lords and continuing atrocities against civilians.


Very Special Delivery


Theater for the Young
The George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick, N.J., has received a $195,000 grant, one of six given nationally by the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund for the production of theater pieces for young audiences.
The George Street Playhouse will use the grant to produce "Entries," a play by Bernardo Solano about a Hispanic young man's coming of age.
Others receiving grants, which totaled $900,000, are Tears of Joy Theater in Vancouver, Wash.; American Conservatory Theater, San Francisco; the Coterie Theater, Kansas City, Mo.; the Metro Theater Company, St.
Louis, and South Coast Repertory, Costa Mesa, Calif.


Not Pausing for Interviews


Thomas H. Kuchel Dies at 84; Ex-Republican Whip in Senate
Thomas H. Kuchel, a Californian who spent 16 years in the United States Senate and who as Republican whip there played a vital role in enactment of major civil rights legislation in the 1960's, died on Monday night at his home in Beverly Hills.
He was 84.
He had been under treatment for lung cancer, said Dick Arnold, a former law partner.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.50
5.43
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.28
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.74
3.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.88
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.94
8.02
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.82
8.87
7.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.29
7.37
5.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Many Turn Holiday Into Mini-Vacation
Spurred by bargain air fares and stable gasoline prices, a record number of Americans were expected to travel over Thanksgiving week, traditionally the busiest travel time of the year.
And although many people have long taken off the Friday after Thanksgiving, this year, travel experts say, more are viewing their long weekend as a time for both holiday visits with families and friends as well as a chance to sightsee, shop or ski.


Rudolf Firkusny Tribute
A memorial tribute to the pianist Rudolf Firkusny is to be held on Dec. 2 at 5 P.M. in the Paul Recital Hall of the Juilliard School, 60 Lincoln Center Plaza.
Among the scheduled speakers are Joseph W. Polisi, the president of Juilliard; Igor Firkusny, the pianist's son; the composer Philip Glass, and Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic.
The pianist Joseph Kalichstein, the Juilliard String Quartet and Avner Arad, who studied with Mr.
Firkusny, are to perform.
The event is open to the public; seating will be first come first served.
Mr.
Firkusny died in July at the age of 82.


Playing Comes First, Pain Is Second
In the first quarter in Monday night's game against Houston, Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey tried to jam a 300-pound offensive lineman, and Bailey took the brunt of the hit.
He said it felt as if someone had taken a hammer and driven it into his right shoulder.
He injured the shoulder socket and the pain was so bad that he couldn't lift his arm.
Both Bailey and the team said the injury wasn't serious, just painful.


Handleman Co.(HDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


The Wedding Reception Did Double Duty With Soup Kitchen
To the Editor:
I recently attended the wedding of clients of mine who have become good friends over the years.
I could not help comparing that most special ceremony with my own wedding day.
The simple church service, without flowers, candles, bridal party, band or flower girl was beautiful, but different from mine.


Hormel (Geo. A.) &amp; Co.  (HRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Apparel Workers Lose In World Trade Pact
To the Editor:
Each month the North American Free Trade Agreement causes 1,000 skilled women who work hard at sewing machines in small towns across this country to lose their jobs to low-wage Mexican workers.


Mexican Lawman Accuses Ruling Party in His Brother's Death
The official heading the investigation into the assassination of one of Mexico's most powerful politicians said today that the killing was ordered by an influential group within the ruling party, but that Mexico's Attorney General and current party leaders had kept him from proving it.
The investigator, Mario Ruiz Massieu, younger brother of the assassinated politician, also announced he had resigned his position as Deputy Attorney General.
He said he would send all the evidence he has gathered during a nearly two-month investigation to an independent notary public who would safeguard it until the incoming President, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, took office on Dec. 1 and decided what to do.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Young Austrian Melts Into the Music at Hand  Avery Fisher Hall


OPEC Move May Spur Sharp Rise in Oil Prices
Oil prices could rise by $2 to $3 a barrel within a year because of the decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to freeze production at current levels while world consumption rises, industry analysts said yesterday.
The decision to hold the group's total production at 24.5 million barrels for another year was announced on Tuesday, at the conclusion of a meeting of OPEC's oil ministers on the Indonesian resort island of Bali.


Bond Rally Continues On Flight From Stocks
Treasury securities continued to rally yesterday for a second consecutive session, benefiting from a flight by investors out of stocks into bonds.
Bond prices surged early in the day day and gyrated through much of the trading, ending slightly below the highs for the day.
Still, yesterday's rally was the biggest since the end of July.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Afternoon With a Soprano Of the New Generation  Alice Tully Hall


Reacting to Wall Street, European Markets Fall
Taking a cue from the steep drop in stock prices in the United States on Tuesday, markets across Europe plunged today as investors dumped stocks and sought refuge in bonds.
In London, equities fell nearly 1.7 percent.
In Paris and Milan, stock indexes were off 0.96 percent and 1.83 percent, respectively.
Here in Frankfurt, stocks were hit hardest, falling 2 percent.


Argentina Demotes Its Once-Powerful Armed Forces
Ever since Argentina's defeat by Britain in the Falkland War in 1982, the armed forces have been in decline here, and President Carlos Saul Menem has virtually eliminated any threat of a military coup through a series of reforms since taking office in 1990.
The Menem Government has cut military spending in half, reduced the armed forces to 20,000 troops from 100,000, retreated from unprofitable military enterprises and abolished mandatory military service in favor of a professional force.


Bridge
The controversy over the Women's Board-a-Match Teams, when a full session of play was canceled because some of the players had played the same deals four months earlier, has died down, but a similar problem seemed about to erupt at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here.
An allegation that the deals played on Saturday in the final session of the Life Master Open Pair Championship were a repeat of those played in the Greenpoint Pairs six months ago in Manhattan was proved true by referring to this column's report of the event, which found a hand identical to a computer-generated hand played on Saturday.


U.S. Assets Of Briton Are Frozen
In a swift response yesterday to an accusation of illegal trading that occurred only 10 days ago, a United States district judge froze the assets in the New York brokerage account of a British businessman.
The account, held by Jeffrey C. Morris, owner of What's in Store, a British retail chain, held profits that the Securities and Exchange Commission contends were made on illegal insider information.
The agency says Mr.
Morris made $425,000 in illegal profits by purchasing stock and options in the Hilton Hotels Corporation while in possession of material, nonpublic information about Hilton.


Vincent Puts Down His Pen
Fay Vincent, the former baseball commissioner, said yesterday that he has decided not to complete and publish the book that he and a collaborator have been writing.
"I've decided that it's probably best for baseball and for me that I keep my counsel about the past," Vincent said in a telephone interview.
"Baseball has enough trouble. I don't need any more controversy in my life. I can't recall a time in my life when I've had more serenity. I've really enjoyed the peace and quiet."


Durable Orders Off 1.5% In First Drop Since July
Orders for long-lived manufactured products, a closely watched predictor of economic activity, fell last month for the first time since July in what some economists regarded as a sign the business expansion might be slowing.
"This does perhaps indicate that the economic boomlet may be subsiding," said Lynn Reaser, senior vice president at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles, as the Commerce Department reported a 1.5 percent decline in orders for durable goods, which range from camcorders to tanks.


Talking With Tony Kushner
The playwright Tony Kushner is to be interviewed by Anna Quindlen, a columnist for The New York Times, on Dec. 6 at 7:30 P.M., as part of the Tuesday Evening Lecture Series at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, at Grove Street, in Greenwich Village.
Other speakers in the series are to be the television newswoman Lesley Stahl (Feb. 7) and the writer Gloria Steinem (April 18).
Tickets are $30 a session.
Information: (212) 924-5960 or (212) 279-4200.


F.T.C. Seeks Data on Caremark Alliances
Broadening its investigation of relations between drug makers and managed health-care drug distributors, the Federal Trade Commission has asked a number of drug companies to describe contractual alliances with Caremark International, which operates a managed-care drug unit.
The commission ordered the drug makers not to destroy documents relating to competition in the manufacture or sale of prescription drugs.


Suspect in Washington Shootings Had Past Weapons Convictions
The man who police say killed a District of Columbia police officer and two F.B.I. agents in a gun battle on Tuesday inside police headquarters here had a criminal record that included convictions on 13 weapons and ammunition charges, law-enforcement officials said today, and the 16-month probation he received after 18 months in jail had ended four days before the shootings.
The gunman, Bennie L. Lawson Jr., a 25-year-old former college student from the District, was also killed during the shooting.
Two other people, including an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, were wounded.


Police Disrupt Subway Service in Pursuit of a Robbery Suspect
City police officers chased a robbery suspect into a Manhattan subway tunnel yesterday and threw an emergency power switch, turning off electricity on several lines from Greenwich Village to Columbus Circle and inconveniencing more than 250,000 subway riders.
The incident shut down service on the A, B, C, D, E, F and Q trains for 1 hour 20 minutes, stranding a northbound E train in a tunnel just south of 42d Street, transit officials said.


Ruminations on Life By a Korean Minimalist
Sin Cha Hong, a Korean-born minimalist performer and choreographer, is at her best when she is simplest.
Miss Hong has a gift for expressing profound ideas about life, death and transcendence in a cross-stage walk or an odd lift of a body, for instance, as she did on Saturday night in a program of new work at the Annex Theater at La Mama.
Miss Hong moved along a diagonal path of diffuse light in "Above and Below," a solo set to an atmospheric score for piano and strings by Ki Young Kim.
Her torso strongly centered, though not always as powerfully as in earlier dances, she turned a little and bowed a little, creating a sense of a body transforming very slowly in space.
The spare, solid look of the solo was enhanced by Tae Ock Jin's costume, a boxy white overall made of rice paper.


Unlocking the Grid?
Senator Dole's agreement with President Clinton on GATT raises a possibility that when the Republicans take over Congress, gridlock may not necessarily be inevitable.
News analysis, page A29.


No Headline
"What idiot is going to work 500 consecutive games when my wife doesn't even drive and I still work? There will never be another nut like me." BERNARD SHERMAN, 80, who has not missed a football game at his high school alma mater since 1934.  [ B29:4. ]


TODAY'S HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL GAMES
C.H.S.F.L.
CARDINAL HAYES (4-5) at MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL (3-6), 10:30 A.M.
Key Players: If the Mounties are going to get untracked offensively, quarterback Joe Ward, who has rushed for 553 yards on 100 carries and 10 touchdowns, will have to lead the way.
Robert Hernandez (66 of 150 for 1,084 yards, 8 touchdowns) and running back Jonaxy Gonzalez (902 yards, 7 touchdowns) are the players on whom Hayes depends.


Dole and Clinton Strike a Deal on World Trade Pact
President Clinton today struck a deal with the prospective Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, that appeared to rescue a world trade agreement scheduled for a vote at a special session of Congress next week.
The compromise with Mr.
Dole raised the hope of a measure of bipartisanship in foreign policy between the White House and the new Republican-controlled Congress.


Currents; Design as Smooth as Skin
PAOLO CERMASI thinks the new LaPerla lingerie boutique that he designed suggests a romantic update of "a grandmother's bedroom." Hmmmm.
Not unless Grandma is the model Jill Goodacre.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Placed Ron Dickerson, running back, on injured reserve.
Signed Victor Jones, fullback.
Hockey  Colonial Hockey League
BRANTFORD SMOKE -- Released Darren Schmidt, defenseman, and Greg Wahl, right wing.
College
JOHNSON C. SMITH -- Announced the resignation of Ray Lee, football coach.


Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds; Why Cut Labor Force?
To the Editor:
In "Misplaced Fears About the Fed" (editorial, Nov. 17) you say that most economists add increases in the labor force (1 percent) to productivity gains (1.5 percent) to arrive at 2.5 percent as the maximum sustainable growth the economy can achieve.


Shorter Hours For Markets
All banks and financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Thanksgiving.
But most markets in other countries were open.
Today, there will be limited trading on the American financial markets.


How Two Theaters Died at Union Hands
To the Editor:
To Emanuel Azenberg, Neil Simon's producer, the theater community owes a vote of thanks for having the courage to tell it as it is in your Nov. 21 Arts pages report "Why Neil Simon Decided to Turn His Back on Broadway."


And Now for the Next Holiday


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"BLADE TO THE HEAT," Joseph Papp Public Theater, Anspacher Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


In This Election, G.O.P. Won Because More Rich People Voted; No Rush to the Right
To the Editor:
I've watched with fascination as the national print and electronic media have rushed in their election post-mortems to announce a new Republican ascendancy and a decisive turn by the United States population to the right ("Moderate Democrats' Poll Sends the President a Warning," news article, Nov. 18).


Making the Affordable Chilean Wines Even Finer
In the vast bottling room of Vina Concha y Toro S.A., the largest winery in Chile, roaring machines and uniformed workers turn out 600,000 bottles of wine a day for the United States and other countries with a thirst for Chile's inexpensive wines of quality.
Business is so good these days that Concha y Toro, tucked into this river-valley town 20 miles south of Santiago, recently doubled its production capacity and is operating 24 hours a day.


A Modest Feast for the Thankful


There Will Be a Brief Recess While We Check Our Wardrobes
Vivian Berger, the vice dean of Columbia Law School, remembers a bright young student who was distraught because no firm would hire her.
"I took one look at her and immediately knew the reason: she looked like a whore," Ms.
Berger said.
"Her clothes were very tight, and she was quite buxom."
The legal profession has a dress code all its own, though its rules go unspoken.
"Clothes can undo the lawyer," Ms.
Berger said.
Yet she admitted: "I talked to this student about everything but the way she dressed. It's so personal, it's like telling someone she has body odor."


Keep in Mind
HANUKKAH CELEBRATION, where the story of the holiday is told through music and contemporary dance by the Avodah Dance Ensemble; for children 4 and older.
Sunday at 2 P.M., at Henry Street Settlement, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side.
Tickets: $5, adults; $3.50, children.
Information: (212) 598-0400.
"THE SOUND OF MUSIC," a new production by the New York Youth Theater and the Looking Glass Theater.
Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sundays at 3 P.M., through Dec. 18.
At the New York Youth Theater, 422 West 57th Street, Clinton.
Tickets: $10; children half-price on Thursdays.
Reservations: (212) 315-1737.


Israeli Military Court Sentences Palestinian to Death in Bombing
In a rare action, an Israeli military court sentenced a Palestinian to death today for plotting a suicide bombing last April in northern Israel that killed five Israelis and the bomber.
It was the first time that a military court has called for capital punishment in a dozen years or more, Israeli civil-rights lawyers said, and they expressed doubts that the death sentence would be carried out, any more than the three or four others ordered in Israel in the past.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  This month's plunge in stock prices has hit cyclical stocks the hardest, showing that the market is worrying about the economy.
But will the selloff continue as investors return from Thanksgiving?
The answer may depend on how they react to economic data next week, including reports on gross domestic product and unemployment.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ Page D7. ]


Art in Review
Marisa Merz Barbara Gladstone Gallery 100 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through De. 10
The Italian artist Marisa Merz is known in the New York art world primarily as the wife of Mario Merz, a founder of Arte Povera, but in Europe she has an art career of some 30 years standing that includes a retrospective at the Pompidou Center in Paris.
Her first show here is consummately self-effacing in ways that emphasize both the strengths and weaknesses of the Arte Povera style.


The Spoken Word
"LAUGHING SCREAMING: MODERN HOLLYWOOD HORROR AND COMEDY," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue and 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
A three-lecture series about pushing the boundaries of good taste continues on Sunday at 2 P.M. with a talk by Larry Cohen, the director of the 1974 film "It's Alive," which will be shown.
Also to be shown, at 4:30 P.M., will be the 1981 film "Porky's Fox," directed by Bob Clark.
Free with museum admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children.
Information: (718) 784-4520.


World War II France: Joie de Vivre Amid the Noms de Guerre
That the gaiety of Paris remained uncompromised throughout much of World War II remains a topic of some delicacy and relatively limited discussion.
Certainly it was still controversial in 1976, when "Chantons Sous L'Occupation" ("Singing Through the Occupation"), Andre Halimi's thoughtful, unflinching documentary on this subject, was shown in Paris to hostile public and critical response.
Opening today for a six-day run at the Walter Reade Theater, Mr.
Halimi's trenchant film uses images of sunny, uplifting show business personages to create a chilling mood.
The inspirational power of popular entertainment is shown to be profoundly disturbing when subverted, as it was in Occupied France, to raise morale artifically and quell the impulse to resist.


There Will Be a Brief Recess While We Check Our Wardrobes
Vivian Berger, the vice dean of Columbia Law School, remembers a bright young student who was distraught because no firm would hire her.
"I took one look at her and immediately knew the reason: she looked like a whore," Ms.
Berger said.
"Her clothes were very tight, and she was quite buxom."
The legal profession has a dress code all its own, though its rules go unspoken.
"Clothes can undo the lawyer," Ms.
Berger said.
Yet she admitted: "I talked to this student about everything but the way she dressed. It's so personal, it's like telling someone she has body odor."


Awkward Questions After the Nazis Won
The plot of "Fatherland," a movie having its premiere tomorrow on HBO, is woven around an ingenious premise.
The year is 1964.
Twenty years earlier, Nazi Germany won World War II after the United States, listening to isolationists like Charles A. Lindbergh, withdrew from the Allied invasion.
Now Berlin, groaning under Albert Speer's elephantine architecture, prepares to celebrate Hitler's 75th birthday, which will be attended by the American President, Joseph P. Kennedy.
One problem: high-ranking officials of the Third Reich are mysteriously turning up dead.


TWO SENATORS VIE TO LEAD MINORITY
When Senate Democrats pick a new leader next week, they will be guessing at which of two relatively young, fairly liberal supporters of President Clinton can best make the party's case in a political era that seems devoted not to youth, not to liberalism and not to the President.
Neither of the two, Tom Daschle, a second-termer from South Dakota, and Christopher J. Dodd, a third-termer from Connecticut, has staked out any clear philosophical differences from the other.


Griffey Sr. to Coach
KEN GRIFFEY, the father of Seattle center fielder KEN GRIFFEY Jr., will be a coach for the Tacoma Rainiers, the Mariners' top farm club.
STEVE SMITH will manage the Pacific Coast League team and JEFF ANDREWS will be the pitching coach, the Mariners said Wednesday. (AP)


Art in Review
Robin Winters 'Notes from the Finishing Room' Michael Klein Gallery 40 Wooster Street SoHo Through Dec. 17


Balloons Over Broadway


Art in Review
Rebecca Horn  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through December
This show, Rebecca Horn's first in New York City since her memorable Guggenheim retrospective last year, centers on one of the eerily animated mechanical contrivances that have become her signature.
"Turtle Sighing Tree" is a gallery-filling cluster of upright copper pipes sprouting tubular branches, each of which ends in a hornlike funnel.
The whole structure rests on a vaguely tortoise-shaped steel platform.


Commander Says the U.N. Must Act Against the Serbs
The United Nations commander in Bosnia tonight called the Serbian advance on a "safe area" in northwest Bosnia "a very grave development, which we have to act upon," but declined to say what action he would recommend.
"They have certainly crossed the line beyond which the safety of the population of Bihac is now directly threatened," the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose said of the town under siege.


Miscellany
*
McDonald's Corp., in its fourth annual videotape promotion, will offer four MCA/Universal films, including "Field of Dreams," for $5.99 each with the purchase of menu items.
The promotion runs through Dec. 15. *
Newspaper Association of America, Reston, Va., said advertising spending in newspapers in the third quarter totaled $8.37 billion, up 8.2 percent from the corresponding period a year earlier.
It was the best quarter in five years, the organization said.
For the first nine months of the year, newspaper ad spending totaled $24.18 billion, up 6.9 percent.


In Navajos' Towns, A New Tactic to Fill A Void in Banking
Water is scarce amid the white limestone cliffs, sandstone canyons and drought-browned prairie grasses of the Navajo Reservation.
But banks are even scarcer.
The last one to operate here still sits beside Route 191, propped up on cinder blocks: a mobile home that was a Citibank branch and was never very popular.
For every dollar deposited, it put out at best a few pennies in loans, infuriating the 25,000 residents of this town and the surrounding hills.


Uranium Leak at Tennessee Laboratory Brings Fears of an Accidental Chain Reaction
Uranium leaking from an old experimental reactor at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee has lodged in a pipe outside the reactor building, raising fears of an accidental nuclear chain reaction.
Energy Department officials said they had not decided what to do with the 4.4 pounds of bomb-grade uranium, which may still be accumulating.
They discovered the leak earlier this year and later evacuated an office building next to the reactor.


Injury to Keep Emtman Out for Rest of Season
Indianapolis Colts defensive lineman STEVE EMTMAN has a herniated disk in his neck and will miss the rest of the season.
Coach TED MARCHIBRODA said yesterday that Emtman would have surgery in the next week to 10 days, but will not return this year.


An Editorial Debate: Should We Make Research Embryos?; No, Humans Are Not Lettuces
Ethics, somebody told me once, derive from repugnance.
Animals faced with the disgusting will simply walk away.
But we, having been blessed (or cursed) with a different kind of brain, will immediately construct a rationale for our response.
Possibly we, too, will walk away.
Just as possibly we will detect a virtue -- or, more likely, an advantage -- in staying.
Whatever the decision, we are almost certain to describe it as "ethical."
Using cells from aborted fetuses to investigate and maybe even cure certain remarkably cruel illnesses -- Huntington's chorea, for instance, and Alzheimer's disease -- has always struck me as equivalent to transplanting organs from the dead to the living.
Having accepted that procedure way back in Christiaan Barnard's day, I also accept the former.
But I can no more accept the notion that it is O.K. to create, and destroy, human embryos solely for research purposes than a cat can accept a rotting mouse.
Both reactions are instinctive, but mine demands explication.
Being human, I am forced, if only by myself, to build an ethical edifice.


The N.I.T. Is Trent's Show, If He Can Face the Pace
New Mexico State Coach Coach Neil McCarthy dubbed his squad the Desert Warriors after his Aggies scored 16 of the last 17 points to beat the University of Memphis, 81-78, in a Preseason National Invitation Tournament semifinal Wednesday night.
McCarthy, whose team will face Ohio University in tonight's final, could just as well have changed the name of his program to Transfer Tech.


Kazakhstan Thanks U.S. On Uranium
Officials in Kazakhstan expressed gratitude today to the United States for taking control of some 1,300 pounds of enriched uranium, but they sought to emphasize that the material had not been at risk of theft or diversion to a dangerous power.
Clinton Administration officials have said they arranged the transfer to the United States because they feared that if the material was left in the former Soviet republic, some of it might find its way to Iran, Iraq, North Korea or some other nation.


METRO DIGEST
MODEL WELFARE PROGRAM OFFERS LESSONS Westchester County has become a statewide model for tough enforcement of eligibility rules for welfare, including a stringent requirement that the able-bodied work for their benefits, and strict enforcement of state rules that deny benefits to addicted and mentally ill recipients who do not accept treatment.
In Westchester, the approach has produced measurable savings.
But a close look also puts into perspective what a limited impact these savings might have for the state and New York City.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Restaurants
Verbena: n. any of a genus of plants of the verbena family, with spikes or clusters of showy red, white or purplish flowers, widely grown for ornament; adj. designating a family of mostly tropical, American, dicotyledonous plants, shrubs and trees including vervain, lantana and teak.
Verbena: A leaf with a lemony flavor and the trendiest herb in restaurants in the fall of 1994.


Revisiting the World Of Rebels and Redcoats
Let's get the invidious comparisons out of the way.
"The American Revolution" is not "The Civil War." Momentous though it was, the war that began the United States does not grip the imagination like the war that might have ended it.
For 20th-century Americans, the Revolution does not have the dramatic force, the emotional resonance, the painful relevance of the Civil War, and the six-hour history that begins on Sunday does not pretend otherwise.
What "The American Revolution" does do is trace the background, dramatize the high moments and sketch some of the personalities and achievements of the remarkable company that gave us the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and political ideals that have never lost their glow.


An Editorial Debate: Should We Make Research Embryos?; Yes, the Gains Could Be Great
When a panel of experts proposed in September that the Federal Government start funding research on human embryos, they ignited a controversy.
Some people feel such research is inherently unethical, while many scientists think it has been needlessly curtailed.
The panel's recommendations, which apply only to embryos created in the laboratory, not to those created in the womb, will be reviewed next week at the National Institutes of Health.
The most inflammatory recommendation by far is that, in carefully defined circumstances, scientists should be able to create embryos solely for research and then destroy them when finished.
That has stirred fears that modern-day Frank-ensteins will soon create, destroy and tinker with life forms just to satisfy their intellectual curiosity.
But it strikes this observer that the panel of 19 scientists, ethicists, lawyers and others got the balance just about right.
It concluded that the embryo does not have the same moral status as infants or children -- and that research on such embryos holds the potential for great benefit.


Critic's Choice/Music; Troupe of Trouser Voices in Skirt Roles
Some people think La Gran Scena Opera company is a big joke.
But just because the audience laughs through most of its performances, just because the singers -- Vera Galupe-Borszkh, Sylvia Bills and Gabriella Tonnoziti-Casseruola -- tend to camp it up a bit, just because the company plunders the most outrageous scenes in opera and just because the program notes indicate that all these grand divas are actually divos doesn't mean that this company shouldn't be taken seriously.
Most of these singers, after all, need apologize to nobody for their phrasing or vocal range.
In the midst of their extravagance, they have an intimate acquaintance with the opera world, onstage and off.
And there are even times when mainstream productions seem to be imitating La Gran Scena, rather than the other way around.


The Portable Art of Leiber Handbags
Faberge eggs, Tiffany lamps and now Judith Leiber handbags: all are prosaic objects propelled by craftsmanship and imagination into the heady realm of art objects.
Over the last 30 years, Leiber bags have swung from the shoulders of women like Beverly Sills and Pat Buckley at evening parties.
More often, they have been cuddled in the palms of their aficionados, some of whom have assembled groups of the bags in vitrines in their living rooms or arranged them as centerpieces on dinner tables to take advantage of their decorative qualities.


Art in Review
Bruce Weber Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 10


Laundering Of Crime Cash Troubles U.N.
The shipment of cocaine left Colombia for West Africa, but that was not its true destination.
From there, some went to Ethiopia and on to Europe, along the smugglers' trails once used for cigarettes or marijuana.
Some went to Asia.
Some trickled to a blossoming new market of drug abusers in South Africa.
Then came the reverse route, the skillful manipulation of dirty street money through former Soviet republics, offshore banks and major stock exchanges, until it emerged as legitimate cash for the buying and selling of a hotel in Bogota.


Art in Review
Marisa Merz Barbara Gladstone Gallery 100 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through De. 10
The Italian artist Marisa Merz is known in the New York art world primarily as the wife of Mario Merz, a founder of Arte Povera, but in Europe she has an art career of some 30 years standing that includes a retrospective at the Pompidou Center in Paris.
Her first show here is consummately self-effacing in ways that emphasize both the strengths and weaknesses of the Arte Povera style.


Evoking Moses' Vision of New York
THE Panorama of the City of New York is a meeting of two minds: yours and Robert Moses'.
Oh, yes, the vast scale model looks remarkably like a city: five boroughs worth of miniature buildings, streets, parks and bridges.
But don't be fooled.
All that physical apparatus is just a scaffold for what can become an intensely emotional mental exchange.
Here, you will enter the mind of one of the greatest master planners of all time.
You will survey the city through the eyes of the man who transformed it.
Then, moments after stepping inside that legendarily imperial dome, you may begin to discern an urban vision of your own.
Memories, hopes, triumphs, disappointments: these are among the landmarks on the private map that begins to take shape as you look around the Panorama.
The places you've lived, or wanted to.
The good or bad times you had there.
The connections and disconnections of a life lived in New York City.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan shows: JONATHAN HAMMER, Matthew Marks Gallery, 1018 Madison Avenue, at 78th Street.
Jonathan Hammer, an artist and bookbinder, has bound in extravagant and inventively varied ways a group of large-scale books, illustrated by different artists, with tests by several writers. (Through tomorrow.)


More Than 130 Trampled to Death in Central India


No Headline
"You can't help all the people. But if you feed one and that one helps another, then it multiplies." -- FERDINAND PAGAN, helping with food distribution in the South Bronx.  [ B3:2. ]


Art in Review
Bruce Weber Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 10


Owners' Plan Has Payoff for Cardinals
If the 28 major league teams play baseball next year under the terms the owners are now proposing and their revenues and payrolls are what they had projected for this year, the Yankees will contribute the most money to the clubs' revenue-sharing pool, but the St.
Louis Cardinals will hold the most curious position.
The Cardinals, according to figures accompanying the tax proposal the clubs gave the players last week as a solution to end the 15-week-old strike, would receive money from the pool even though their revenue would be higher than the revenues of two teams -- Detroit and Oakland -- that would have to share some of their income with supposedly lower-revenue clubs.


Execution by Injection Can Be Botched, Too
To the Editor:
Like many advocates of the death penalty, Ernest van den Haag (letter, Nov. 18) is less offended by the fact of a state homicide than by the method employed.
Repulsed by the brutality of electrocutions, he recommends America's newest method for killing killers, lethal injection, as being "painless and nonrepulsive."


Market Place; For Stocks, New Fears Of a Slowing Economy
The stock market is suddenly becoming worried about the health of the economy.
The plunge in prices this month, and particularly in the last few days, has hit the cyclical stocks -- the issues most dependent on a strong economy -- the hardest.
At the same time, the battered bond market has suddenly gained strength.


Power Struggle Is Delaying Approval of Hospitals Chief
More than seven months after he was named to head the struggling Westchester County Medical Center, Edward A. Stolzenberg can point to some impressive gains: The hospital has allied with 11 managed-care organizations, its revenues are up and the average time that a patient stays there is down.
So why hasn't the County Board of Legislators voted on Mr.
Stolzenberg's nomination as hospitals commissioner by the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke?


Flexing Fiscal Muscles: Mayor and Council at Loggerheads
For 11 months, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has had near total dominion at City Hall, with the Democratic-controlled City Council resignedly giving its approval to the Republican's austere $31.6 billion budget and vision of a far smaller government.
But now a slow accumulation of citizen pressure over continuing spending cuts, legislative grievances over Mr.
Giuliani's all-or-nothing style, and a sense that the Mayor has become vulnerable in the wake of the election of George E. Pataki as Governor have started to change the relationship between Mr.
Giuliani and the 51-member Council.


Abroad at Home; Thanks And Giving
Two days before Thanksgiving I had a telephone call from a young man who asked how he could reach a Sarajevo children's doctor I had mentioned in a column.
"I want to help," he said.
Who was he?
I asked.
A 20-year-old student at the University of California in Berkeley, Shervin Pishevar.
And why was he interested in what was happening in Bosnia?


Results Plus
PRO BASKETBALL  Pacers Put a Halt to High-Scoring Warriors
Rik Smits scored 28 points on 12 of 14 shooting and the Indiana Pacers held Golden State to 28 points in the second half of a 123-96 victory last night at Indianapolis.
Dale Davis added 19 points for Indiana, which shut down the National Basketball Association's second-ranked offense.
Antonio Davis grabbed 10 rebounds to lead the Pacers to a 48-31 advantage in that category.


Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds; Slow the Money Supply
To the Editor:
Who really believes the nonsense from the Federal Reserve when it says that increasing its interest rates will somehow decrease inflation ("Misplaced Fears About the Fed," editorial, Nov. 17)?


Corrections
An obituary of Wilma Rudolph on Nov. 13, as well as a Sports of The Times column that day, misstated her accomplishment in winning three gold medals in track and field at the 1960 Olympics in Rome.
She was the first American woman to win three or more medals in one Olympics, not the first woman; Fanny Blankers-Koen of the Netherlands won four gold medals at the 1948 Games in London.


Critic's Choice/Film; A Jamaican Journeyer in Search of His African Roots
Howard A. Trott, the subject of Fritz Baumann's film "The Journey of the Lion," is a Jamaican Rastafarian who lives an impoverished existence with his two children in a shack on the outskirts of Kingston.
Disgusted with modern civilization, Brother Howie, as he is known, dreams of repatriation in Africa.
Out of the blue one day, he receives a letter from the sister he hasn't seen in 30 years inviting him to visit her in London.
Leaving Jamaica for the first time in his life, he embarks on a journey that takes him to England and eventually to Egypt and Ghana.
The eloquently simple film, which is to be screened twice this weekend at Cinema Village (tomorrow at 3:50 P.M. and Sunday at 9 P.M.), is among 13 movies having their American premieres as part of the Contemporary Films of the African Diaspora Festival.
The festival, which opens at noon today with "Life is Rosy," a musical comedy from Zaire, is presenting 32 recent feature films from around the world.


Diner's Journal
Serene, and Expensive
"It looks like a coffee shop," the woman sitting on the banquette beneath the window was saying to the woman at the next table.


Put the Magazine Covers and Prognostications Aside: St. John's Season Starts Today
It's easy to forget that St.
John's finished with a disappointing 12-17 record last season.
All has been forgiven now that the nickname and the uniforms have been changed and Felipe Lopez is on the cover of Sports Illustrated.
Only optimism about a promising future surrounds the St.
John's basketball program these days, a future that stirs talk of Big East titles and a national championship.
The long journey to whatever pot of gold awaits perhaps the best recruiting class in St.
John's history officially begins at 4 P.M. today when the Red Storm plays Dartmouth in the first round of the 20th annual Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament at Alumni Hall.


Russian Aid Under Siege By G.O.P.
Aid to Russia, always a contentious issue before Congress, is under siege by the new Republican majority, even though President Clinton has already cut Russian aid sharply from last year.
The two Republican Senators who are expected to be the most influential voices on foreign assistance -- Jesse Helms of North Carolina, in line to head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who is likely to run the Senate Subcommittee on Foreign Operations -- have repeatedly suggested that aid to Russia is too generous and vow to take an even tougher line next year.


The G.O.P. Assault on Welfare
The welfare reform proposal drafted by House Republicans would violate good sense by turning welfare programs over to the states.
It would violate common decency by victimizing millions of children, including legal immigrants.
It would even violate the reasonable notion that Government should help needy Americans willing to work.
What the House Republicans have in mind is not reform but a grotesque assault on the poor for the sake of honoring their ideological war on Government.
Its punitive measures go way beyond what conservative Democrats and Republicans, let alone President Clinton, have recently proposed.


Sports of The Times; DiMaggio, 80 Today, Still Stars
THE ELDERLY man and his companion had driven off the New Jersey highway on a recent afternoon in order to use the facility of a restaurant.
Once inside, the elderly man, not uncommonly, ignited a commotion among the patrons.
His familiar face is long and lined, his eyes rheumy, his hair now snow white.
He is slightly stooped from an arthritic condition -- his aching knees and arm, remnants of his former occupation.
He wears a pacemaker to juice his heart, and fairly recently underwent stomach surgery for a long-suffered ulcer.


Inflation Figures Go Up for 68th Straight Year
With wind nipping at their noses and fingertips, tens of thousands of New Yorkers lined the streets of Manhattan yesterday for the 68th annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade.
Despite the chill, they roared approval at the blaring bands, prancing steeds, bulb-nosed clowns and, of course, the traditional pantheon of pumped-up heroes like Spiderman, Garfield, the Pink Panther, Snoopy, and, making his debut, Barney the dinosaur.
Bundled like Inuits on an ice floe, children sat cross-legged under police barricades or atop phone booths.
One youngster stole a perch on a story-high ladder behind the 10-deep crowd.
And some, their enthusiasm chilled a bit by temperatures in the upper 20's, still managed to wave as the clowns scampered about.


Canada's Trade Efforts Raise Hackles at Home
Canada is pursuing fast-growing markets in Asia and the Pacific to reduce its dependence on the economy of its neighbor, the United States, though not without some public misgivings at home.
Earlier this month, the largest Canadian trade delegation to visit China came away with $6.5 billion of deals with the Chinese.
Team Canada, as the Canadian news media nicknamed the delegation in sports parlance, won Beijing's attention with its political influence.


Police Charge Mother With Daughter's Shooting
A mother who first claimed that her 2-year-old daughter was shot by an errant bullet on Wednesday during a gang fight in the Bronx has been arrested and charged with the shooting herself, the police said yesterday.
The 22-year-old mother, Sandra Beniquez, who is eight months pregnant, told the police early yesterday that she was playing with the gun when it went off on Wednesday night.


SPORTS PEOPLE: Football; Sharp Criticizes Ryan
First, Coach BUDDY RYAN placed Arizona Cardinals tackle LUIS SHARPE on injured reserve, ending the 13-year veteran's season.
Then Sharpe said he would never play for Ryan again.
"Absolutely not," he said.
"This is it for me here."


In the Weary, The Divine; As He Fights Hunger, A Friar Spreads Hope
A touch of heaven graced Stebbins Avenue this week.
It usually looks like a patchwork purgatory -- where the poor bide their time crowded into dilapidated furnished rooms that lie one tantalizing block from the ranch homes and town houses of the new South Bronx.
Other times it seems like limbo, where hollow-eyed men spend their shortened lifetimes drifting through streets and vacant lots.


Unable to Protect Product Trademarks, Manufacturers Copyright the Boxes
If Parfums Givenchy and other premium-product makers continue to prevail in their use of copyright law, consumers could find fewer cut-rate deals on prestige perfume, cosmetics, crystal ware and other luxury goods at their local discount stores.
That, at least, is the implication of a Federal appeals court ruling here last month that stopped Drug Emporium Inc., the discount-drugstore chain, from selling Givenchy's Amarige scent at prices as much as 35 percent below suggested retail.
Drug Emporium has asked for a new hearing.


Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds
To the Editor:
In "Misplaced Fears About the Fed," your Nov. 17 editorial praising the Federal Reserve's decision to raise interest rates, you repeat two widely accepted beliefs that may not be correct:


Germans in Tax Revolt Embrace Luxembourg
This tiny country nestled between France, Germany and Belgium may be best known for its castles, vineyards, rolling hills and stone-etched capital perched above a meandering river.
But to the German Government, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has become a royal thorn in the side.
Since 1993, when the Finance Ministry in Bonn imposed a 30 percent withholding tax on interest income for residents, Germans by the thousands have used Luxembourg to carry out a quiet but powerful tax revolt.


Sherrard Sees the Football And He Opens Some Eyes
When the locker room had cleared, and his teammates had patted him on the back and reporters had asked their last questions, Mike Sherrard could only laugh.
The holidays had come early for him, his present being a larger part of the offense.
The football wasn't gift-wrapped, but on Monday night against the Houston Oilers when those deep passes came his way all evening, his eyes lighted up as if he had just seen all of the presents under the tree.
And when it was all over, he had 6 catches for 109 yards and 1 touchdown.


Discovering The Depths Behind Constable's Simplicity
JOHN CONSTABLE, who is the subject of an excellent exhibition at the Frick Collection, is a deceptively complicated artist.
His pictures can seem at a superficial glance mundane, even artless.
On the whole, they speak to nothing so much as peace, stability and the quiet meditation on everyday life beyond 19th-century London, a life that can seem very remote to American viewers today.
The extravagant paintings of his compatriot and contemporary, Turner, more readily conform to our 20th-century idea of advanced art as idiosyncratic and abstract.
But the simplicity of Constable's work is misleading.
On the one hand, there are his famous cloud studies, big oil sketches and some of the late paintings, where pigment is put down with a freedom that can bring to mind the Impressionists. (The French, not coincidentally, admired him before the English did, and more than they did Turner.) And on the other hand, there are the excessively labored pictures Constable painted to win acceptance at the Royal Academy in London.
The former are groundbreaking, the latter conformist, and it is this split that makes Constable such a curious and intriguing figure.


Albright Makes Her U.N. Post a Focal Point
When the overloaded buffet tables and trays of hors d'oeuvres came out this fall to mark the start of another General Assembly session, Madeleine K. Albright stepped up to the microphone and described her job to New York City officials attending an American reception: "I have been sent here by my Government to eat."
But a few moments later, when the laughter had barely faded and a hundred conversations had resumed, Ms.
Albright, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, vanished without a nibble to continue working in her office into the evening hours.


Bure and Mogilny Stay
Two of hockey's Russian stars, PAVEL BURE of the Vancouver Canucks and ALEXANDER MOGILNY of the Buffalo Sabres, have decided to sign with Moscow Spartak of the Russian League.


Home Video
Votes for favorite tapes are being counted at the Coalition for Quality Children's Video in Santa Fe, N.M.
Fairy tales are big winners, as usual, along with myths and literature and other powerful incumbents among the children's categories, but newcomers have made gains as well.
Firefighters are in this year.
So are pilots and a hard-hat contingent at the controls of bulldozers and other pieces of heavy equipment.
This fall, the coalition, a nonprofit organization that searches out and promotes outstanding children's videos, published the Kids First Directory.
The guide lists about 300 titles chosen by a jury of 200 adults, many of them child-development professionals, and 3,000 children from around the country.
Next month a supplement will add 120 titles now being chosen by the jury.


St. John's Milestone (Victory 10) Not an Easy One
St.
John's (10-1) achieved its most victories ever in a football season by hanging on to defeat Pace, 20-13, yesterday at Red Storm Field in Jamaica, Queens.
After building a 20-0 lead late in the third quarter, the Red Storm allowed the Setters (2-8) two late touchdowns.
With 33 seconds left in the game, St.
John's had a third-and-3 play from the Pace 5-yard line, but fullback John Anitra fumbled, giving the Setters a chance to pull off a Thanksgiving Day miracle.


About SportsFriday And Business Day
To accommodate holiday weekend news and advertising, SportsFriday starts on page D1 today.
Business Day begins on page D7.


Inside Art
3 Recordings Later
When Philippe de Montebello, the Metropolitan Museum of Art's director, is enamored of a painting, he has been known to ramble on a bit.
His enthusiasm recently caused serious traffic jams in the galleries of the museum's "Origins of Impressionism" show.


Europeans Follow U.S. Shift to Bonds, for Now
Like their counterparts in the United States, investors in European markets have been bailing out of stocks this week and putting their money into bonds.
But the economic fundamentals behind the European markets are considerably different from those at play in the United States.
And while investors and analysts here said Europe would continue to be influenced by what happens on Wall Street, some said there are still selected opportunities for equity market gains in France, Britain, Germany and other markets.


Reporter's Notebook; G.O.P. Leaders Pledge to Dump Iceman
One of the hottest issues on Capitol Hill these days is ice.
Specifically, the ice delivered to House members at taxpayers' expense in plastic buckets by 9 o'clock each morning.
Republicans taking control of Congress promise an end to business as usual, and the ice buckets have become a potent symbol of Congressional perks and practices that continue with no apparent justification.


Art in Review
Robin Winters 'Notes from the Finishing Room' Michael Klein Gallery 40 Wooster Street SoHo Through Dec. 17


NATO Gives U.N. Bosnia Action Plan
NATO, meeting in Brussels on a United States proposal to threaten more air strikes to halt an offensive by nationalist Serbs in northwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina, referred the plan to the United Nations.
The United States had proposed threatening the nationalist Serbs with bombing attacks unless they withdrew from Bihac, which the United Nations has designated a safe area, and allowed safe passage for Bosnian Government troops there.
The United States had also proposed extending the safe area four miles northward and demilitarizing it.


Robert M. Cohart, 84, Professor And an Expert in Public Health
Dr.
Robert M. Cohart, Winslow professor emeritus of public health at Yale University, died on Nov. 18.
He was 84 and a resident of New Haven.
The cause was complications of heart disease and pneumonia, his family said.


Accounts
*
Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta, to Publicis Conseil, Paris, to handle advertising in Europe for the caffeine-free versions of its Diet Coke and Coke Light brands, previously at Lowe &amp; Associes, Paris.
It is the first Coca-Cola assignment for a Publicis agency.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Dow Jones &amp; Co., New York, and Flextech P.L.C., London, to Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners, New York, and CIA Medianetwork International, London, to introduce European Business News, a business-news cable and satellite television network.
Both agencies already handle other accounts for Dow Jones.
Billings were not disclosed.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
Long Island  CHIEFS TWO-PEAT: With 6 minutes 29 seconds remaining, Bill Martin booted a 32-yard field goal yesterday to lift MASSAPEQUA (10-0) over LAWRENCE (6-3-1), 11-8, and give the Chiefs the Nassau County Conference I championship for the second consecutive year.
Massapequa will take on the winner of today's Connetquot-Sachem clash in the Long Island Class I championship next Friday at Hofstra Stadium at 7 P.M.
Massapequa used 11 plays and drove 59 yards to set up Martin's tie-breaking field goal.
P.S.A.L.
SMITH RUNS OVER XAVIER: Sean Smith scored 4 touchdowns and carried 32 times for 123 yards as FORDHAM PREP (6-4) routed XAVIER (3-5-2), 42-14, in New York City's oldest Thanksgiving Day rivalry, dating to 1905.
Smith set a school single-season rushing record of 1,393 yards.
SOMETHING HAD TO GIVE: Keith Robinson scored two touchdowns to lead MIDWOOD (1-9) over JEFFERSON (0-10), 13-0.
C.H.S.F.L.
GOING THE DISTANCE: Three long runs by each team highlighted MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL'S 30-20 victory over CARDINAL HAYES in the 52d annual Thanksgiving Day matchup.
With the victory, Mount St.
Michael (4-6) extended its holiday winning string over Hayes to 14 games and upped its series edge to 30-17-5.
Joe Ventola (54 yards), Rodney Sanders (69 yards) and Joe Ward (a 70-yard quarterback sneak that became more) accounted for Mount's long-distance plays.
Ventola had 148 yards on 16 carries.
Hayes' big gains were by Jonaxy Gonzalez, who had scoring scampers of 47 and 60 yards.
Jose Rosa raced 54 yards on an end-around for Hayes's other long run.
Gonzalez, who rushed for 208 yards on 23 carries, finished with 1,110 yards.
New Jersey  DIVISION CHAMPS: With 3:30 left in the fourth quarter, WAYNE VALLEY (9-1) drove 99 yards to a score that defeated PASSAIC VALLEY (5-4), 10-6, in their 23d annual holiday clash.
The victory gave Wayne Valley the Northern Hills Skyline division title.
Rob Caridad capped the winning drive with a 2-yard fourth-down touchdown run over the 240-pound center, Jake Pluta, with two minutes left.
"I was excited when Coach called my number on fourth down," said Caridad.
"It was a do-or-die situation." DAWKINS FILLS THE VOID: Joe Dawkins, replacing the state's best running back, Rashidi Brown, rushed for 178 yards and 2 touchdowns to lead HACKENSACK (10-0) to a 27-0 victory over TEANECK (4-5) before 5,800 yesterday in Hackensack, which now leads the 62-year-old series, the oldest in the state, 42-17-1.
DANDY DAN: Dan Madine of BUTLER (10-0) threw for 332 yards and 5 touchdowns in a 49-20 victory over CALDWELL (9-1) before 4,400 in Butler.
Madine, a senior, lifted his season total to a state-record 34 touchdown passes, snapping the mark of 30 set by Brian Opre of Florence in 1992.
Madine will have a chance to build on his record when Butler faces New Providence in the North Jersey, Section 2, Group 1 state playoff final next Saturday.


Tory Rebels Under Fire About Europe
Playing a high-stakes game to try to whip his own back-bench critics into line, Prime Minister John Major said today that his Conservative Government would resign and call a new election if it failed to win a parliamentary vote Monday on payments to the European Union.
The move was intended to overcome a rebellion by so-called Euro-skeptics in the party, who are fighting tooth and nail to prevent Britain from merging into Europe, as called for by the Maastricht Treaty on European Union.


Gotham to Expand With London Office
The Gotham Group, the boutique agency spun off in March from Lintas New York, is expanding its operations by opening a London office that will serve the Yardley of London account in Britain.
Billings were estimated at $9.4 million.
Gotham said Tuesday in a news release that the London office would be headed by two executives.
One is F. Stone Roberts, Gotham's chief executive in New York, who will double as managing director in London.
The other is Eliza Parker, who will join Gotham as creative director from Publicis in London, where she had served as a board director.


Health and Happiness Go Together for Nets
On the surface, the Nets have no reason to complain.
They have a 5-7 record.
They meet the Los Angeles Clippers on Friday night in Los Angeles having won five of their last seven games.
They are coming off their first road victory -- by 103-98 over the Sacramento Kings on Wednesday night, a game in which they found their poise in the final minutes for the first time this season.
This should be time to savor accomplishment, time to enjoy an early-season run of success and growth.
But Kenny Anderson's health has a lot to do with the Nets' happiness, and he is neither 100 percent healthy nor happy today.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  BOSNIAN SERBS BLOCK U.N.
TROOPS  Fighting raged in northwestern Bosnia as Serbs immobilized 200 United Nations troops and observers around Sarajevo and detained 50 Canadian troops.
A1


Fighting Rages as NATO Debates How to Protect Bosnian Enclave
Fierce fighting raged today around the Muslim enclave of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia when Serbian forces pursued a steady advance toward the center of the town and NATO allies failed to agree on how to save it.
In a move to discourage retaliatory bombings by NATO, Serbs immobilized about 200 United Nations troops and observers around Sarajevo and detained about 50 Canadian troops north of the capital.
The tactic, used by the Serbs in the past when they faced air strikes, left the peacekeepers virtual hostages.


Lorelei Lee Returns, Dizzy and Savvy as Ever
Whatever the feminist thinking on the subject, there is, frankly, no blonde like a dumb blonde.
The altogether snappy revival of "Gentleman Prefer Blondes" at the Goodspeed Opera House here makes a strong case that she deserves her place of honor not just in the annals of gold digging, but in those of show business, as well.
The wisecracking musical by Anita Loos and Joseph Fields with a brash and brassy score by Jule Styne and Leo Robin may belong to another era (1949, to be precise), but Lorelei Lee, the girl diamonds are the best friend of, remains mint-fresh and as convulsively funny as ever.


Art in Review
Tony Oursler Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street (at Houston Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
In the strongest show of his career, Tony Oursler takes the concept of the talking head to places it hasn't been before, while giving the tired art of assemblage a needed boost.
His discombobulated video sculptures combine projected or on-screen faces and sometimes figures with discarded furniture, fabric or scarecrowlike stuffed garments.
They eerily bring to life a cast of unhappy characters who natter and curse, pound their fists, disparage themselves or the rest of us, or wedge themselves into tight places.
The overall effect is of a none-too-comforting stroll through a mental hospital, each piece representing a patient in a different state of torment.


A Point Guard Leaves in Order to Go Back Home
Rafer Alston has the rearview mirror from hell.
In it, he sees his father hawking his Michael Jordan rookie card for cash, and his mother not coming to the card's defense.
He sees his high school coach waving a basketball uniform, asking him to dive in, but his high school principal snatches it away.
He sees his teacher calling roll, and he wants to say, "Here; I'm here," but the teacher calls Felipe Lopez's and Stephon Marbury's names instead.
He sees himself rolling the dice, and coming up 7, but no money is in the pot.
He sees his brother in prison, his twin sister pregnant and himself with no S.A.T. score.
This is how the other half of the New York City point guards live.
Rafer Alston could do everything Kenny Anderson or Khalid Reeves could do, except go to class.
He could solve a 1-3-1 press, but not the square root of 49.
Letters from John Thompson were no antidote; his classmates at Cardozo High in Bayside, Queens, graduated last June without mailing him an invitation.


Asia Society Offers a Rare Glimpse
Anyone who was in New York City and on the alert five summers ago may remember an untrumpeted but astonishing exhibition of sculpture at the Asia Society.
It included top-flight South Indian bronzes, Cambodian stone work and a small, sublime wooden Buddhist figure from Japan that alone was worth the price of admission.
A major museum loan show?
No.
The sculptures were all from Asia Society's own permanent collection of 285 objects, established by the society's founder, John D. Rockefeller 3d, and his wife, Blanchette.
Oddly, the collection has been more rumored than seen.
For reasons never fully explained, it has been shown only once in its entirety: in 1981 when the society opened its Park Avenue headquarters.
Thereafter, it was confined to storage, where with the exception of a few outings, it has remained.


Art in Review
Duane Michals 'Questions Without Answers' Sidney Janis Gallery 110 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 24
The list of questions Duane Michals poses in his latest photo-and-text works is a daunting one, encompassing queries about the nature of life, love, language, beauty, passion, memory, the universe and other light topics.
Despite the disclaimer in the show's title, Mr.
Michals tries to answer these weighty puzzles, in works that combine black-and-white photographs made in his familiar understated style with rambling poetical musings written in his scratchy scrawl.


INSIDE
Giuliani v. the City Council
The Mayor has had his way till now, but voter pressure, institutional grievances and political opportunity have led the Council to a more defiant stance.
News analysis, page B1.
New Wall Street Worries
The economy is still growing steadily, but this week's stock market plunge shows that some investors expect a slowdown soon.
Page D7.
Case Clothed
Lawyers confess that what they wear can be more important than what they know.
So what do they wear?
Page B16.


Milton J. Shapp Is Dead at 82; Ex-Governor of Pennsylvania
Milton Jerrold Shapp, former Governor of Pennsylvania and a Philadelphia industrialist who was the first Jew to mount a campaign for the Presidential nomination of a major party, died on Thursday at Lankenau Hospital in the Philadelphia suburb of Wynnewood.
He was 82.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, family friends said.


'He Says, She Says' on a Royal Level
DIANA Her New Life  By Andrew Morton  Illustrated. 176 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
THE PRINCE OF WALES A Biography  By Jonathan Dimbleby  Illustrated. 620 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.
If you didn't know the names of the famous ex-couple portrayed in these two books, you'd think they were just another pair of guests on "Oprah" or "Donahue": victims of dysfunctional families and a bad marriage, who are given, alternately, to bouts of self-pity and New Age searches for meaning and self-esteem.


Central America Nations to Be Urged to Seize Stolen U.S. Cars
In an effort to reduce auto thefts, the Clinton Administration is planning a major effort to persuade Central American governments to seize stolen cars smuggled from the United States and return them, a State Department official said this week.
With an estimated 20 percent of the 200,000 stolen vehicles smuggled out of the United States each year ending up in Central America, Administration officials say they hope that their effort will make at least a modest impact on auto theft in the southwestern states.


3 Officials Are Demoted After Slaying at Mental Hospital
The director and two top officials of a Brooklyn psychiatric hospital have been demoted and transferred after a weekend escape of a patient who later returned to murder another inmate, the State Commissioner of Mental Health said yesterday.
The Commissioner, Dr.
Richard C. Surles, said the demotions of top executives at Kingsboro Psychiatric Center in Brooklyn were prompted not only by the security breaches surrounding the killing but also by a pattern of overspending, questionable contracting practices and generally sloppy management over the last year.


Norma Donaldson Dies at 68; Singer Who Became an Actress
Norma Donaldson, whose sensuality and throaty voice entertained Broadway audiences, moviegoers and television viewers, died on Tuesday at Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 68 and lived in Hollywood Hills.
The cause was cancer, said her cousin, Lovely Hill Billups of Washington.


CHRONICLE
Going to Red Square for a picnic is not a good idea, or so a group of American chefs and restaurant owners who recently plunked down a blanket, caviar and vodka there learned.
The chef proprietors, JEAN-LOUIS PALLADIN of Jean-Louis in the Watergate Hotel and two other restaurants in Washington; TODD ENGLISH, who owns both Olives and Figs in Boston; ROBBIN HAAS of Bang in Miami; GEORGE MORRONE of Aqua in San Francisco, and MICHAEL GINOR, vice president of Hudson Valley Foie Gras, in Ferndale, N.Y., were on a trip to Moscow, St.
Petersburg and Helsinki last week for Chefs for Peace, an informal organization that promotes understanding through the joys of the table.


Limiting Welfare -- A special report.; Often-Cited Workfare Effort Provides Cautionary Lessons
Sandy Pitt and Sajan Mathew pounded on the door of a shuttered house on Union Avenue.
They were searching for a 37-year-old welfare recipient who had given the address as his own.
Ms.
Pitt amd Mr.
Mathew, Westchester County welfare workers, peered through the window into a barren room littered with bottles and cigarette butts.
They surveyed the heap of trash on the lawn.
They agreed that no one lived there.


At Neiman Marcus, Mail-Order Frenzy Nears Peak
The caller from Mexico City wanted a model.
Not a model car or plane but a model, as in the Cindy Crawford variety.
He wasn't fussy. Just about any model in the Neiman Marcus Christmas Book would do.


CHRONICLE
The evening was billed as an opportunity to learn how to break into modeling and acting, but there were few potential Cindy Crawfords, Naomi Campbells -- or for that matter, Elle MacPhersons -- who turned out to hear ELLE MacPHERSON the other evening.
The supermodel was giving a talk sponsored by the Learning Annex at the Park Central Hotel on Seventh Avenue.
But the audience of about 300 was mainly men, few of whom appeared headed for modeling careers.
What they wanted to know from Ms.
MacPherson had little to do with high fashion.
What was her idea of a romantic evening? one man asked.
Was she aware that the questioner had her picture on his night table along with his loved ones?
A third asked if she would go to his Taft High School prom with him.


Suicide Law Placing Oregon On Several Uncharted Paths
Early next month, Oregon will become the only place in the world where doctors may legally help patients end their lives.
With that comes a leap into the unknown: the hows, whens and whys of state-sanctioned suicide.
Edged into law by a bare majority of Oregon voters on Nov. 8, the decriminalization of assisted suicide is a triumph for groups that have been trying for years to wrest life-and-death decisions away from the state and the medical profession.


Treating Nazis in Art, Even Seriously, Is Risky
No doubt there are those who will take offense at "Mein Kampf," David Levinthal's new series of photographs at the Janet Borden Gallery.
Using toy soldiers and other figurines, Mr.
Levinthal sets up and photographs tableaux that tell the story of the rise of Hitler and the Nazi campaign to wipe out the Jews and others.
This is familiar if still horrifying material, and Mr.
Levinthal handles it with appropriate seriousness.
But the mere fact that he uses what are undeniably children's playthings to stage his vignettes may strike some as frivolous.


On Stage, and Off
Night of 100 Flashes
Stars, and their union, Actors' Equity, take a very dim view of people who take pictures in theaters; copyright problems aside, the flashes blind the actors, who then may blunder into the path of a 1,000-pound piece of rolling scenery.
At the matinee of "Sunset Boulevard" last Sunday, two flashes popped as Glenn Close made her entrance.
Normally, the ushers rush down the aisle with a cease-and-desist order, and, depending on how tough the house manager is, may seize the film.
But Sunday they were all in the lobby dealing with late arrivals.
So when Ms.
Close finished "With One Look," her big number about the power of her face as a silent-screen star, so many flashes went off that "it was like a lightning storm," a crew member said.


MILITARY PLANNING AN EXPANDED ROLE FOR THE RESERVES
Aiming to reduce the strain on active-duty troops, Defense Secretary William J. Perry has approved a plan to use reservists in many peacetime roles now performed by regular forces.
Recent military operations in Haiti, Rwanda, Cuba and the Persian Gulf have exposed cracks in the combat readiness of America's 1.6-million-member military.
With the armed forces shrinking and military commitments likely to remain high in the future, the Defense Department is scrambling to avoid a crisis.


Miami Beach Journal; Kosher Pizza: Sign of a Jewish Revival
At Shimmy's Pizza on Arthur Godfrey Road here, the busiest time is Saturday night, when the wait may be 30 minutes to order a large pie with lots of cheese, but never any sausage.
Shimmy's, which is new to the block, is a dairy restaurant and is strictly kosher.
Along Arthur Godfrey Road, Shimmy's is just one of the stores and restaurants that have opened in the past few years to serve a growing population of modern Orthodox Jews.
Vacant storefronts have yielded to businesses like Kosher World, a grocery store; Torah Treasures, which sells books and Judaica, and Alisa's, which sells hats and wigs that married Orthodox women wear to cover their heads when they are in the presence of anyone but their husbands, as required by Jewish law.
Shimmy Weiss says his pizza place has been successful enough that he hopes to open a second restaurant serving hamburgers.


Burnett Has an Eye On Heinz's Rivals
The Leo Burnett Company says it will probably consider working for marketers that sell pet foods and other products that compete against a longtime former client, the H. J. Heinz Company.
"We'll be open to any client" in those categories, Tom Ross, executive vice president for client services at Burnett in Chicago, said on Wednesday.
His comment came after Burnett and Heinz unexpectedly disclosed that they had mutually agreed to end their relationship on accounts like 9-Lives cat food and cat treats, Star-Kist tuna, Heinz ketchup and Heinz 57 steak sauce.


R. L. Patterson Jr.; Orthopedist Was 87
Dr.
Robert Lee Patterson Jr., an orthopedic surgeon and former surgeon in chief at the Hospital for Special Surgery on East 70th Street in Manhattan, died last Friday at his home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 87.
Dr.
Patterson served on the hospital staff for 36 years, starting in 1936.
He became surgeon in chief in 1963 and retired in 1972.
An expert on shoulder diseases and disorders, he concurrently had been a professor of orthopedic surgery at Cornell University Medical College since 1963.


People
*
J.
Craig Mathiesen, president at Ketchum Advertising, Los Angeles, was named to the additional new position of vice chairman at the agency's parent, Ketchum Communications. *
Alan Sheldon, executive vice president and chief financial officer at Young &amp; Rubicam Europe, London, was named executive vice president and chief operating officer at Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, New York.
He assumes the responsibilities previously handled by Steven J. Heyer, who left to take top positions at Turner Broadcasting Sales and its parent, Turner Broadcasting System.


For Children
'Opera in Brief'  Amato Opera Theater 319 Bowery (at East Second Street) East Village  (212) 228-8200  Recommended ages: 6 and up Tomorrow
Sally Amato said it was a long story, darling, about how she went from operaphobe to opera swooner.
There's plenty of time to hear it, dear, she was told.
In narrating the true-life tale, she realized it was actually brief, an operini of sorts.


Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds
To the Editor:
In "Misplaced Fears About the Fed," your Nov. 17 editorial praising the Federal Reserve's decision to raise interest rates, you repeat two widely accepted beliefs that may not be correct:


Company A Gives Thanks: 8 Days to Go in Haiti
It was hard to tell who looked more thankful this afternoon, the soldiers of Company A or their turkey.
The turkey, spared from being turned into a feast, was set free to roam the grounds of the National Palace with flocks of peacocks, geese and the occasional chicken.


Fresnes Journal; Sad Voyages to France: In One School, Many Sagas
Sabine Contrepois well remembers the day two years ago when she explained to her high-school class how the Vietnam War eventually spilled into Cambodia.
Suddenly, Meak, an Asian girl in the front row, burst into tears.
"I asked her what was wrong," Mrs.
Contrepois recalled.
"She said her father was shot the day the Khmer Rouge took power in Cambodia in 1975. She and her mother spent years in concentration camps before they escaped through Thailand. There was absolute silence in the classroom."


Focusing on Games, Not Scandal
In "Lillehammer '94: 16 Days of Glory," the filmmaker Bud Greenspan covers the Nancy-Tonya story in 30 seconds.
The 1994 Winter Olympics with not a mention of a Gillooly, an Eckardt or a Stant?
Not in the Greenspan oeuvre.
"Oksana Baiul was the story," said Greenspan, the veteran Olympic documentarian, whose other renown comes from perching his glasses on his bald head.


Little Switch Pays a Big Dividend for Lions
Jim Kelly had thrown a bushel of passes to his running backs and the Buffalo Bills were outperforming the Detroit Lions in this matchup of back versus linebacker in the Silverdome today.
So there was little surprise when, with 1 minute 35 seconds to play and Buffalo trailing by 28-21, Kelly began a Bills' drive from his 16 with a 9-yard pass, out of the shotgun, to a running back, Thurman Thomas.
This time, though, the Lions altered the matchup.





Beauty and Heroism Emerge From Snarls and Tangles
No bar, grill or coffee shop ever had a juke box like the one Garth Fagan devised in 1985 when he choreographed "Never Top 40 (Juke Box)," the suite that Garth Fagan Dance has revived at the Joyce Theater.
The title suggests that Mr.
Fagan was well aware that a juke box with jazz records and an arrangement of "Over the Rainbow" is unlikely also to offer a Puccini aria and 17th- and 20th-century musical versions of the Psalms.
Mr.
Fagan put together dances to all these accompaniments in "Never Top 40." It was therefore appropriate that his program note is a quotation from the contemporary Mexican poet and essayist Octavio Paz: "Life is plurality. Death is uniformity."


Wounded but Standing, Gibbs Exits Oklahoma
Gary Gibbs sits at his University of Oklahoma desk and talks about sacrificing himself so that others may live.
"I've been shot at and I've spilled a lot of blood along the way," Gibbs said today, three days after he resigned as coach, effective at the end of the season.
"And others here have been shot at, and they've spilled some blood. And you look up and say, 'Who's in the most critical condition?' Well, obviously I was in the most critical condition.


Major Bridge Title Is Decided in a Playoff
Overtime was needed to decide the first National Senior Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here on Wednesday night.
The team with Richard Hunt of Las Vegas, Nev., as captain, and Russ Arnold of Miami, Zeke Jabbour of Boca Raton, Fla., Dan Morse of Houston, Chuck Said of Nashville and John Sutherlin of Dallas, won by 14 imps in an eight-deal playoff, which concluded at 2:30 A.M.


In This Election, G.O.P. Won Because More Rich People Voted
To the Editor:
As President Clinton considers how to respond to the 1994 elections, he should not overlook the composition of this year's electorate.


Who Needs Aikman? Garrett Does Job
Things looked very grim today for the Dallas Cowboys in the first half.
They were playing fugitive football.
The rookie right tackle Larry Allen was being haunted by a one-armed man -- Green Bay Packers defensive end Reggie White -- who kept trying to bury his quarterback.
Jason Garrett, starting in place of Troy Aikman, kept running for his life.
And the Cowboy defense, ranked No. 1 in the National Football League, was in hiding, too.
The Cowboys trailed by 17-6 at the half, and it looked as if the Packers were on their way to a rout.
But then the Cowboys sprang to life.
Allen got some halftime advice from the injured tackle Erik Williams, Garrett got back to the game plan and the Cowboys ripped off 36 points -- the most in a second half in the team's history -- to beat the Packers by 42-31.


Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds; How to Fight Inflation
To the Editor:
After five interest rate increases this year, the Fed has done it again.
In light of all the mischief and dismay these increases have created, has anyone bothered actually to assess their direct effect on inflation?
As far as I can see they have, at best, had no effect whatever.
The lame, convenient excuse is that it takes anywhere from 6 to 18 months for the effect to show up.
Nonsense!
If interest rates go up today, they affect your next borrowing decision.


Lowe Will Keep A Citibank Account
The Citibank North America unit of Citicorp in New York has retained Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York on its domestic credit card account after a two-month review.
The account, with billings estimated at $60 million, has been handled by Lowe since 1980.
The review was narrowed to Lowe and one other finalist, J. Walter Thompson New York.
It is one of a few recent instances of a client retaining an incumbent agency after a review on a large, important account.
Lowe is participating in a review on another big account, Prudential Insurance.


Plan for Toxic Dump Off Coney I. Is Attacked
Rebuffed in its bid to dump 150,000 tons of dioxin-tainted sand in the ocean six miles off Sandy Hook, N.J., the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is considering a plan to deposit the material in a pit a half mile off Coney Island.
Residents of Coney Island and Staten Island have begun letter-writing and petition drives against the plan and nearly 300 people showed up at a recent protest meeting in Sheepshead Bay.
Community Board 3, which oversees most of Staten Island's recreational beaches, has passed a motion condemning the plan.
And fisherman say the area around the pit is teeming with fish that could be poisoned, destroying the catch of charter boats and commercial fisherman, many of whom sell at the Fulton Fish Market.


Enough Salt for the Winter, Mine Officials Say
The giant piles of salt that surround one of the world's largest salt mines here bode well for drivers in New York City and across the Northeast -- even as the mine fills with up to 18,000 gallons of water every minute.
Officials with Akzo Nobel Salt in Livingston County say they have enough salt on hand to get through this winter, and enough life left in the mine to keep one of the county's largest employers going until a new mine is open in 1996.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Did a vampire take a bite out of a movie? And how does car buying resemble a wrestling match?
IS it time again to ask 20 questions about advertising, marketing and the media?
Yes, but that one doesn't count.
*When executives at Faberge decided that Actif Blue would be a chic name for their new line of Brut men's toiletries, did a losing faction hold out for Active Bleu?


As Its Stars Age, Folk Music Stays Forevewr Young
IN folk music, there is almost always a message.
So when Tom Paxton writes a new song with a chorus that ends, "I wish I could start all over again," Mr.
Paxton just may be trying to tell us something.
"The heavy touring is going to end in May, when our first grandchild arrives," the 56-year-old troubadour, who has been challenging the world's conscience for more than three decades, said recently.
"We'll just do festivals, special events, galas, the jobs I really want to do."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the family life of Representative Newt Gingrich, who is line to become Speaker of the House, misspelled the surname of a Georgia state senator whom he defeated for Congress in 1978.
She is Virginia Shapard.





Art in Review
Duane Michals 'Questions Without Answers' Sidney Janis Gallery 110 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 24
The list of questions Duane Michals poses in his latest photo-and-text works is a daunting one, encompassing queries about the nature of life, love, language, beauty, passion, memory, the universe and other light topics.
Despite the disclaimer in the show's title, Mr.
Michals tries to answer these weighty puzzles, in works that combine black-and-white photographs made in his familiar understated style with rambling poetical musings written in his scratchy scrawl.


Art in Review
Tony Oursler Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street (at Houston Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
In the strongest show of his career, Tony Oursler takes the concept of the talking head to places it hasn't been before, while giving the tired art of assemblage a needed boost.
His discombobulated video sculptures combine projected or on-screen faces and sometimes figures with discarded furniture, fabric or scarecrowlike stuffed garments.
They eerily bring to life a cast of unhappy characters who natter and curse, pound their fists, disparage themselves or the rest of us, or wedge themselves into tight places.
The overall effect is of a none-too-comforting stroll through a mental hospital, each piece representing a patient in a different state of torment.


For Hess, a Thanksgiving to Savor
Leon Hess is feeling good about his Jets these days.
"I'm more optimistic now than at any time I can remember," said the septuagenarian who owns the team and has been a silent sufferer for so long.
He originally became an owner in 1963.


BACKLOG OF CASES IS OVERWHELMING JOBS-BIAS AGENCY
In the heat and hopes of the civil rights strife of a generation ago, Congress created an agency to stop discrimination in the workplace.
Today that agency, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, is choking on bureaucracy and a mounting backlog of discrimination complaints from blacks, women and other people it is supposed to protect.
And even as Congress expands the pool of protected people, most recently with the 1990 law to fight discrimination against disabled workers, the commission's staff is shrinking under the pressure of tight budgets.


Recordings in Review; POP
Young Band's Debut Album Imitates Mature Arrogance
Arrogance pays off for Oasis, a two-year-old band from Manchester, England, that is already reveling in rock-star narcissism on its debut album, "Definitely Maybe" (Epic 66431).


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the Winslow Professor Emeritus of Public Health at Yale University misstated his given name.
He is Dr.
Edward M. Cohart, not Robert.


Greenaway, Operatic Natural
Perhaps the most surprising thing about Peter Greenaway's first foray into opera is that he has not been there before.
His training as a painter, the visual extravagance of his movies, his interest in music and his delight in experimentation all seemed to be leading him in this direction.
"My cinema has become more and more operatic as I have dabbled with the English tradition of pseudo-realism and notions of truth," the British film director explained.
"Finally, I thought, why not push the boat out all the way and see what I could do operatically with this?"


Willem J. Luyten, 95, Expert on Stellar Motion
Dr.
Willem Jacob Luyten, an astronomer whose work expanded the understanding of stellar motion, dying white dwarfs and the origin of the solar system, died on Monday at his home in Minneapolis.
He was 95.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


No Headline
"There is only one Santa -- everybody knows that." MICHAEL STEMEN, the store director, asked how many Santas work at Macy's.  [ 27:6. ]


Recordings in Review; POP
An English Band Plays, And You Can See the Music
Every year, a few records are released that sound strikingly original.
The music seems to come not from some previous model, but from an idea for a sound its composer has trapped in his or her head.
"Dummy" (Go! Discs/London Records), the first album by the English band Portishead, is such a record.


Five Years Later: Eastern Europe, Post-Cummunism -- A special report; Ethnic and Religious Conflicts Now Threaten Europe's Stability
Five years after the fall of the Berlin wall, Checkpoint Charlie has moved 600 miles southeast to a bridge over the Miljacka River in Sarajevo, where coils of barbed wire and occasional tearful family reunions testify to the new divisions of Europe.
Here at the bridge, Benjamin Hamidovic, a Bosnian Muslim, stands guard.
He gazes out, past the wire and the French United Nations soldiers in their blue helmets, to the far side, held and guarded by Bosnian Serbs.
It is very close, the other bank, but eerily distant -- another land in a severed city.


Angola on the Brink of Peace
For 19 years Angolans have fought one of Africa's bloodiest civil wars, fueled by cold-war rivalries and costing half a million lives.
On Sunday the two sides signed a peace treaty in Lusaka, Zambia -- the third attempt to end the conflict.
If it is to succeed, the international community will have to keep up the pressure on both sides and offer some substantial help.
In the end, however, the warring parties will have to show a little statesmanship.
The rebel leader Jonas Savimbi did not show up for the signing, saying he feared leaving Angola; the document was signed by proxies.
In the following days the Government charged that his Unita rebels were still fighting; Unita made similar counterclaims.
By Wednesday the Government radio station said the truce was holding, as the two sides worked out the details of a power-sharing arrangement that will lead to an election in 1996.


Winless and Clueless Clippers Lose to Nets
The Nets momentarily lost their composure and the Clippers eventually lost their 12th straight game.
On nights like these in the National Basketball Association, when the arena is half-empty and a shooting guard from a Division II school provides the game's only dramatic moment, you're left with this: These guys apparently deserve one another.
In the league's Game of the Weak, the Nets nearly lost a 15-point fourth-quarter lead, Kenny Anderson turned the ball over three times in the last 1 minute 20 seconds and Harold Ellis scored a Clippers-record 19 fourth-quarter points before the Nets escaped with a 107-102 victory.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 18 about thefts of No Parking signs in New York City misstated parking regulations.
The city can issue a parking ticket to a car if there is a sign anywhere on the block on which it is parked, on either side of the street, not just within 50 feet of the car.


Westin Hotel Co. to Be Sold To Starwood and Goldman
The Starwood Capital Group, a privately owned real estate investment firm, and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company announced yesterday that they had agreed to acquire the Westin Hotel Company from the debt-burdened Aoki Corporation of Japan in a deal valued at $561 million.
The purchase price will include cash, seller financing and the assumption of mortgage debt.
The percentages were not disclosed.


COMMUNITIES VETO INTEGRATION PLAN
Days before a judge is to consider whether to order a school desegregation plan for Hartford and its suburbs, a state effort to avoid such a court order by encouraging voluntary measures is suffering serious setbacks.
As cities and towns vote on voluntary plans promoting racial diversity in the schools of the 11 regions covering the state, the plans for two regions have already been killed and two more have been crippled by key communities' refusal to participate.


How to Avoid Thieves When Touring Italy
To the Editor:
My wife and I are periodic visitors to Italy.
Unlike some American travelers to Italy who complain of being ripped off by pickpockets and other thieves, we have never lost so much as a lira to thieves, not even in much-feared Naples.
Here's how we do it.


New York's Business Districts Make the City Cleaner and Safer
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 20 article on New York City business improvement districts seemed to imply that the districts are devoid of accountability.
Our accounting firm provides services to many of these districts, including auditing and consulting services, and I must say the opposite is true.


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York's Business Districts Make the City Cleaner and Safer; Different Partnerships
To the Editor:
New York is a big city, big enough for more than one group called "Partnership." However, after receiving many phone calls following your Nov. 20 article on business improvement districts, we feel the need to distinguish the Partnership for the Homeless from the Grand Central Partnership, a business district whose work with homeless people is controversial.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline Again on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that uncovered short sales in stocks traded on the Nasdaq system fell for the third consecutive month.
The number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not covered, fell by a little less than 4 percent in the month that ended Nov. 8, the association said, to 802.2 million from 834.1 million the previous month.
Uncovered short sales of Nasdaq issues rose steadily through most of this year, peaking in August at 849.2 million shares.


Horst Schulmann, German Banker, 61
Horst Schulmann, who played a role in developing the European currency unit and served on the powerful policy-making council of the German central bank, died on Thursday in a hospital in Frankfurt, his office said today.
He was 61.
He had been undergoing treatment for lung cancer for the past year.


Groupe Videotron reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Maynard Pennell, 84, Former Boeing Executive
Maynard L. Pennell, a former executive of the Boeing Company who played a leading role in the development of nearly every type of aircraft that the company made during his career of 34 years there, died on Tuesday.
He was 84 and lived in Seattle.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease, the company said.


Maine Helps Utility Buy Power Plant
Customers of the Central Maine Power Company pay some of the highest electricity rates in the country, but this is beginning to change with an unusual helping hand from the State of Maine.
The state provided $64 million in financing that helped Central Maine Power buy one of the independent power plants that sold it electricity last month.
By acquiring the plant, Central Maine was able to cancel a long-term contract that forced the utility to buy power from the plant at far above market rates, costs that were then passed on to Central Maine's customers.
Next Thursday, the utility, which is based in Augusta, will lower customer rates for the first time in seven years.


Those Cyclical Stocks Are a Disparate Bunch
CYCLICAL stocks may wind up on top in the weeks ahead, some stock pickers say, especially now that the Federal Reserve has raised interest rates once again.
There is just one problem: What are cyclical stocks?


A Dolphins' Dilemma: Either Heads or Tails
It is the one element of football that Don Shula can't control: the opening coin toss.
The Miami Dolphins have lost 10 of 11 coin flips this season.
What are the odds of that? 186 to 1.


Giuliani Says He'll Reverse A Few Cuts In His Budget
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would accept some of the City Council's proposals to restore services he had marked for elimination in his budget, including soup kitchens, alcohol- and drug-treatment programs and services for the mentally retarded.
But the Mayor said he would reconsider only a handful of his initial cuts, not nearly meeting the Council's desire to restore $96.6 million in spending to the city's budget.


Trent Show Runs Into Overtime For a Title
If Gary Trent was not a household name before the preseason National Invitation Tournament, he almost certainly will be after his performance last night at Madison Square Garden.
Trent, the Ohio University junior who was the Mid-American Conference player of the year the last two seasons, showed why he could be considered the most dominant player in the country.


In Teheran, a Day for Women


Dallas Ahead of '93-'94 Pace
Mavericks 101, Trail Blazers 91
Jim Jackson scored 19 of his 31 points in the third quarter as the Dallas Mavericks built a 23-point lead and then held off a fourth-quarter rally for a 101-91 victory over the visiting Portland Trail Blazers last night.


A Display of Flexibility By Montserrat Caballe
One thing was apparent very early in Montserrat Caballe's recital at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, and that was that her style involves a tradeoff of sorts.
What she offers is a sweet, beautifully manipulated and, in her best moments, seductively sensual sound.
But much of the time, this sheer vocal beauty comes at a cost in depth.
How serious a problem that is depends on what a listener looks for in a recital.
There are times, after all, when one is grateful for ravishing vocalism and willing to overlook everything else.
Perhaps the best example of this transaction at work on Tuesday was Haydn's "Grande Scena di Berenice," a showpiece that draws both its form and its energy from touching on emotional extremes, and which demands considerable vocal flexibility.
Flexibility was no problem for Miss Caballe.
She moved easily between the scene's recitative and aria sections, regulating color and dynamics in much the same way a master instrumentalist might.
It was consistently elegant singing.
Yet the work's drama and emotionalism seemed locked behind a patrician veneer.


Tembec Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


System Software Associates Inc.(SSAX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


TRANSACTIONS
College  GANNON -- Announced it will begin playing women's lacrosse in 1995.
SLIPPERY ROCK -- Announced that Dennis Green and Mark Metzka, guards, will sit out the first two men's basketball games because they used the office telephone of former coach Robert Bartlett to make long-distance calls.


Energy Efficiency Works, and It Saves Money
To the Editor:
"It Costs More to Save Energy" (Op-Ed, Nov. 20) by Herbert Inhaber and Harry Saunders strays far from the real-world experience we have analyzed in dozens of studies published in widely read, reputable journals and highlighted in the book "Energy Efficiency and Human Activity" (Cambridge, England).


My Solid Gold Hernia
America must start to laugh again, particularly in the wake of elections in which both the winning and losing parties make many of us dread the future.
My own contribution is to tell my friends about my recent hernia operation.
I was in Greenwich Hospital for six hours, two of them for anesthesia and surgery; I was home by 5:30 P.M.
Let's give the hospital top marks for efficiency and courtesy, and acknowledge the miracles of modern surgery that have cut hospital stays for this operation from weeks to hours.


After the Turkey-Loading, The Shopping Marathon
IT was 7:45 A.M. and as many as 50 people were already assembled at each of the entrances of Macy's, the galaxy's largest store.
Through the locked doors, clerks could be seen rushing more stuff onto shelves in preparation for the busiest shopping day, which fell as it must on the day after Thanksgiving.
In one vestibule on 34th Street, a quiet sort of nervousness prevailed, the same sort of tension runners show at the start of a marathon.
The shoppers seemed into themselves, trying to get focused, keeping their pulse rates low to better go the distance.


Stores Say No to Sales Taxes, for a Day
For John and Tammy Guerriero, it was one of those pleasant little surprises at the mall.
While jostling through the throngs of holiday shoppers yesterday -- the year's busiest shopping day -- they found a pair of shoes for their 4-month-old son, Michael, for exactly 8.25 percent less than they expected to pay.
"Geez, we might come back for another pair," said Mr.
Guerriero, a carpenter and Staten Island native, as the couple emerged from the Buster Brown shoe store in the sprawling, 200-store Staten Island Mall, Michael babbling happily in tow.


Reject the New Arms Guidelines
America has a rare chance to use its dominant position in the arms market to inhibit the international traffic in weaponry.
Unfortunately, new guidelines governing American arms sales abroad, now on President Clinton's desk, would toss away that chance.
With the end of the cold war, global arms sales began to dry up and competition intensified to capture what was left of the market.
The demonstrated prowess of American arms in the Persian Gulf war allowed the U.S. to dominate the market, accounting for well over half the world's sales.
That would enable Washington to take the lead in restraining sales, especially to volatile regions like the Middle East.


UMass Stuns Arkansas, Making It Look Easy
In advance of tonight's season opener between defending national champion Arkansas and Massachusetts, the Razorbacks' premier player, Corliss Williamson, expressed the opinion that his university's second team was better than the Minutemen's starting five.
As it developed in the Tipoff Classic at the Springfield Civic Center, UMass reserves more often than not outplayed Arkansas starters as Massachusetts not only upset the Razorbacks, but did it by the lopsided score of 104-80 before a capacity crowd of 8,999.


Clash on Bosnia Creates Strain in NATO
In London, Paris, and here in Bonn, some officials are beginning to fear that NATO could be headed toward its gravest crisis since 1956, when the United States clashed with Britain and France over their attempt to seize the Suez Canal.
This time, the issue is Bosnia, where Europeans and Americans have been at odds over how to react to aggression by Bosnian Serbs against the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.


Michael Somes, 77, Ballet Star And Longtime Fonteyn Partner
Michael Somes, the first male star to be trained by the Royal Ballet and Margot Fonteyn's longtime partner, died on Nov. 18 in London.
He was 77.
The cause was a brain tumor, according to The Guardian.


Needle Exchange Programs Shown to Slow H.I.V. Rates
In the midst of a driving November rain, a woman in a stiff wig and a soiled trench coat approached a converted ice-cream truck in East Harlem and exchanged a brown-paper bag of used hypodermic needles for a bag of new ones.
Into the bag went several condoms and the friendly admonition, "Use them; be safe."
It was just another day for the people inside the white truck that houses one of New York's needle-exchange programs.
Intravenous drug users come to the van, which parks on the street, and trade used needles for new ones in an effort to slow the spread of AIDS through shared needles.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
Following is a look at today's top playoff games in the Public Schools Athletic League and Long Island.
Team records are in parentheses.
P.S.A.L.
Susan Wagner (9-1) at Canarsie (9-0), semifinal, noon Key Players: Canarsie's rushing attack of Cory Harper, Justin Zuckerman, Tahir Henriques and Jason Prister has Wagner Coach Al Paturzo concerned.
"We have to put some points up on the board and get them out of the wishbone," he said.
"If they run the ball down our throats, we are going to be in trouble." Wagner's two main threats are quarterback Robert Hoke, who has thrown for more than 1,000 yards, and Jermaine Gilliam, who has more than 1,000 yards rushing.


Players Told to Expect a Unilateral Move
Major league club owners are prepared to take one of three steps when they meet in Chicago on Dec. 5, players were told in a memo they received from the union this week, but management's most likely action will be a vote on implementation of a salary cap.
In the memo dated Nov. 22 -- a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times -- Donald Fehr, the head of the union, told the players that John Harrington, the owners' labor spokesman, stated the clubs' intentions at the last bargaining session last Saturday.


Italy Faces a Different Kind of Government Crisis
It is not unusual for Italian governments to be labeled shaky or fractious or frail or embattled; the country, after all, has had 52 of them since World War II.
So there has been plenty of time -- and more than enough governments -- to build a political vocabulary suggesting that instability is as endemic as the common cold.
It is not unusual, either, for them to teeter, dissolve and then re-form, like the colors in a kaleidoscope.


Use of Army to Fight Crime in Rio Makes Many Feel Safer in Streets
Two olive green Panther helicopters droned in wide circles over the vast, human amphitheater of the Nova Brasilia shantytown.
But in the shadows of one narrow alley, one cocaine trafficker said an eventual occupation by Brazilian Army soldiers gave him no fear.
"The army won't come in to massacre us," said the trafficker, a lean young man sporting new sneakers.
"Our guns will be hidden. There won't be any shooting."


NATO Jets Fly but Don't Bomb As Bosnian Serbs Attack Enclave
NATO planes flew repeatedly over the Muslim enclave of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia today after nationalist Serbs shelled the center of the embattled town.
But the aircraft returned to base without dropping any bombs.
After a day in which his sentiments on the fate of the Bihac pocket seemed to swing violently, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, called in NATO air strikes against the attacking Serbs.
But with night already blanketing the Bihac area, the NATO pilots were apparently unable to find their targets.


Creating an Estate Vehicle
In 1988, when his oldest child entered high school, Dr.
Edward J. Zelnick told his longtime tennis buddy that he wanted to do some estate planning.
He was in his peak earning years and in good health.
His friend suggested that he shift money to his children in the form of an insurance trust to reduce the doctor's estate, which is subject to probate, estate taxes and any action by creditors.
In addition, the money could serve as a source of funds for college if the parents were unable to pay for any reason, said the adviser, Larry Schweiger, who is president of Unisyn Securities America, an insurance agent and tax strategist.


Suzy Shier reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Meggett's Option Open Against the Redskins
If David Meggett has something on the Washington Redskins, he isn't letting on.
Meggett has thrown a touchdown pass from the halfback option the last three times the Giants and the Redskins have met.
And as a rookie in 1989, the 5-foot-9-inch, 195-pound all-purpose runner established himself with a 62-yard touchdown reception at R.F.K.
Stadium in his first National Football League game -- still the longest catch of his career.


If a Graduate Doesn't Work, Simply Return To Sender
Like toasters, the students at Middlesex Community College now come with guarantees.
If they graduate from vocational programs without the skills to hold a job in their fields, their employers can send them back to be repaired.
"It's the same thing as a warranty on a product," said Flora Mancuso Edwards, president of the college.
"We warranty the expertise of our students to be absolutely fit for the purposes for which the education was intended."


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL Injured Zeier Says He'll Play in a Bowl Eric Zeier wasted no time assuring any bowl committee that might be wondering about his injury status.
"I'm going to be ready for the bowl game," Zeier said yesterday in Athens, Ga., after leaving Georgia's 48-10 rout of Georgia Tech in the second quarter with sprained ligaments in his right knee.
"I thought it was hurt a lot worse than it was," Zeier said.
"It's going to be fine. I'll be back in a couple of weeks." Zeier passed for 115 yards and 2 touchdowns before he went down with 7 minutes 34 seconds left in the second quarter.
Georgia (6-4-1) qualified for a bowl game by winning its finale, handing Tech its ninth loss in a 1-10 season.
Zeier completed his career No. 3 on the National Collegiate Athletic Association pass yardage list with 11,153, trailing Brigham Young's Ty Detmer with 15,031 and San Diego State's Todd Santos with 11,425. (AP)


Nebraska Still Has A Question To Answer
As Tom Osborne moved within one victory of his first national title in 22 years as head coach of Nebraska, he opened the door to a sizable quarterback controversy.
The No. 1-ranked Cornhuskers (12-0) struggled to a 13-3 victory over Oklahoma before 70,216, their seventh straight with Brook Berringer as the team's starting quarterback.
Yet Osborne admitted "looking at Tommie a few times" when the game was tied 3-3 at halftime.


WTD Industries(WTDI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sony's Pioneering Chairman Gives Up the Reins
Akio Morita, the brassy, white-maned entrepreneur who co-founded the Sony Corporation and turned it into one of the world's most innovative electronics companies, resigned today as chairman because of health problems, the company announced this afternoon.
The terse announcement by Sony came as little surprise.
Mr.
Morita, who is 73, suffered a cerebral hemorrhage a year ago that has reportedly left him vibrant but physically impaired and using a wheelchair.


CHRONICLE
A minor tempest in London this week involves who else but the royal family, although this time none of the royals can be accused of contributing to it.
The little brouhaha is over "Three Princes," a painting of PRINCE CHARLES and his two sons, PRINCE WILLIAM and PRINCE HENRY.
Some viewers and critics think the painting, unveiled Wednesday at the Cafe Royal, makes all three look silly.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI ALLY OUSTS SENATE LEADER Governor-elect Pataki moved briskly toward consolidating his control over both the state government and the fractious state Republican Party when his allies in the State Senate ousted one of his chief rivals, Senator Ralph J. Marino, from the powerful position of majority leader and installed a leading Pataki supporter, Senator Joseph L. Bruno, in the top job.
Page 1.
With the ascension of Senator Bruno, the Governor-elect has gained a political and philosophical soul mate.
Man in the News, page 29.
DATA SHOW NEEDLE EXCHANGE CURBS H.I.V.
For the first time, researchers say they can document the success of a needle-exchange program in slowing the spread of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
An evaluation of 2,500 participants in New York's needle-exchange program showed a new H.I.V. infection rate of 2 percent a year, compared with 4 to 7 percent for high-frequency intravenous drug users who may share needles.
Page 1.
FEW VOLUNTEER FOR DESEGREGATION PLAN Days before a judge is to consider whether to order a school desegregation plan for Hartford and its suburbs, a state effort to avoid such a court order by encouraging voluntary measures is suffering serious setbacks.
Key communities likely to benefit most, cities with large minority enrollments, have refused to participate.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR TO REVERSE SOME PROPOSED CUTS Mayor Giuliani said he would accept some of the City Council's proposals to restore services he had marked for elimination in his budget, including soup kitchens, alcohol- and drug-treatment programs and services for the mentally retarded.
But he stopped far short of the Council's desire to restore $96.6 million in spending to the city's budget.
Page 27.
HIT-RUN CRASH LEAVES 2 DEAD IN BROOKLYN A family trip to celebrate Thanksgiving in New Jersey ended in the deaths of a Brooklyn woman and her aunt when a stolen car speeding through a red light hit their vehicle just two blocks from their home in Sunset Park, the police said.
They said they driver of the stolen car apparently escaped.
Page 27.
SPRINTING INTO THE SHOPPING MARATHON It was 7:45 A.M. and as many as 50 people were already assembled at each of the entrances of Macy's, the galaxy's largest store.
Through the locked doors, clerks could be seen rushing more stuff onto shelves in preparation for the busiest shopping day, which fell as it must on the day after Thanksgiving.
In one vestibule on 34th Street, a quiet sort of nervousness prevailed, the same sort of tension runners show at the start of a marathon.
The shoppers seemed into themselves, trying to get focused, keeping their pulse rates low to better go the distance.
About New York, page 27.
REGION  PREDATOR NURSE BRINGS WARNING The police on Long Island have issued a warning to older men to beware if an attractive young woman dressed as a nurse approaches them at a stop light, says her car has broken down and asks for a ride.
Since April 1991, the police said, the woman has robbed at least 15 men by fondling them and then stealing their money.Page 28.
CONNECTICUT CITIES GET PHONE INCREASES Telephone customers in six Connecticut communities will pay more for telephone service because the number of new telephone lines is growing so fast, Southern New England Telephone said.Page 28.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.50
6.00
3.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.28
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.72
3.23
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.78
7.80
5.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.94
7.94
6.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.82
8.82
7.28
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.29
5.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Jets Better Let This Light Shine
AS the Jets prepare for what some have construed as Armageddon, I remember what Duane Thomas said before Super Bowl VI, when he was asked about playing in the ultimate game.
Thomas, the Dallas Cowboys running back who definitely marched to the beat of a different drummer, said that if the Super Bowl is the ultimate game, why are they playing again next year?
Sounds like something Johnny Mitchell would have said.


JLG Industries(JLGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Milton J. Shapp Is Dead at 82: Ex-Governor of Pennsylvania
Milton J. Shapp, former Governor of Pennsylvania and a Philadelphia industrialist who was the first Jew to mount a campaign for the Presidential nomination of a major party, died on Thursday at Lankenau Hospital in Wynnewood, a suburb of Philadelphia.
He was 82.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, family friends said.


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; Hanoi Hannah Looks Back, With Few Regrets
Not many calling cards list an alias, but even in Vietnam few people would know this slight, elegant 65-year-old woman by her real name, Trinh Thi Ngo.
The alias -- Thu Huong -- means Autumn Fragrance, the name she first used as an English-language radio announcer in the 1950's because it was easier for her non-Vietnamese listeners to pronounce.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CG BANCORP, Cottage Grove, Ore., said its shareholders had approved the acquisition by Centennial Bancorp, Eugene, Ore., a bank holding company, for approximately $1.8 million, in Centennial stock.
ELSCINT LTD., Haifa, Israel, has signed a letter of intent to acquire the magnetic resonance imaging business of Otsuka Electronics USA Inc., Fort Collins, Colo.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
NORWICH FINANCIAL CORP., Norwich, Conn., a savings bank, has announced that it plans to buy back up to 300,000 of its shares, or 5.8 percent of its common shares outstanding.
UNITED GRAIN GROWERS LTD., Winnipeg, Manitoba, a farmers' cooperative, is selling two units to W. H. Escott Co., a food brokerage in Winnipeg.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


CHRONICLE
Where do a couple who have seen a lot, but maybe not all, spend their 50th wedding anniversary?
If they are JERRY and EILEEN FORD, it's at a luxury camp in Mala Mala, South Africa, eating roast impala and chocolate cake and sipping champagne sent by their office in New York.
"It was the most exotic trip of our lives," Mrs.
Ford said.
"We ate in an outdoor room enclosed by 20-foot-high reeds and open to the sky, and we never had a better time." No faint praise, considering that most trips the Fords have made, traveling the world in search of models, could legitimately be considered exotic.
The Fords founded the Ford Models agency in 1946.


Largest Numbers Sit in Stands As Lopez Quietly Begins Career
They weren't exactly the numbers the sellout crowd of 6,008 at Alumni Hall had expected to see.
When you're on the cover of Sports Illustrated and basketball's reigning national prep player of the year, your college debut is supposed be worth more than 12 points.
But that's all an admittedly nervous Felipe Lopez managed to score yesterday as St.
John's opened its season with a 93-63 romp over Dartmouth in the first round of the Joe Lapchick tournament.


Wascana Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shaw Commun. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


McNair and Alcorn Wind It Up Throwing
Steve McNair demonstrated today before a capacity crowd, a national television audience and in a playoff game that, despite injury, he was indeed a formidable football force.
The Youngstown State team, however, proved infinitely mightier.
The final score was Youngstown State 63, Alcorn State -- one is tempted to simply write McNair -- 20, in this first-round game of the Division I-AA playoffs in Stambaugh Stadium on the Youngstown campus and before a record crowd of 17,795.


Beame Is Hospitalized
Former Mayor Abraham D. Beame was admitted to Mount Sinai Medical Center yesterday, where he was being treated for gastrointestinal bleeding, hospital and police officials said.
Mr.
Beame, who is 88, was listed in stable condition and was alert, chatting with nurses and doctors, not long after he was rushed to the emergency room shortly after 9 A.M. from his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, hospital officials said.


Light Trading In the Markets
The stock and bond markets were open in the United States yesterday, although trading ended several hours early because of the Thanksgiving holiday weekend.
The futures and options exchanges in Chicago were also open for a shortened trading session.
The Commodity Exchange, the New York Mercantile Exchange and the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange were closed.
There was no cotton or orange juice trading on the New York Cotton Exchange.


Hit-and-Run Crash Leaves 2 Dead in Brooklyn
A family trip to celebrate Thanksgiving in New Jersey ended in the deaths of a Brooklyn woman and her aunt when a car speeding through a red light hit their vehicle just two blocks from their home in Sunset Park, the police said.
The accident killed Sherry Layton, 51, and injured her husband of two years, Daniel Layton, a fellow hospital technician who was driving the car.
Mrs.
Layton's 80-year-old aunt, Rosa Raymond, also died in the crash, the police said.
They said the hit-and-run driver apparently escaped.


Treasury Bond Market's Dismal Turnabout
No place else is the effect of this year's rise in rates so clear as on Treasury bonds, which have been mauled as a pure interest rate play.
"There have been two distinct interest rate environments -- first a raging bull market and second a raging bear market -- in the last three years," said Catherine Voss Sanders, associate editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds.


For Some, the More Bears the Merrier
If stock investors are not feeling very thankful right now, who can blame them?
The market, which for months had labored to achieve meager results, fell sharply this week despite yesterday's gains, leaving many investors looking at losses for the year.
Prognosticators are predicting the end of the world, or at least of the bull market.
Gloom hangs over the investing world.
Which is why Bernard G. Schaeffer is so cheery.
Not that Mr.
Schaeffer enjoys the suffering of his fellows.
But the more bearish other investment advisers become, the happier he is -- as long as the stock market's long-term trend is upward, which he thinks it is.


Salvadorans May Lose Status as Refugees
Reflecting the nation's toughening attitude toward immigrants, the Clinton Administration is leaning toward ending a program that has granted temporary protection to almost 200,000 Salvadorans who fled civil war.
Administration officials said today that a final decision was expected within two weeks.
They said that if the protected status ended, the Salvadorans would have two options: return home or apply for political asylum or some other permanent status.


For Holiday Shoppers, No Hurry
Beth Findlay and her mother, Joan Gorelick, spent yesterday morning browsing at the Stamford Town Center in Stamford, Conn.
In Macy's, they picked up a couple of pairs of earrings that were already gift-wrapped and bought a sports shirt that was on sale for Mrs.
Gorelick's husband, Dan.
But mostly they just prowled the mall, trying to get into the holiday spirit.


Chambers Development Co.(CDV.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man In The News; Soul Mate For Pataki -- Joseph Louis Bruno
With the ascension of Joseph L. Bruno as the presumptive majority leader of the State Senate, Governor-elect George E. Pataki has gained a political and philosophical soul mate at the top of state government.
Mr.
Bruno is, above all, a fiscal conservative who has argued relentlessly about the need to cut state spending and taxes during his 18 years in the Senate.
And unlike the man he deposed, Ralph J. Marino, he is both a gregarious colleague in the Senate and an eager, sharp-tongued spokesman for his beliefs.


In Jeffries Case, Bill of Rights Is at Risk; Unprotected Speech
To the Editor:
In "Fine-Tuning the Jeffries Case" (editorial, Nov. 17), you offer as a jurisprudential truism the proposition that Prof.
Leonard Jeffries has "every right" to vent publicly the most "hateful" and "heinous" invective without risking his privileged (though now clearly ill-conceived) tenured status.


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Observer; And He Is Us
School prayer and the baseball strike remind me of daytime television.
In all three departments Americans are confessing something they ought to be ashamed of.
This is, that they are incapable of self-control.


Time for a Budget Truce
The New York City Council has picked the wrong time to assert its power over the budget.
The city admittedly faces tough choices because current spending must be cut by at least $800 million.
Moreover, Council concerns over Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's October proposal that much of the cutting be imposed on social services are justified.
But the Council's authority to vote its own plan is ambiguous.
Both sides should want the courts to clear up the ambiguity, though it would be risky and costly to delay cuts while courts ruminate.
This confrontation is over political muscle, not fiscal details.
The revised City Charter gave the Council substantially more power than before.
Up to this point, the Council has not exploited that power aggressively.
Now its Democratic majority is embarrassed by its failure to press for more changes in the new Republican Mayor's original budget when it could have done so last June.
Members are also angry that he now proposes to cancel some of the few changes they made.
June was the time to fight.
Not now.


Bridge
A neck problem indirectly decided the result of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here on Thursday night.
The discomfort was Ed Carr's, a Minneapolis player who was due to play with Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., but did not feel well enough.
His house guest, Alexander Weiland of Glenview, Ill., replaced him and the new partnership won the three-day event by more then two boards.
Weiland, returning to the tournament scene after an eight-year hiatus, won his first national title.
Lair, an experienced professional who stands third on the list of master-point winners, won his 16th.


Older Men Are Warned About Predatory 'Nurse'
The police have issued a warning to elderly men to beware if an attractive young woman dressed as a nurse approaches them at a stop light, says her car has broken down and asks for a ride.
Since April 1991, the police said, the woman has robbed at least 15 men by fondling them and then stealing their money.


Energy Efficiency Works, and It Saves Money; Costs of Inefficiency
To the Editor:
The indictment of policies to save energy by Herbert Inhaber and Harry Saunders (Op-Ed, Nov. 20) is at once defeatist and deficient.


Treasury Bonds Are Mixed In a Short and Thin Session
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in thin post-holiday trading yesterday as some market participants decided that the recent selloff in stocks had subsided.
The Treasury market had benefited from a flight of investors out of stocks and into bonds after the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 91.52 points on Tuesday.
But stocks recovered some ground yesterday, with the Dow gaining 33.64 points.


New Sony Complex Lures Crowds
Barely a week into its run, the 10-screen Sony Theaters Lincoln Square complex, the new flagship of the Japanese-owned chain, is drawing record crowds, company figures show, including gawkers drawn by the outsize sidewalk video screen, a monumental mural of filmdom nostalgia and electronic panels flashing show times.
Inside, patrons find gift shops, black and gold palm trees, faux movie palaces, and ushers wired like secret service agents who practically wrestle people down to say hello.


Religion Journal; Bishops Take on a 'Culture of Violence'
This Christmas Eve, more than a few inner-city parishes will hold Midnight Mass early in the evening so that parishioners can get home safely.
The next morning, some children will strip away gift wrapping to find the latest video game whose objective is to kill, maim and maraud your way to victory.
And, surely, that night someone will get drunk and beat his spouse.
From the church to the home, there seem to be few havens from the violence that has become an increasingly common part of daily life.
Alarmed that society has grown numb to it all, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops have issued a sweeping denunciation of the "culture of violence" that pervades American society.


Living and Shaping Legacy of Civil Rights Leader
With his steady, slow-cadenced speech, strong jaw and prominent forehead, Dexter King is very much the image of his father, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
But heredity is not necessarily destiny, and Mr.
King, at 33 the youngest son of the civil rights leader, has struggled mightily with the question of whether he should devote his life to carrying forth the legacy of his father and, if so, how and to what extent.


Awards to Americans In Honor of Nijinsky
The Vaslav Nijinsky Medal, sponsored by the Polish Artists Agency in Warsaw, has been awarded for the first time to Americans for work in honor of Nijinsky, the Russian dancer who was born of Polish parents in 1890.
The medals, presented last Saturday at the Polish Consulate after a performance there by students of the Joffrey Ballet school.
Douglas Blair Turnbaugh, an American representative of the International Dance Council/Unesco, made the presentations.
Two were given posthumously to Robert Joffrey and Bronislava Nijinska.
The Dance Collection of the New York Public Library and the Joffrey Ballet were institutional recipients.


A Bystander Is Shot Dead In Crown Hts.
Police officers fired at a man who they believed was drawing a gun on a street corner in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last night, and a bystander 300 feet away was hit and killed, the police said.
While investigators were awaiting the results of ballistics tests, they said they believed that the bystander may have been killed by a police bullet that went astray.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  ARMY STABILIZING RIO
The use of army troops against violence related to drugs in Rio de Janeiro is proving to be a stabilizing influence, with residents saying they feel safe, though no major drug caches have been found. 1


Recordings in Review; JAZZ
Salsa on an Anachronistic Note: Mambo That's for Dancing
As salsa drifts toward the blandness of international pop music, its original dance impulse is dissipating, with the rhythm section's prominence replaced by choirs and keyboards.
Along comes Eddie Torres, a dancer who worked with Tito Puente, to make an anachronism, a hard mambo album meant for dancing.


Recordings in Review; CLASSICAL
Making the Earth Shake  With Vibrato and Coloratura
While other mezzo-sopranos court publicity, Anne Sofie von Otter plies her artistry in understated ways, often with spectacular results.
An example is her new Handel release with Musica Antiqua Koln, cantatas and arias in honor of the Virgin Mary (Archiv 439 866-2; CD).


Bosnia Marring Europe's Hopes
Five years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, ethnic and religious conflicts that are no less menacing than the divisions of the cold war have erupted, wiping out hope for the progress that was to follow the end of Communism.


Ally of Pataki Replaces Marino As State Senate Majority Leader
Governor-elect George E. Pataki moved briskly toward consolidating his control over both state government and the fractious state Republican Party yesterday when his allies in the State Senate ousted one of his chief rivals from the powerful position of majority leader.
The coup not only installed a leading Pataki supporter, Senator Joseph L. Bruno, in the Senate's top job, but also demonstrated again the ascendancy among state Republicans of Mr.
Pataki's patron, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, whose lobbying helped insure the insurgents' victory.


American Woodmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Charter Power Systems Inc.(CHP,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mayflower in Talks to Sell Its Moving Business
Mayflower Group Inc., a moving van and bus company, announced yesterday that it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell its household-moving business, the nation's fourth largest, to Unigroup Inc., a private company that operates United Van Lines.
Mayflower will confine its negotiations to Unigroup until next Friday.
It said it had agreed to the exclusive arrangement because the Unigroup offer was superior to other proposals.
No financial details were disclosed, said Michael Grisham, a spokesman for Mayflower, because the two parties are still negotiating a price.


Trojan War Atrocity
To the Editor:
In "Columbia to Celebrate 75 Years of Great Books" (Education page, Nov. 16), the president of Columbia University accepts two errors about "The Iliad": that Achilles dragged Hector's body through the streets of Troy and that this atrocity was not meant to be horrifying.


Protesting on Broadway


7 in Lebanon Killed In Clash Over Arafat
Supporters and opponents of the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, fought in Lebanon's largest refugee camp today, killing at least 7 people and wounding 10.
Some 400 supporters of Mr.
Arafat's Fatah faction attacked areas that had been seized earlier by dissidents in the Ain Hilwe district on the outskirts of Sidon, a port city 35 miles south of the capital, Beirut.


Down to the Sea on Windsurfers


In Money Transfer, Fast Costs More Than Slow
YOUR son runs out of money on spring break.
Your wife loses her purse on a business trip.
Your vacation in Las Vegas leaves you with an empty wallet and over-the-limit credit cards.
Many people experience the urgent need to send (or receive) cash in a flash (or at least in a day or two).
In recent years, though, the number of needy cases has grown substantially.


INSIDE
Giuliani Reverses Some Cuts
Mayor Giuliani accepted some of the City Council's proposals to restore services he had planned to cut, but stopped far short of the $96.6 million the Council sought.
Page 27.
Sony's Chairman Resigns
The chairman who built Sony into an innovative power resigned.
The company said Akio Morita, 73, who co-founded Sony, was stepping down because of health problems.
Page 39.
Recovery From Hurricane
Two years and three months since much of South Florida was hit by a hurricane, recovery continues, but the pace is slow.
Page 8.


2 Die in Queens Shootout
Two people were killed and four others were seriously injured last night in a shootout at what the police described as a crack house in St.
Albans, Queens.
Lieut.
Ray O'Donnell, a police spokesman at the scene, said two men had been admitted to the sparsely furnished house at 176-05 Linden Boulevard and went upstairs into the bedroom where they began shooting.


Tax Date Looms for Bullish
To the short list of important dates in your relationship with the Internal Revenue Service -- Dec. 31 and April 15 -- this year add Nov. 29.
The date is important for bullish investors who plan to "accelerate capital losses," or close out losing investment positions before the year ends.
While all investors can gain tax advantages by selling losers before year-end, those who are bullish may want to act by Tuesday, the deadline this year for "doubling up." The strategy is to buy additional shares of losing securities now and sell the original shares for a loss on Dec. 30.
In this way, investors can lower their 1994 tax bills while leaving themselves poised to catch any market run-up in January.


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Smith Makes Skeptics Re-evaluate
Charles Smith is surprised that his recent precise and powerful play has surprised observers.
The persistent questions, the sweet compliments and the quizzical stares have enveloped Smith while he has performed smoothly for the Knicks this month.
Astute enough to gauge the situation, Smith has realized that these reactions indicate that his revival was unexpected.
Maybe people did not believe that his left knee was injured.
Maybe they did not think he would be the reliable player the Knicks invested $26 million in.
Maybe they refused to forget those three missed layups against Chicago in the Eastern Conference finals last year.
Smith thinks that the doubts about his injury have been unfair.


Apprentice Breaks Collarbone In Fall
New York's weekend of holiday racing took a bad turn yesterday when the apprentice jockey Dale Beckner fell from his mount at Aqueduct, fractured his right collarbone and was lost for probably two months.
Beckner, who is 21 years old, was the third-leading rider at Aqueduct's fall meeting when he went down shortly after the start of the third race.
His mount, Young and Regal, took a misstep on the backstretch and pitched him to the ground.
The jockey was taken to North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., where Dr.
Andy Somma diagnosed his injury as a broken clavicle, and held him for observation because of tingling in his left foot.


For Some, the More Bears the Merrier
If stock investors are not feeling very thankful right now, who can blame them?
The market, which for months had labored to achieve meager results, fell sharply this week despite yesterday's gains, leaving many investors looking at losses for the year.
Prognosticators are predicting the end of the world, or at least of the bull market.
Gloom hangs over the investing world.
Which is why Bernard G. Schaeffer is so cheery.
Not that Mr.
Schaeffer enjoys the suffering of his fellows.
But the more bearish other investment advisers become, the happier he is -- as long as the stock market's long-term trend is upward, which he thinks it is.


Recordings in Review; CLASSICAL
Klezmer Mimics Human Sound, And With a Touch of Pain
Paul Schoenfield's music proclaims his belief that the boundaries between concert style and certain popular and folk idioms are porous.
His early works borrowed from jazz and bluegrass.
In a new Argo release (440 212-2; CD), he expands on the jazz connection and adds klezmer music, in some ways a close relation, to the mix.
Gracefully bending instrumental melodies of a type usually played on the clarinet, and meant to simulate vocal chant, weave through each piece.


Shoppers Begin the Holiday Rush at a Leisurely Pace


Oregon's 'Out-of-Step' Senator Steps Forward
Term limits, a balanced budget amendment, school prayer -- these are "phony" solutions to the nation's problems.
The military budget needs to be cut.
The death penalty violates Christian principles.
And there is nothing wrong with being a liberal.
Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, the man espousing those post-election heresies, is a lifelong Republican who is nearing the end of his third full decade in the Senate.
He says, proudly, that he spent most of the years under President Reagan trying to undermine his program, and that he is the only active senator who has never voted for a military authorization bill.


Recordings in Review; POP
A Gentle Soul's Songs, Accompanied by His Cello
Arthur Russell reveals a gentle soul in the 15 songs on "Another Thought," which were recorded from 1982 to 1990, two years before he died of AIDS.
In the 1970's and 80's, Mr.
Russell performed regularly at places like the Kitchen; he also made singles geared for dance clubs.
Most of the selections on "Another Thought" (Point Music/Polygram 438 891) are solos for voice and cello that tuck a world of influences into puckish, resolutely optimistic songs.


Gretzky and His Ad-Hoc Team Trying to Enlist Leetch
While negotiators tried again to settle a labor dispute that has postponed the start of the National Hockey League season for eight weeks, the sport continued to mutate today in ad-lib fashion.
Like boys on the winter pond, the superstars of a generation are putting together a pickup team to hit the road, play and have a little fun.
Wayne Gretzky started it.
Then Mark Messier came on board and so did Sergei Fedorov and more than a dozen others.


Business Digest
Companies  The chairman who turned Sony into an innovative power resigned.
Sony said Akio Morita, 73, who co-founded the Japanese company, was stepping down because of health problems.
During his 22 years as chairman, Sony achieved spectacular successes with its television sets, stereo equipment, video cameras and the much-imitated Walkman tape player.  [ Page 39. ] Goldman, Sachs will coordinate the sale of Deutsche Telekom to investors outside Germany.
The sale of Germany's telephone company is the largest privatization ever in Europe.
The appointment as one of three global coordinators is a coup for Goldman, which will reap huge investment banking fees.  [ 39. ] The Westin Hotel Company will be sold in a $561 million deal to a joint venture formed by Starwood Capital; Goldman, Sachs, and the Edward Thomas Companies of Beverly Hills, Calif.  [ 39. ] Mayflower Group is in talks to sell its household-moving business to the private company that operates United Van Lines.
Shares of Mayflower jumped 15 percent after the announcement.  [ 41. ] Two of Britain's biggest home-lending companies plan to merge and go public, creating a $140.6 billion banking company.  [ 41. ] In an unusual move, Maine helped Central Maine Power buy an independent plant that provided it with electricity.  [ 41. ] The German financier who runs Lonrho sold a stake in the Kempinski hotel chain to a Thai joint venture for $83.5 million.
Dieter Bock is shedding his holdings to focus on Lonrho.  [ 41. ] The Economy  The holiday shopping season began, even if many people did not begin shopping.
For now, many shoppers are still looking for bargains rather than loading up on presents.  [ 39. ] Created to stop racial discrimination in the workplace, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is choking on bureaucracy and a mounting backlog of discrimination charges.  [ 1. ] Markets  Stock prices recovered some ground in light, post-holiday trading.
But stocks fell across Europe, hurt by expectations that when most of Wall Street returns on Monday, stock prices will continue their slide.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index rose 2.36 points.  [ 39. ] Treasury prices were mixed after two sessions of strong gains.
Investors who had fled stocks for bonds earlier this week apparently decided that the selloff in stocks had subsided.  [ 47. ] Uncovered short sales in stocks traded on the Nasdaq system fell for the third consecutive month.  [ 50. ] The dollar was little changed in quiet trading.
The Italian lira continued to slide against the German mark and the dollar.  [ 51. ] Soybean, corn and pork prices were higher on a day when most commodity markets were closed.  [ 51. ] Your Money  Investor gloom is a silver lining for some investment advisers.
After this week's sharp decline in stocks, many investors expect the worse, which means, these contrarians argue, that the smallest ray of hope can make the market climb.  [ 36. ] Cyclical stocks are a disparate group of issues, united only by a general tendency to mirror the direction of the economy.
But cyclical stocks manage eventually to go in one direction, as the Morgan Stanley Cyclical Index shows.  [ 36. ] Tuesday will be an important date for investors who plan to close out losing investment positions before the year ends.  [ 36. ] Money transfer services have grown in recent years.
Generally, the faster the service, the more expensive it is.  [ 38. ]


All Tchaikovsky, Leading With Leonskaja
With Thanksgiving opening the holiday season, Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic are taking a break from their investigations of the symphonic repertory's deeper reaches.
Their offering on Wednesday evening (there are repeats tonight and Tuesday) was essentially a pops concert disguised as an all-Tchaikovsky program.
The first half of the concert was given over to Tchaikovsky's blustery Piano Concerto No. 1, for which Elisabeth Leonskaja was the soloist.
It was a puzzling reading.
At times, textures in the solo line were fuzzy and indistinct, as if Miss Leonskaja were wearing mittens.
Elsewhere she summoned considerable clarity and force, and even a touch of impetuousness that enlivened parts of the outer movements.
Yet on the whole there was little in this gray reading to capture the imagination.


Short Day Gives Dow 33.64 Gain
The stock market recovered yesterday about a fifth of the ground it has lost since Nov. 16.
The few traders on the floor in a shortened session on the day after Thanksgiving tended to buy interest rate-sensitive stocks whose prices had fallen because of the Federal Reserve's six increases in short-term interest rates so far this year.
Bond prices were mixed, and the dollar was little changed.
European stock traders bid down prices overseas yesterday, convinced that when most of Wall Street returns on Monday, stock prices in the United States will continue their slide.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 33.64 points, to 3,708.27, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 2.36 points, to 452.29.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 5.82 points, to 742.52.
Still, the Dow had fallen for five sessions in a row before yesterday, for a total drop of more than 170 points.
Yesterday's advance meant about a 20 percent recovery in the Dow.
"I had been expecting something of a snapback," said James B. Macko, vice president for equity trading at McDonald &amp; Company Investments in Cleveland.
"But I had expected it next week. Today may be a small portion of that snapback."
Broader indexes have also fallen.
The S.&amp; P. 500 had fallen 15.69 points in five sessions, and with yesterday's advance had recovered about 15 percent.
The Nasdaq index dropped 32.94 points for the same period and gained back nearly 18 percent.
Even one of the broadest possible measures, the Wilshire index of 5,000 stocks, had dropped 165.55 points, but recovered nearly 17 percent.
Yesterday, seven stocks advanced for every three that declined, or 1,496 winning stocks and 564 losing stocks on the New York Stock Exchange.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was far below normal at 113.9 million shares because the exchange closed at 1 P.M., instead of 4 P.M.
In Europe, British stock prices fell one-tenth of 1 percent, German stocks fell two-tenths of 1 percent, but French stocks rose six-tenths of 1 percent.
While local issues affected the outcome, most traders cited uncertainty in American financial markets as a drag on their markets.
In Britain, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 issues fell 3.1 points, to 3,033.5, in part because Prime Minister John Major faced a parlimentary vote on Monday on payments to the European Union that threatens to bring down his Government.
In Germany, the DAX index of 30 stocks fell 4.35 points, to 2,051.62, as some investors started shifting investments to bonds out of stocks.
But in France, the CAC index of 40 stocks rose 11.21 points, to 1945.89.
In the United States, most stocks that advanced were those that investors had shunned at earlier points in the year because of the Fed's tightening of interest rates.
These groups included chemical companies, drug manufacturers, retailers, computer software developers, electric utilities, computer makers and banks.
American depository receipts of Sony rose 1 1/4, to 51 3/4, despite a large write-off for its movie-studio operations and yesterday's resignation of its co-founder, Akio Morita.
Mr.
Morita suffered a cerebral hemorrhage a year ago.
Musicland Stores established a 52-week low of 12 3/8, down 2.
A Smith Barney analyst lowered her assessment of the speciality retailer to "underperform" from "neutral, " citing discount pricing and higher advertising costs.
The most active stock, at 2.4 million shares, was Intel, which fell 1 1/4, to 63 7/8.
The company has acknowledged that its Pentium computer chip could cause inaccurate results in rare cases in complex scientific calculations and that newer chips have been corrected.
Shares of Gibson Greetings rose 1 1/8, to 13 7/8.
Gibson and Bankers Trust announced on Wednesday that they had agreed to settle Gibson's lawsuit accusing the bank of improperly leading the company to engage in risky financial trades.
Bankers Trust shares rose 3/8, to 57 1/8.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index rose 1.42 points, to 247.60, and the American Stock Exchange market value index gained 2.29 points, to 434.69.
Of the 30 component stocks that make up the Dow industrials, 21 rose, led by Alcoa, which rose 2 3/8, to 80 3/8.
Of the 500 component stocks that make up the S.&amp; P. 500, 286 rose, led by Merck, which gained 3/4, to 36 5/8.
In Tokyo, stocks were slightly lower.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues lost 34.31 points, or two-tenths of 1 percent, at 18,666.93.
For the week, which was shortened by a national holiday on Wednesday, the Nikkei was down 635.63 points.


Saving on Taxes On Staten Island


In Jeffries Case, Bill of Rights Is at Risk
To the Editor:
"Fine-Tuning the Jeffries Case" (editorial, Nov. 17) supports the Supreme Court's decision to reopen the possibility of removing Prof.
Leonard Jeffries as chairman of the black studies department at the City College of New York.
You argue that although the college shouldn't revoke his tenure and right to speak as freely as he wishes as a faculty member, the college "need not bestow chairmanships" on those who have spoken as he has.


Ally of Pataki Replaces Marino As State Senate Majority Leader
Governor-elect George E. Pataki moved briskly toward consolidating his control over both state government and the fractious state Republican Party yesterday when his allies in the State Senate ousted one of his chief rivals from the powerful position of majority leader.
The coup not only installed a leading Pataki supporter, Senator Joseph L. Bruno, in the Senate's top job, but also demonstrated again the ascendancy among state Republicans of Mr.
Pataki's patron, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, whose lobbying helped insure the insurgents' victory.


For New Innkeepers, a Worry Season; The Solitude of a Winter Island Tests Hopes for a New Life
Raw winds tear across the moors and ponds of this mostly treeless speck of land off the tip of Long Island, rattling the window panes of the empty Atlantic Inn, and sometimes the nerves of its new proprietors, Anne and Brad Marthens.
The Marthens, formerly of Cheshire, Conn., traded in their lives of upward mobility on the mainland to take up innkeeping here in October, just as the hectic summer season was settling into the gray of winter an hour's ferry ride out into the Atlantic Ocean.
They've never run an inn before, they're about a million dollars in debt, and they have all winter to brood over it in a closed-for-the-season Victorian inn on an island where the winter population drops to about 800.


Battling Neighbors
Fordham University has a very big problem: a radio transmitter that, once built, will be 480 ungainly feet tall.
The New York Botanical Garden also has a very big problem: The antenna is directly across the street and all too visible from much of this essentially sylvan site.
There is no doubt how this squabble between neighbors needs to come out.
Common sense, esthetics and the importance to the city of this botanical jewel virtually dictate that Fordham find another site for its tower.
Fordham asked for a construction permit to build a new transmitter in 1983, three years before new Federal Communications Commission regulations made one mandatory for a license renewal for WFUV-FM, the university's radio station.
The old transmitter, a discreet antenna atop the school's Keating Hall, does not meet the new guidelines, which are designed to reduce public exposure to radio waves.


Goldman Wins Big Role in German Sale
Ending months of speculation and intense competition among the world's leading investment bankers, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company was named today to coordinate the sale of Deutsche Telekom, the state telephone monopoly, to investors outside Germany.
The appointment will mean huge investment banking fees for Goldman as the sale of Deutsche Telekom, valued at up to $60 billion, will be the largest privatization in Europe and the second largest globally, after the $70 billion privatization of Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone.
The deal will also solidify Goldman's position as one of the leading sellers of telecommunications securities at a time when the industry in Europe is undergoing great change, as governments sell off large holdings.


Public &amp; Private; Sex For Sale
There's something quaint about the prosecution of Heidi Fleiss.
And it's not only that being accused of making money by selling sex in Hollywood, home of the casting couch and the gratuitous nude scene, is so rich with irony that it's a better subject for a comic novel than a column.
It's the strange prospect of law enforcement types blazing in to save our society from getting caught in the dangerous crossfire of genitals for hire.
On one coast the cops are busting sex workers on Eighth Avenue, dragging them downtown to night court where they pay the fine and go right back to their corner; on another they're charging Heidi Fleiss with pandering in a town in which the verb is a term of art.


Low-Cost Dwellings Helping Bluebirds
ON an Indian summer day, scores of brilliantly colored Eastern bluebirds perched in a long line along a telephone wire.
The wire ran across the front of an open field deep inside Ward Pound Ridge Reservation, a county-owned park in this rural village.
On warm fall days, Westchester residents can see this remarkable environmental success story for themselves.
It is remarkable because many Americans have never seen a bluebird.


Journal; The Victory Rush
Of all those saying "I told you so" to the Democrats this month, no one is louder than Rush Limbaugh, whose latest best seller is conveniently titled "See, I Told You So" and whose voice reaches some 20 million Americans each week.
Like any good masochistic liberal, I started listening to Mr.
Limbaugh immediately after Nov. 8 -- curious to hear how he'd sound in full gloat instead of rabid attack, certain to find him overplaying his post-election hand by indulging in the boorishness of the sore winner.
Mr.
Limbaugh outwitted me.
While his opponents stumble about in disarray, still waiting for firm leadership from the White House, he is already with the next Republican program, advancing his armies of loyal "dittoheads" toward '96.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold, beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


Sending Marines 'Prudent'
Three Navy ships carrying 2,000 marines headed toward the Adriatic Sea today in what the Pentagon called a "strictly precautionary" response to increased fighting around Bihac, in northwestern Bosnia.
When the move was announced on Friday, a statement issued by the United States European Command called the deployment "a prudent measure to enhance the capabilities of our forces supporting the United Nations." The Pentagon declined to elaborate, but the marines, who have helicopters, would presumably be able to rescue any NATO pilots who might be shot down or to evacuate United Nations peacekeepers.


Versatile Butternut Squash A Cook's Favorite Standby
OF all the varieties of hard-skinned winter squashes, butternut appears to have emerged as the cook's favorite.
And with good reason.
Within the smooth beige shell that covers this oddly shaped vegetable is dense, deep-orange flesh that is richer-tasting and less watery or stringy than most of the sturdy cold-weather squashes.
It is a versatile vegetable, good for baking as well as for cooking.
And because it holds up well at room temperature for weeks, it can be kept on hand to use whenever it is needed.


Manager's Profile
Earl McEvoy and John R. Ryan
Fund: Vanguard Wellesley Income Fund, $5.7 billion in assets.
Earl McEvoy, co-manager since 1982; John Ryan, co-manager since 1986. (Sponsor: The Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, Pa.)


Nepali Rivals Are at an Impasse Over Forming a Government
More than a week after elections produced a divided Parliament, the two main political groups, the Communists and the centrist Nepali Congress Party, are at an increasingly tense impasse over which will form the new Government.
Neither party has been able to line up a coalition partner to assure a majority in the 205-seat Parliament.
The uncertainty has created a new constitutional crisis for King Birendra, who was forced by mass protests into ceding his ruling powers to Parliament in 1990.


And Tonight's Party Is in Honor of . . .
The social calendar this month has been a whirlwind of people, places and events.
Now sampling nine parties, Nov. 10-21.


Elissa Williamson, Richard Scogland
Elissa Haywood Williamson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip Williamson of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard William Scogland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Scogland of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
Jane Brendel, a minister of the Church of Religious Science, officiated at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
Ms.
Williamson-Scogland, 25, is a teacher at the Theater Workshop and Enrichment Program of Davenport House in Marblehead.
She and her husband graduated from Bentley College.
She received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a senior director for Alamo Rent A Car.
Her mother, known professionally as Betty Jinnette, is an actress.


Neutral-Site Visitations Urged
JEANNIE T. had a restraining order against her ex-husband, who had beaten her repeatedly during their marriage and continued to threaten her during their divorce proceedings.
The couple had a 2-year-old child, and -- because of the husband's history of violent behavior -- the judge ordered that the father's visits to his daughter be supervised.
Mrs.
T. was grateful that her daughter was to be protected, but her relief was short lived.
The judge, who himself had granted the order of protection for Mrs.
T., also named her as the supervisor of the visits.
"It was awful," said Mrs T., whose last name is being withheld because she fears further repercussions from her ex-husband.
"I had to be in the same room with him, in the car with him and oversee everything that went on with the baby. I did it because I had to protect my daughter. But it was terrible."


School Prayer Can Both Exclude and Coerce; No Amendment Needed
To the Editor:
"Prayer in Public School? It's Nothing New for Many" (front page, Nov. 22) exaggerates the extent to which schools are defying the First Amendment's ban on governmental establishment of religion.
More disturbing, you lump impermissible activities with practices that are constitutionally tolerated and might also be constitutionally protected.


Out, Damned Spot!
Ray and Louise Barnes of Baltimore recognized that murder, suicide and other sudden deaths can leave a terrible mess.
So they set up Crime Scene Clean-Up Inc., a service specializing in getting out those damned spots, and marketed themselves to funeral directors, insurance companies and the police.
"Most cleaning services usually don't want to mess with anything having to do with a body," says Ray, a forensic investigator with the state of Maryland.
"But I'm used to it." Since May, the Barneses have scrubbed away the blood, other bodily fluids and odors of 30 of Baltimore's more untimely deaths.
Typically, the scene of a death takes about three hours to clean; cost, about $400.
The Barneses have fielded several calls from New Yorkers who want to set up franchises.


English Rentals
To the Editor: Following up on your article "In Cornwall, a Castle of One's Own" (Aug. 21), I wanted to add that for a number of years my husband and I have rented houses, cottages or flats through the National Trust in England.
It is the only way to go.
You unpack and get settled for a whole week and take day trips.
Each one we had was fascinating and perfect in every way.
Our favorite was a little place in Yorkshire.


Wall Street; Mothers-to-Be and High Fashion: They Don't Mix
IF your pregnant pals have been looking a little frumpy lately, it would come as little surprise to the sellers of high-fashion maternity clothes.
A Pea in the Pod, the Irving, Texas-based maternity retailer that operates 68 stores, said Wednesday that it would be closing ten stores over the next nine months, taking a one-time pretax charge of $1.25 million.
Net loss per share for the fourth fiscal quarter ended Oct. 23 was 12 cents, the company said, compared to a 4 cent gain in the same quarter the year before.
The stock tanked on the news, closing at 2 3/8 on Friday, down from $3 at Tuesday's close and $12 when Pea in the Pod went public in September 1993.
Pregnant women apparently aren't as anxious to deck out as maternity rag peddlers would like.
Mothers Work Inc. has been suffering similar setbacks.
News of layoffs and plunging earnings this fall sent the stock from $20 a share on Aug. 19 to $9.75 Friday.
SUSAN ANTILLA


Hesitant Norway to Vote on Europe
The meeting was billed as a discussion on whether Norway should join the European Union, but judging from the number of "no" buttons, most of those crowded into the tiny hall in rural Os this week had already made up their minds.
They listened politely while Ranveig Froyland, a member of Parliament, told them that they would be better off and their children's future more secure inside Europe.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


And Never, Never Plan a Special Event for Friday the 4th


G. J. Feldman, 91, Ambassador And Leader in Space Effort, Dies
George J. Feldman, a former United States Ambassador to Luxembourg and Malta and a leading figure in the United States space effort, died Tuesday at the Bryn Mawr Terrace Nursing Home in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 91.
A native of Boston, Mr.
Feldman received his law degree from Boston University and later alternated between private law practice in Boston, Washington and New York and government service.
Among his corporate clients, Mr.
Feldman represented the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, better known as A.&amp; P.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


F.Y.I.
The Legality of a Honk Q. Automobile horn blowing seems unnecessary in a city.
I believe it is prohibited in Paris, for example.
Is it against the law here?
A.
Now, don't panic.
But right now, all over the city, thousands of New York City residents are flouting the authority of Section 24-221a of the city's Noise Control Code: "No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated any claxon installed on a motor a vehicle except as a sound signal of imminent danger."
While losing your job for being late or suffering a nervous breakdown in midday traffic may fit many people's idea of "imminent danger," technically it still doesn't justify using your car horn.
But, luckily for cacophonous car owners, the city does not pursue offenders rigorously; generally, the Environmental Control Board levies fewer than 10 fines a year for car horn violations.
To register complaints about noise pollution, call the New York City Department of Environmental Protection's 24-hour complaint line, (718) DEP-HELP.
Sheriff Fetches Fines Q. I saw a white car marked Sheriff holding up traffic in Central Park.
Who is the New York City Sheriff, and what does he do?
A.
Despite its folksy moniker and long history, the New York City Sheriff has more to do with tow trucks than with gunfights.
Established in 1626, the Sheriff's office in Manhattan and its equivalents in the other boroughs served as a major part of the patchwork of law-enforcement agencies that existed before the city's consolidation in 1898.
After that, the new New York City Police Department took over the responsibility for criminal investigations and arrests.
As recently as 1942, the Sheriff was also responsible for manning and administering the city's jails, a duty now carried by the Department of Correction.
Today, the sheriff's primary duties are enforcing court-ordered judgments and fines, including unpaid parking tickets and littering fines, and collecting judgments from reluctant losers in private lawsuits, said John George, the Sheriff's executive assistant.
Sheriff's deputies, outfitted in dark blue uniforms and state-trooper style Stetsons, carry guns and can make arrests if they see a crime in action.
In recent years, the Sheriff's office, though small in comparison to the City Police Department, has been no stranger to attention.
The previous Sheriff, Philip A. Crimaldi, found himself in hot water with the City Council and city marshals (who also collect fees for the city) for his tough tactics with parking-ticket scofflaws, which included seizing their cars.
Some residents also accused Mr.
Crimaldi's deputies of using tactics reminiscent of the Old West, including brandishing weapons to collect unpaid fines.
Mr.
Crimaldi denied his deputies acted improperly.
But now there's a new Sheriff in town.
Kerry John Katsorhis, a Queens lawyer, was appointed on June 2 by Mayor Giuliani as the 108th Sheriff of New York City.
And as for weapons, Mr.
Katsorhis said shortly after his appointment that, frankly, he doesn't like guns.
But does he wear a star?
More Lawyers, by Far Q. My friend and I (he a litigious drone, I an artist) got into an argument that you might be able to settle.
Are there more lawyers or more actors in New York City?
A.
The drones have it.
As of Sept. 1, the State Office of Court Adminstration shows 63,823 registered lawyers doing business in New York City.
By comparison, actors seem practically scarce.
According to Alan Eisenberg, executive secretary of Actors Equity, the professional actors and stage managers union, there are about 16,000 professional actors registered with Equity in the New York City area.
This figure does not, however, include legions of nonunion actors or actors working only in film or television.
Though more lawyers means more competition, they can take solace in the fact that they're at least registered as "doing business"; the average weekly unemployment rate for Equity actors runs at about 83 percent.
JESSE McKINLEY


A Little Urban Greenery


Versatile Butternut Squash A Cook's Favorite Standby
OF all the varieties of hard-skinned winter squashes, butternut appears to have emerged as the cook's favorite.
And with good reason.
Within the smooth beige shell that covers this oddly shaped vegetable is dense, deep-orange flesh that is richer-tasting and less watery or stringy than most of the sturdy cold-weather squashes.
It is a versatile vegetable, good for baking as well as for cooking.
And because it holds up well at room temperature for weeks, it can be kept on hand to use whenever it is needed.


Ban the Ban?
Call it chemical correctness.
The School of Social Work at the University of Minnesota has adopted a "scent-free policy" to protect three people who suffer from multiple chemical sensitivity.
There's no ban, but students are requested to, well, refrain from Ban.
"This is a medical mine field," says Claudia Miller, an allergist at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.
Some small percentage of the population suffers from multiple chemical sensitivity.
Even a whiff of some chemicals can cause them cardiac and respiratory problems, memory loss and dizziness.
But Miller says rigorous double-blind testing needs to be done to establish the nature and causes of the condition.


Where Trite Is True, 'Hip' Rings Phony
IN EDNA FERBER'S BEST-SELLING 1926 NOVEL, "Show Boat," Magnolia, once the leading lady of the Cotton Blossom, boasts to her actress daughter about the good old days when the Mississippi was crowded with giant floating theaters: "In the audience strong men wept and women fainted." Her daughter, Kim, thinks that Magnolia's tastes are dated and that she may have spent too much time on the river for her own good.
"Now listen, Nola, darling," Kim says in the smart-set style of the 20's.
"One of your old-day gals would last about four seconds on Broadway. . . . If the sentimental old dears were to come back in an all-star revival today the intelligent modern theatergoing audience would walk out on them."
Well, as anyone can see by attending the latest revival of Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein's 67-year-old musical based on the novel, strong men are indeed weeping as in Magnolia's day, and at least at the performance I attended, nobody showed any inclination to walk out on any sentimental old dears.
In fact, audiences at the Gershwin Theater are cheering, and even sober-minded critics more used to unamplified voices in grander-styled music dramas have been swept away in the musical currents.
What a difference from Leonard Bernstein's "Wonderful Town," which just finished its run at the New York City Opera; that musical may be three decades younger than "Show Boat," but it seems as creaky as a dilapidated steamship.
On its opening night earlier this month, many presumably intelligent modern theatergoers did just what Kim predicted.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey Colonial Hockey League  DETROIT FALCONS -- Traded Ryan Schmidt, defenseman, to the Utica Blizzard for future considerations.


New Tunnel Eases Trip: Toulouse to Barcelona
Crossing the Pyrenees between Toulouse, France, and Barcelona, Spain, has been made easier with the opening of the Tunnel du Puymorens last month.
The two-way tunnel took four years to complete and cost about $186 million.
Cars and trucks can now drive through the three-mile tunnel in five minutes, avoiding the 20-minute, twisting climb over the 1.2-mile mountain pass on a road that is often snowbound in winter.
The toll for cars is about $8 one way.
The tunnel, which is open 24 hours a day, all year round, is the fourth of its kind under the Pyrenees.


On Sunday; 'Old Sparky': It's Not Just A Punch Line
AT a time when David Letterman gets a pretty good laugh with references to the expected return of "Old Sparky," New York State's electric chair, Bob Gangi is not amused.
He quoted Churchill: "The mood and temper of the public in regard to the treatment of crime and criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilization of any country."
If so, then the public temper of our civilization is clearly for more of Old Sparky.
And Mr.
Gangi, as executive director of the Correctional Association of New York, one of the nation's earliest do-good watchdog organizations, can only groan in the minority with his risque insistence that felons are human, whatever problems of disposal they present to law abiders.
Mr.
Gangi talks of "the ignorance of history and the thirst for retribution" ruining all attempts at political debate about crime and punishment in America.


Two Acts: 'Figaro/Figaro'
THE double bill at Yale Repertory is being called "Figaro/Figaro." Sans Rossini.
Sans Mozart.
And yet, it's not so much a double bill as a, well, marriage.
For the playwright Eric Overmyer has attempted a one-night fusion in two acts of the Beaumarchais classic "The Marriage of Figaro" (1776) and what will be inevitably perceived as a sequel of sardonic but contemporary logical consequence: "Figaro Gets a Divorce" (1937) by the Hungarian playwright Odon von Horvath. (Performances begin Thursday and run through Dec. 17 at the University Theater, 222 York Street, in New Haven; 432-1234).


RUNNING LATE
Like Todd, I am a runner, a California transplant.
I've lived in various cities where I had to gauge the level of danger in the areas where I chose to run.
And I have accepted that, as a woman, there is no safe place for me to run at night.
I hate that I can't listen to music while I run.
Yet, being raped is too high a price to pay to hear a good beat while I sweat.
Night is a glorious time to be outside and work out, but I would rather rework my schedule than end up a statistic.


POP BRIEF
The London Suede: 'Dog Man Star'  Nude/Columbia CK66769; CD and cassette.


New Captain Alters Buildings Department's Course
PROFESSIONALS in construction and allied fields who have been forced to deal with a Buildings Department buried in the administration of the city's burgeoning rules for 25 years may be pardoned for skepticism when talk turns yet again to reform.
But in 10 months as Buildings Commissioner, Joel A. Miele, a civil engineer and former City Planning Commissioner from Queens, has left no doubt that change is afoot.
From a staffing standpoint, a reduction has already begun.
Marching to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's downsizing drum, the staff has already shrunk 22 percent -- to 595 employees from 758.


Mr. Motown
TO BE LOVED The Music, the Magic, the Memories of Motown: An Autobiography.
By Berry Gordy.
Illustrated. 432 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $22.95.


Wonderful Town


Maria Cunningham, Victor Bobetsky
Maria Sue Cunningham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Cunningham of Columbus, Ohio, was married yesterday to Victor Vinfon Bobetsky, a son of Marie L. Bobetsky and Victor Bobetsky, both of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
F.
Wayne Weiss performed the ceremony at Covenant Presbyterian Church in Upper Arlington, Ohio.
Mrs.
Bobetsky, 38, is a secretary in the department of speech and hearing science at Ohio State University in Columbus.
She graduated cum laude from O.S.U.


A Vietnam Sketchbook
IN PHARAOH'S ARMY Memories of the Lost War.
By Tobias Wolff. 221 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Woodall Wakes Up and Finds It's True: He's Really a 49er
If he stopped to think about where he came from and where he is now, Lee Woodall's head would probably spin off his shoulders.
How often does a football player from a small Division II school, who played three positions in college and flunked out of school for a year, come to be drafted in the next-to-last round and wind up starting at linebacker for a Super Bowl contender?
But that's exactly how things happened for Woodall, a rookie the 49ers drafted in the sixth round out of West Chester University, a Division II college outside of Philadelphia where the Eagles hold training camp.
He is the right outside linebacker for the 49ers, who play New Orleans on Monday night for a chance to clinch the National Football Conference West division.


Phoning Home
To the Editor: And then there's the phone company that has pay phones installed in the Portsmouth Abbey school in Rhode Island.
A company called Operator Assistance Network has its name on top of the bills, but the company is called American Telecom.
All Elderhostelers called home at least once from this private school in August.
Bet that was our biggest learning experience.


The Nation; New Economy Dashes Old Notions of Growth
EVERYWHERE, companies are telling the same sort of story, whose message is this: The American economy may be capable of generating more production and prosperity -- without inflation -- than either the statistics or conventional theory acknowledge.
Chase Manhattan Bank in New York is one of the storytellers.
It once had 100 data-processing centers in Europe and the United States.
There are two now, in New York and London, that turn out more work than all 100, with far fewer people, says Craig D. Goldman, Chase's chief technology officer.
If the New York center is overloaded, work is shifted to London, where the computers are idle during Europe's nighttime.
"When we need extra capacity, we can get it rapidly overseas," Mr.
Goldman said.
From 6 Seconds to 3
The Eaton Corporation's factory in Kearney, Neb., which manufactures engine valves for auto companies, also stretches production and capacity in ways the Government doesn't measure.
For Stephen R. Hardis, Eaton's vice chairman, "capacity is a very fluid kind of thing that keeps growing." Each month, Eaton gets a little more production with the same number of workers.
The packing of valves in boxes was automated recently, and the chrome-plating process was redesigned so that each valve is plated now in three seconds instead of six.


Bistro Best
CAFE DE BRUXELLES


Why Women Remain At the Back of the Bus
CARNEGIE HALL'S "WOMEN IN Jazz" concert on Thursday is one of those fine ideas, part marketing and part do-goodism, that inadvertantly underscores a deep and rarely registered problem in jazz.
The concert, which is meant to give an overview of women's contribution to jazz, will feature the music of historical figures like Mary Lou Williams along with the music of and performances by Melba Liston, Toshiko Akiyoshi, Carla Bley and Maria Schneider.
It will allow some of the better female arrangers and improvisers working in jazz to display their wares before a large audience.
Taken as a group, they yet again make the case that women can and do play the music well.
Two things are disturbing about the concert.
In its packaging, the concert implies that women need special ways of being marketed, a kind of Women's Night, suggesting that musicians, promoters and audiences haven't supported women enough.
More insidious is the lingering perception of women as anomalies in jazz.
The Carnegie Hall program is nothing less than the continued, systematic ghettoization of female performers and begs the most obvious question of all.
If these women are good enough to be featured on stage together and audiences are charged up to $55 to hear them, why aren't they good enough to appear regularly in the presence of their male peers with no reference made to their sex?


Chinese Cheetos
Cheetos, the cheesy corn puffs introduced 46 years ago, recently became the first major brand of American snack to be made in China.
In two flavors, Zesty Japanese Steak and Savory American Cream.
No cheese.
Some other findings:
1.
Chinese focus groups did not like ranch dressing, nacho, Italian pizza, Hawaiian barbecue, peanut satay, North Sea crab, chili prawn, coconut milk curry, smoked octopus, caramel and cuttlefish.


It's All in Boomer's Hands; Jets' Quarterback Is Pitching Leadership and Responsibility
Through all the championship games Boomer Esiason has played in, there was only one that his father, Norman, worried about.
It occurred years ago at East Islip High School on Long Island, and it involved baseball, not football.
With East Islip up by a run over Connetquot in extra innings and a division title at stake, young Norman (Boomer) Esiason was summoned from first base to take over the pitching chores for the final three outs.


Technology; Coast-to-Coast Radio Without Squawk or Fade
IMAGINE dozens of channels of CD-quality music of every conceivable genre, plus dozens more offering talking books and foreign language services -- all at the touch of a car radio button.
Imagine that the crystal-clear signal would be available anywhere in North America, broadcast from a satellite.
If CD Radio Inc. or any of the three other companies designing the systems have their way, such signals may start beaming earthward as early as 1998.


An Embassy Job in Moscow Would Make Any American Testy; Rudeness in Budapest
To the Editor:
While living and working in Budapest for the Soros Foundation for the last year, I had numerous occasions to visit the United States Embassy (news article, Nov. 18).
Virtually every time, I was struck by the insensitivity of United States personnel.
I witnessed verbal abuse of non-Americans and a general attitude of disdain, disrespect and indifference.


Q. &amp; A.
A Leak From the Unit Above Q I have owned a co-op in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn since 1988.
During this time I have had several problems with leaks from the apartment above into my bathroom and bedroom.
In August, I contacted the city housing department about the most recent leak.
After inspecting my apartment, they notified the building's co-op board of the situation.
Damage from the leak has made my bathroom unsafe, unsanitary and unsightly.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEONARD BERNSTEIN  A Life. By Meryle Secrest. Knopf, $30.


The Reeves Ego
To the Sports Editor:
Dan Reeves is a dinosaur who should go the way of Mike Ditka and others who think that the power of personality is the first, necessary step to winning football.
We see such grim, myopic obsession too often in little league parents.
It's too much to stomach in the National Football League: just ask John Elway.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Denny's changed its policy only in response to the lawsuits brought against it.
If no one had challenged the restaurant, it would still be business as usual.
I cannot, therefore, eat at Denny's, and I am a white American.
The incident tells a lot about content of character or the lack of it.
CHRISTINA BRUNI Staten Island


The World -- The New Trade Treaty; A Quick Ramble in a Thicket of Rules
IT'S a scary thing, this GATT, if only because its name sounds so unfriendly and its details are so obscure.
The treaty sets new rules for international commerce by revising the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
It is so enormous that President Clinton needed 4,004 pages to explain to Congress what he was asking it to pass, with no amendments allowed.
The number of people who have read, and understood, all those pages is no doubt small.


Where Every Bar, It Seems, Must Have a Hook
ONE place has a psychic available for consultation at all times.
Another serves tequila shots down chutes carved from blocks of ice.
A third is filled with garbage.
The theme bar is the new theme of the Upper East Side bar scene.
Over the last several years, First and Second Avenues have become a bit of a fallen Disneyworld.


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
The Swan Princess  Animated, with the voices of Sandy Duncan, John Cleese and Jack Palance Directed by Richard Rich G 95 minutes


Raising a Chimp in a Suburban Setting
THE experiment was a great success, but all the participants were devasted, and the subject died soon afterward.
When an ambitious scientist diverges from his customary objectivity and loses his way in a jungle of human emotions the repercussions are profound for himself and his family.
"A matter of love" is how Jane Orttung today describes the preternatural relationship between her father, the explorer and mammologist Henry Raven, and her sometimes "sister" Meshie, who would obey no one else but him.
This singular child, as loved and loving as any other growing to adolescence in the Long Island suburbs, rode tricycles and a kiddie car, played with the neighborhood children, indulged at ice-cream parties, went sledding and splashed about in a backyard pool.
Meshie, however, was anything but a regular child; she was a chimpanzee.


After Years of Talk, Trade Pact Now Awaits Congressional Fate
It may be the most confounding acronym in American foreign policy: GATT, shorthand for a vast international trade agreement that has been negotiated for so long that the founder of one of the world's great trading centers, Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, once called it the General Agreement to Talk and Talk.
In the coming week, the talking about the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade will yield to decision-making.
Congress, meeting in a lame-duck session that initially threatened to be the setting of the first power struggle between the Clinton Administration and a Republican opposition that will be in the Capitol Hill majority come January, is to vote up or down on a sweeping, 124-nation overhaul of GATT.


Lost in Yonkers? An Olds Option Could Be a Guide
TIRED of trying to unfold, read and refold road maps in heavy traffic while looking for an unfamiliar location?
Oldsmobile is offering navigational help for buyers of 1995 Eighty Eight models in the form of Guidestar, a computerized system that calculates the most efficient route to a destination and provides visual and audio information on how to get there.
The help does not come cheap.
Guidestar is currently a $1,995 dealer-installed option in California, the only place where the highway data base is sufficiently complete to permit full operation of the system.
Olds plans to introduce Guidestar next month in the Michigan-Illinois-Indiana region, and coverage of the New York-New Jersey-Connecticut-Rhode Island area is expected by early 1995.
All of the United States is due for inclusion by the first quarter of 1996.


From Photographer to Historian
In 1958, Jacques Lowe was a fairly inexperienced 26-year-old photographer when he met the young Senator John F. Kennedy, and almost without realizing it found himself a member of a campaign in those early days when few people bothered to turn out for Kennedy appearances.
Only slowly, he recalls, did he come to realize that "we" were running for President.
The 1960 election won, J.F.K. asked Lowe to stick around and record his Administration.
Given carte blanche to roam the White House, Mr.
Lowe amassed, in the end, some 40,000 negatives of the Camelot years, what he calls "the most complete photographic record of any Administration in American history" in his selection of these shots, JFK REMEMBERED (Random House, $37.50).
His commentary, witty and just a bit offbeat, accompanies stunning photographs, some familiar, some never before published.
Mr.
Lowe lends a new dimension to some of the era's most historic moments: the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Bay of Pigs discussions, the Paris meeting with Charles de Gaulle when the French leader used every ruse to keep the photographer away, the Khrushchev summit in Vienna with the Russian leader totally charmed by Mrs.
Kennedy while the President looked miserable with Mrs.
Khrushchev.
Always at Kennedy's heels, the photographer was inevitably drawn into the private moments; the President insisted that Mr.
Lowe take pictures of his daughter, Caroline, knowing that her mother did not want the children photographed.
We have finally a personal retrospective on Kennedy history, private and public.
In his foreword, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. writes that he recognized in Lowe a fellow historian "with a passion to record actualities -- not to reconstruct for the sake of a prettier photograph." LYNN KARPEN


Zurich
Zurich's lucrative function as one of the world's financial crossroads may suggest it is nothing more than a place for nursing numerous anonymous bank accounts.
Yet this rich city of 360,000 residents boasts great cultural wealth as well: an ambitious opera house, many concerts and interesting theater.
Its Kunsthaus is internationally renowned, principally as a trove of modern art, and a score of other museums also deserve visits.


No Headline
"I talked to some of my religious customers. I asked them, 'What are you going to do different this year, guys?' They told me, 'We're going to eat our regular thing on Thanksgiving, our regular thing on Hanukkah, and if there is any cranberry sauce left, we will put it on our latkes.' SAUL ZABAR, describing one solution to a crowded holiday week.  [ 49:3. ]


Racing Stripes at the Ready


Josh White Liked It, Too
To the Editor:
Eric Weisbard's discussion of the folk song variously called "In the Pines," "Where Did You Sleep Last Night?" and "Black Girl"  [ "A Simple Song That Lives Beyond Time," Nov. 13 ]  omitted an important contributor to the song's endurance.
The folk singer and guitarist Josh White established a career as a cabaret performer well before the popular folk revival inspired by Pete Seeger and the Weavers.
White's rendition of "Black Girl" gained far more notice than any of the other early versions.
Playing on the song's theme of duplicity, White infused it with heavy irony and adopted it as a signature song.
JOHN SWINTON  State College, Pa.


Facile Versifying
To the Editor:
Regarding Linda Gregerson's review of John Ashbery's "And the Stars Were Shining (Oct. 23): Again we are treated to panegyrics -- "national treasure," "part of a larger provisionality," etc., etc. This championing of Mr. Ashbery -- a facile versifier at best and an overrated verbal meanderer at worst -- is simply unsupportable. Why isn't it obvious that this writer writes the equivalent of cotton candy? Bite, swallow and there's nothing there.
Having read Mr.
Ashbery and having come to the aforementioned candy conclusion, I thought that listening to him read his own work would show me what I was missing, and as director of the International Poetry Forum I invited him to Pittsburgh some years ago.
Mr.
Ashbery in person gave me the same impression as he did on the page.
Here was seemingly sophisticated dullness raised to new heights.
Why then this cavalcade of praise for such an opaque writer when there are poets like Galway Kinnell, W. S. Merwin, Mona Van Duyn, Linda Pastan, Hayden Carruth, Derek Walcott, Seamus Heaney, Barton Sutter, Brendan Galvin, Peter Makuck, Philip Levine, Charles Causely, Philip Booth, Miller Williams and Naomi Shihav Nye -- writers of genuine talent and vision with something to say -- unignorably among us?
I have heard Mr.
Ashbery's prominence attributed to everything from another example of the tale of the emperor's new clothes to the influence of a friendly cabal on the East Coast.
Who knows and who cares?
The result is that we have pseudo-poetry passed off as the real thing.
SAMUEL HAZO Pittsburgh


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CONSIDERING SUBURBIA
Connecticut's suburbs and the towns that have become or are becoming suburbs with the spread of development will be the subject of a conference called "Between City and Country: Preservation and the Suburbs," to be held by the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation on Wednesday in Waterbury.
This will be the first time that the suburbs have been considered by the trust as a focus for preservation.
Examination of the issue has revealed concern for the loss of many small town Main Street environments and the construction of megastores in rural areas where they tend to alter the character of the landscape.


A 19-Year-Old Carries the Hopes of a Culture
The promoter Julio Pabon would like to sign Felipe Lopez to a contract with his company, Latino Sports.
Coach Brian Mahoney would like Lopez to lift him from coach class to first class.
And the scout Jim Thomas would like to squint through the Lopez limelight to spot something about one of his St.
John's teammates that might someday help the Toronto Raptors.
It is far too early in the season to cast Pabon, Mahoney and Thomas as three wise men bringing gifts to a child who will save them or as the protagonists in the Chaucerian tale of three robbers finding treasure.
But the saga has clearly begun, and in a time when multiculturalism and shoe dreams are scrambling under the same hoop, it is a saga worth following, especially when the subject has a Magic Johnson smile and is willing to declare himself a role model.


HOW I GAVE UP MY ALIAS
Her 26-year marriage ends in divorce and the issue of dropping her married name "overshadowed all others"?
Personally, I would have thought that other things -- the effect of the divorce on her daughters, her own financial security, the prospect of life alone or with another partner -- would have loomed somewhat larger.
When will women stop exaggerating the importance of superficial issues?
BARBARA S. KARNI Baltimore


Taking the Measure of Death
QUEER AND LOATHING Rants and Raves of a Raging AIDS Clone.
By David B. Feinberg. 275 pp.
New York: Viking. $22.95.


The Red Menace, Courtesy of the Cineplex
"What a horrible day!" says Nancy, recovering from her fifth suicide attempt and looking out her apartment window at what passes for bad weather in Havana.
"Yes," says her neighbor Diego, a gay man with attitude.
"But health care and education are free."
Foreign films often provide glimpses of a coutry's politics.
American audiences have seen such glimpses of Communism in films like "The Granes Are Flying" (Russia, 1957) and "Memories of Underdevelopment" (Cuba, 1968), from Tomas Gutierrez Alez.


Laurie B. Milder, Robert Firestone
Laurie Beth Milder, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Milder of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Robert Jonas Firestone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Firestone, also of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Joel M. Finkelstein will perform the ceremony at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue in Manhattan.
The bride is the special counsel to the New York City Bar Association.
She graduated from Brooklyn College and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a cardiologist at the Sephardic Home for the Aged in Brooklyn and a clinical assistant professor of medicine at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
Her mother, Hilda Milder, is a painter and poet.


Lopez Gets A's for His Second Effort
Contrary to published reports, the Felipe Lopez era at St.
John's didn't begin with Friday night's season-opening victory over Dartmouth.
That was just a bad warm-up act.
The first real Lopez sighting worth remembering actually occurred with 15 minutes 47 seconds left in the second half of yesterday's championship game of the 20th annual Joe Lapchick Tournament.
That's when Lopez brought a sold-out crowd at Alumni Hall to its feet by displaying the first true evidence of a mega-talent ready to explode.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
While I understand your reasons for choosing the cover photo depicting four spike-wearing, cigarette-smoking students, dyed hair blowing in the breeze, apparently beamed up to Vermont from Avenue A, I believe that you have done a disservice to the Bennington College community by visually misrepresenting us.
And your cover line, "Reality Bites," is the title of a mediocre film that portrays my generation as a trendy, unimaginative, lazy and consumeristic lot who are interested only in sponging off our parents, watching television and smoking -- hardly an accurate description of Bennington students.


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
Star Trek Generations  Patrick Stewart, William Shatner, Malcolm McDowell Directed by David Carson PG 118 minutes


Caveats On Firms In 2 States
AFTER Tony Warren invented a product that he called "the soap handle," he looked for a company that would market his invention.
Answering an ad by International Product Design, Mr.
Warren called a toll-free 800 telephone number.
He received a welcome letter, inventor's kit, glossy brochure and confidential-disclosure agreement.


Phoenix Edges San Antonio as Barkley Returns
Suns 111, Spurs 108
Charles Barkley of Phoenix, activated off the injured list before the game, scored 10 of his 23 points in the fourth quarter as the Suns outlasted the visiting San Antonio Spurs by 111-108 last night.


RUNNING LATE
Todd says that she will continue to run because you cannot hide from violence.
Has it occurred to her to use some of the energy she expends running eight miles a day to advocate for safer running areas?
FELICE R. KOBRICK Searingtown, L.I.


BEST SELLERS: November 27, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
39
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
6
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
3
3
23
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
4
13
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
6
3
THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote themselves to solving crimes.
6
5
8
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
7
7
5
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
8
1
THE CRYSTAL STAR, by Vonda N. McIntyre. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A "Star Wars" novel in which Princess Leia tracks the kidnappers of her children.
9*
8
5
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
10
11
10
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
11
9
120
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
12
1
DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful Government agency.
13
13
18
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
14
1
GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A 1981 novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist from Texas.
15
10
9
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II.
Edited by Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to other faiths.
2
2
4
THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence affect American life.
3
3
12
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
5
8
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
5
6
9
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
6
8
7
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
9
11
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
8
4
4
NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker. (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J.
Simpson as remembered by a friend.
9
7
7
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
10
10
49
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
11
5
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like overpopulation, famine and plague.
12
12
38
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
13
1
STRANGE JUSTICE, by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) An account of the nomination and confirmation of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
14*
14
7
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
15*
8
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
79
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
31
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
4
9
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
3
6
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Ways to cope with life's problems.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR, by David Grossman. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A dark and stunning Israeli novel whose protagonist, a post-Freudian little boy, forestalls the treasons and corruptions of adulthood by ceasing to grow at the age of 11.
CORELLI'S MANDOLIN, by Louis de Bernieres. (Pantheon, $24.) A high-spirited historical romance about events on a Greek island, mostly during World War II, when Italians and Germans occupy the place and try to control it.
FAMILY, by Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) An extraordinary history of an ordinary family, in which the author plays the roles of gossip, pedant and loyal member, yielding a reunion strangers are welcome -- and fortunate -- to attend.
FEELING THE SPIRIT: Searching the World for the People of Africa, by Chester Higgins Jr. (Bantam, $50.) Wonderfully evocative images of Africans and their descendants everywhere, by a staff photographer at The New York Times.
THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr.
Frey examines the myth of deliverance through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional sports.
LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and generals hints at restlessness with his own art.
THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M.
Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.
SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton, by Linda Gray Sexton. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An intimate account of growing up the daughter of a mad, child-abusing, suicidal, brilliant poet, and of resolving such an upbringing from the inside out.
SHADOWS OF THE MIND: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness, by Roger Penrose. (Oxford University, $25.) Mr.
Penrose's assertion that only a new physics will explain mental life has been questioned, but he produces a fine introduction to quantum mechanics and what he thinks is wrong with it.
THIS YEAR IN JERUSALEM, by Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $23.) An engaging novelist's report on his youth as a Zionist and his travels in Israel, ventures that leave him content to be a Canadian.
UNDER MY SKIN: Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949, by Doris Lessing. (HarperCollins, $25.) A remarkable life in Britain's declining African empire, told by a novelist who has never conceded anything to political, psychological or literary fashion.


How He Kept 'Em in Stitches
AT THE HEIGHT OF Richard Pryor's fame in the late 1970's, he was the undisputed king of stand-up comedy.
Considered a genius by many, he was recognized for his brilliance even by those who were offended by the content and candor of much of his material.
But his near death by fire, his several heart attacks and the gradually disabling effects of multiple sclerosis have almost ended his career as an active comic performer.
In his absence since the early 80's, some outstanding black comedians have emerged.
Eddie Murphy, Whoopi Goldberg and, more recently, Martin Lawrence top the list of those who dominate the field.
Others, like Damon and Keenen Ivory Wayans, Sinbad, Marcia Warfield, George Wallace, Robin Harris and the up-and-coming Dave Chappelle and Paul Mooney, have also carved out respectable niches as comedians.
And, of course, the legendary and indefatigable Bill Cosby remains a formidable comic presence, largely through his popular television series "The Cosby Show," which is now in syndication.


Danya M. Rogers, Evan S. Cohan
Danya Merrill Rogers, the daughter of Lydia S. Rogers Freifeld of Nyack, N.Y., and Bruce A. Rogers of Grandview, N.Y., was married on Wednesday to Evan Scott Cohan, the son of Charlotte D. Cohan of New City, N.Y., and the late Albert I. Cohan.
Rabbi David E. Fass officiated at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Cohan, 28, is an area sales manager in Port Washington, L.I., for Hoffman-LaRoche Inc., the pharmaceuticals manufacturer.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo and is studying for a master's degree in psychology at Hunter College.


When Shaped Like a Basketball, the World Is Her Oyster
As girls' basketball has changed, so have the girls themselves.
In the 1950's, girls' basketball was like a hand-cranked silent movie.
Very slow and very jerky.
A girl dribbled twice, and then stopped, looking around like a frightened deer.
If someone ran toward her, she dropped the ball.


New High School Is a Study in Green
From the composting of cafeteria waste in the basement to the roofing made of recycled tires, the High School for Environmental Studies is living up to its name.
The school, which started at the old Stuyvesant High in 1992, moved this fall to its permanent home in a three-building complex at 444 West 56th Street.
Practicing what it teaches, the school set an earth-friendly example in designing the $23 million renovation of the buildings, formerly a 20th Century Fox studio and headquarters.


Park Slope Experiment Takes Recycling to Its Outer Limits
How much trash are New Yorkers capable of recycling?
If the experience of about 6,000 families in Park Slope, Brooklyn, is any indication, there is virtually no limit.


Marni P. Stiftel, Jonathan Frankel
Marni Paula Stiftel, a daughter of Fredrick and Helaine Stiftel of Wayside, N.J. was married last evening to Jonathan Joshua Frankel, the son of Eric and Lynn Frankel of Ocean, N.J.
Rabbi Jacob Friedman performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Frankel, 25, is a budget analyst for the District of Columbia.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in public policy from Georgetown University.
Her parents own Walton Management Serices, a management consulting concern in Ocean.


Hair Line
Where everyone's on the same wavelength.


The World; Who Can Save Arafat? Arafat.
YASIR ARAFAT is in trouble.
Yes, you've heard that Jeremiad before.
But this time there is a twist.
In the past, somebody else always saved Mr.
Arafat when he was tottering on the brink -- the Russians, the Saudis, the Lebanese Muslims, the Jews, the United Nations, the world media, or simply Lady Luck.
But this time things are different, because this time the only one who can save Mr.
Arafat is himself.
A lot of governments are now asking what they can do to rescue Mr.
Arafat, and they will be meeting in Brussels next week to discuss just that.
No doubt, the Israelis can help him.
The United States, the Europeans and the World Bank, too.
And they will have to help.


At Work; A Plan Even Democrats Could Love
THINK "harmonic convergence" and what images materialize?
Mount Shasta at dawn perhaps.
Druids and Californians in saffron robes humming the Windham Hill backlist.
Imaginative would be the person who immediately thought, "Ah, employment policy, ah, enlightenment."
Yet scholarship and the Zeitgeist did converge recently in the Republican landslide and the near simultaneous publication of a proposal to overhaul workplace law, leaving two bemused policy experts unexpectedly enjoying a world-historical moment.
They are Edward E. Potter and Judith A. Youngman, authors of "Keeping America Competitive: Employment Policy for the 21st Century" (Glenbridge Publishing, $27.95), a compendious excursion through employment law that was surely destined only for the seminar tables of policy Washington until the people spoke on Nov. 8.


Pro-Russia Rebels Enter Chechyna Capital
The civil war in the secessionist Russian republic of Chechnya intensified today as rebels seeking to overthrow the Government entered the capital city and attacked the presidential palace with tanks.
There were conflicting reports on the extent of the rebels' advance.
Both the Government and the opposition claimed to be in control of the Government's headquarters.


Jill A. Freeberg, James M. Gartenberg
Jill Ann Freeberg, the daughter of Frank and Ferne Freeberg of Melville, L.I., was married last evening to James Michael Gartenberg, the son of Irving and Lois Gartenberg of New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at the Tam O'Shanter Golf Club in Brookville, L.I.


The Widow Gets Her Verdict
ON LABOR DAY MORNING, Myrlie Evers, 61, widow of Medgar Evers, the slain civil rights legend, stood on a platform in Jackson, Miss., and cut ribbons dedicating the Medgar Wiley Evers Post Office Building.
A church choir sang "He's So Wonderful." Mississippi politicians, black and white, made speeches.
Two blocks away, Byron De La Beckwith, 73, who was convicted in February of the Evers murder in 1963, sat at the Hinds County Detention Center.
"I chuckled at the thought that the jail was so close," Myrlie Evers said after the festivities.
She is a handsome woman, tall, with a spark in her chestnut eyes.
"I hope he heard everything," she went on.
"I want him to understand how much he's motivated me all this time."
The journey that brought Myrlie Evers to this sweet moment of justice took her 31 years to complete.
In June 1963, her husband, the field secretary of the Mississippi N.A.A.C.P., was gunned down in front of the family home in Jackson.
The killing was among the first of that decade's political assassinations and a turning point in the civil rights movement.
President John Kennedy dedicated his ground-breaking civil rights legislation to Evers's memory.
Within days of the funeral, Byron De La Beckwith, a white supremacist, was charged for the first time with the murder.
He was tried twice in 1964; both times, all-white juries deadlocked, creating mistrials.
Though strong evidence linked Beckwith to the killing, and though he himself dropped hints of involvement, the Hinds County prosecutor eventually dismissed the murder charges.


For Giants and Skins, Something's Not Right
Giants-Redskins was once one of the most heated rivalries in football.
Joe Gibbs and Bill Parcells were roaming the sidelines.
John Riggins was playing behind the Hogs.
Lawrence Taylor sent Joe Theismann's life into an entirely different direction with a crushing hit.
John Madden would roll up in his cruiser to the stadium and help broadcast the game.
Now, Madden would probably just as soon take the bus to a Washington Bullets game and watch Chris Webber dunk a basketball than go to today's Giants-Redskins clash at R.F.K.
Stadium.


Sound Bytes; Sybase's Quiet, Steady Hand
IN the software industry, where flamboyant chief executives like Bill Gates of Microsoft and Larry Ellison of Oracle garner much of the attention, Mark Hoffman has studiously avoided the limelight.
The quiet and unassuming West Point graduate and former triathlete has nonetheless built one of the fastest-growing software companies in the world as chairman and chief executive of Sybase Inc., an Emeryville, Calif. data base software maker.
With the acquisition this month of Powersoft, the leading client-server application development tool company, Sybase became the seventh-largest software company in the world, with revenues expected to surpass $1 billion in 1995.
Mr.
Hoffman, who engineered the $940 million deal, cofounded Sybase in 1984 (with Robert Epstein) after brief stints at Amdahl and Britton-Lee.


Three Patients Are Missing After Escapes at Psychiatric Hospital
Two patients at the Kingsboro State Psychiatric Center in Brooklyn escaped through an unlocked ward door on Friday, state officials said yesterday, and four others failed to return after spending Thanksgiving Day with their families on day passes.
Three of the six were still unaccounted for yesterday afternoon, said Robert Spoor, a spokesman for the State Department of Mental Health, including a man who was being held involuntarily for observation after a sexual assault charge.


Bruce L. Campbell, Cannon L. Quigley
Cannon Louise Quigley, a daughter of Lynn and Leonard V. Quigley of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Bruce Loren Campbell, the son of Rilla and Larry E. Campbell of Riverside, Calif.
The Rev.
Edward Scharfenberger performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mr. and Mrs.
Campbell, both 27, received their law degrees from Harvard University and are associates in the law firm of O'Melveny &amp; Myers, she in Los Angeles and he in Newport Beach, Calif.
The bride graduated from Stanford University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bridegroom graduated cum laude from Princeton University.


Fall Cleaning for a Better Spring Show
IT'S time.
Cleanup of the garden should be well under way.
End-of-the-season tending helps make the spring garden spectacular.
All those reminders of the previous year will be gone.
The bulbs, trees and early wildflowers can have the scene all to themselves.
A proper fall season tidy-up also reduces wintering hideouts for many insects, which like to snuggle down in garden debris.
Some insects also lay their eggs in plant detritus and removal of it makes their reappearance less likely.


A Fuel Tank In Projects Raises Fears
For six months, a fuel tank has sat outside the Bland Houses.
Over the summer, said residents at the Flushing housing project, children climbed atop the 13-foot-high tank and, after prying open a trapdoor and soaking rags inside, they coated one building's lobby with oil.
Last week, one of the tank's pipes broke and spewed oil for several hours before it was repaired.
Many residents believe the latest incident was caused by vandalism, said George Gardner, who has lived for 27 years in the project.
And now the onset of winter has raised residents' fears that freezing temperatures will burst more pipes, endangering passersby and leaving hundreds of apartments without heat or hot water.


Jet Evacuated After a Threat
Forty-two passengers were evacuated from a Delta Air Lines jet at La Guardia Airport yesterday after officials received a bomb threat from a caller who identified the flight by number, a Port Authority official said.
The passengers were taken off the plane, flight 792, and asked to claim their luggage at about 7:45 P.M., said Gwen Williams, a Port Authority spokeswoman.


'The Size of the World,' By a New Playwright
THE Penguin Rep, the gutsiest little theater just north of New Jersey, is wrapping up its 17th season with a new play, "The Size of the World," by a new playwright, Chuck Evered.
Having primed a loyal audience for the risks and rewards of what might be called potluck theater, Joe Brancato, the artistic director, keeps on presenting plays that nobody -- well, hardly anybody -- has ever heard of.
Except for a random anomaly like "Love Letters," which opened the season with alternating performers.


Nov. 20-26: A Revolution Stalls; Berlusconi Is in Trouble, Politically and Otherwise, And So Is His Country
Italy's Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, the tycoon-turned-politician who promised his land a revolution of prosperity and clean dealing, is in trouble.
Last week, only eight months after the won power as the harbinger of a new Italy, the country's crusading magistrates told him that he was under investigation for corruption.
And this week, unless he is able to reach some last-minute compromise, the labor unions are threatening a general strike to protest budget cuts, further underscoring the difficulties of beating Italy's debt-ridden economy into any kind of shape.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
On the Open 'Road'
THOSE who like to put their pedals to the metal will appreciate how Stuart Hayim of Kings Point spends his spare time.
Imagine, he says, finding a piece of open road on Long Island. (Imagining may be the only way to accomplish that feat.)
As you start to speed, you're surrounded by 50 other drivers doing the same.
And every five seconds the cars hit giant speed bumps.
"All you can do is steer," he said, "while your passenger keeps the gas pedal to the floor."


Nov. 20-26: New Missions in Mind; Reservists and Guardsmen May Get Bigger Roles
One weekend a month and two weeks a year, often at the local armory.
That's what the annual drill routine has been for the one million members of the National Guard and Reserves.
But under a plan approved by Defense Secretary William J. Perry and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, many of the nation's weekend warriors would serve in several peacetime jobs now performed by active-duty forces.


Nov. 20-26; 80 Years Old? Say It Ain't So, Joe!
The words in the song voice this yearning: "Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio, a nation turns its lonely eyes to you."
We know the answer to the first: Joe in fact is here, still with us, because on Friday he celebrated his 80th birthday.
But while he has not played a baseball game in 43 years, the nation still turns its lonely eyes to him, or to what he symbolizes: excellence, elegance, goodness and, to be sure, gentleness.


World Markets; Eastern Europe as a Reasonable Risk
A YEAR ago investing in Eastern Europe was the craze.
A flood of foreign capital moved into these emerging free-market economies and pushed stocks to euphoric levels.
Poland's stock market, for example, rose more than 800 percent in 1993.
Hungary's market was up 200 percent in February of this year over a year earlier.
Then reality set in, with rising interest rates, profit taking and a flight of capital from these risky, barely regulated markets.
Since March investors have seen values plunge.
Hungarian stocks are off 30 percent.
Polish shares are down 57 percent from their March peaks, and the Czech stock market index has lost 35 percent.


Everglades Now Suffers Water Excess
Duane Osceola stood on the reservation dock here, boot deep in water, as he prepared to launch an airboat into the Everglades.
"Not all my life I haven't seen this much water," said Mr.
Osceola, a 20-year-old Seminole who is a land surveyor for the Miccosukee tribe.


Getting Angles
To the Sports Editor:
Being a motor racing fan, I have found it difficult at times during the Formula One season to find timely reports.
Joseph Siano's articles the last two weeks have not only been timely but they offered an interesting angle: contrasting Michael Schumacher's successful bid for the championship despite penalties and suspensions with Damon Hill in close pursuit of his father's legend.
MICHAEL CARABETTA  San Francisco


From Art Deco Chrome to Indian Eatery
EVIDENCE of the organic changes that occur in a city is the metamorphosis of the Elm City Diner, a longtime New Haven landmark, into an Indian restaurant called Tandoor.
Everything that endeared the downtown site to Art Deco fans is still in place: the gleaming chrome and glass interior, the booths (now covered with pink tablecloths and Indian designs under glass) and the diner configuration.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
I read with disgust your article about the discrimination encountered by many black Americans at various Denny's restaurants.
But I have to admit to mixed emotions when defending their "right" to be served the kind of fat-and-cholesterol-laden platter depicted on your cover.
To eat such a meal is to pay dearly indeed for the right to be served.
Our minds don't necessarily conform to "The Bell Curve." Our bodies shouldn't either.
DANIEL CADY Ann Arbor, Mich.


Nov. 20-26; Amber Tsunamis of Grain


Happy Hanukkah? A Guide for the Perplexed.
HANUKKAH begins tonight at sundown.
It almost slipped past me this year, so soon after Turkey Day, almost a month before Gift Day.
Even when the calendar isn't playing tricks, Hanukkah is confusing, one of those holidays that tend to induce a spot of seasonal existential angst in secularized New York Jews.
I called my kids.
They refused to be interviewed.
Then could I at least say, I said, that this was their way of loading on new guilt for old gelt?
One of them said I couldn't even say that until she had her own major media outlet in which to reply.


Nov. 20-26; Paying Germans to Have Germans
Many experts believe that over-population is one of the greatest threats facing humanity and the earth on which we live.
Governments around the world are seeking ways to stop population explosions that threaten to overwhelm their economies and social structures.
Germans, however, have precisely the opposite concern.
Women have all but stopped having children, especially in states carved from the former East Germany.
The birth rate in Brandenburg has fallen by more than two-thirds since 1989 -- the state had 38,000 births that year, 12,000 last year -- and the drops in other eastern German states are almost as dramatic.


GOOD EATINGThe West Village: An Ethnic Harvest
CARIBE + (212) 255-9191; 117 Perry Street, near Greenwich Street; $; no credit cards


RECORD BRIEFS
Arnold: Symphonies Nos. 7, 8  Royal Philharmonic conducted by Vernon Handley.
Conifer Classics 74321-15005-2; CD.


Nice Knees
As the advertisements for the Hospital for Special Surgery show, you can have surgery and still be sexy.
Real patients posed for the striking series of three print ads, each of which shows a joint that was reconstructed this year at the hospital in Manhattan.
The two women (the one with the knee is in her late 30's and the one with the hip in her mid 40's) are attractive enough to be good advertisements for cosmetic surgery.
The man in his mid 60's looks so-so.
Why is a hospital that specializes in orthopedic surgery running sexy ads?
Kathleen McGovern, director of marketing, says the market is "more competitive" than ever, although the sexiness was unintended.


Camp in Northern Minnesota a Haven for the Deer Hunter
Orion's belt was low in the southwest when I awakened a few hours before dawn and wandered outside, barefoot on the frost-covered stubble surrounding our deer camp.
Back inside, I debated whether to lie back down for the half hour that remained before all hands would be stirring.
Being somewhat past the age when one vibrates with excitement on the opening day of the hunting season, I chose the sack.
"Camp" is something of a misnomer for the establishment in which my companions and I spent a week in this thinly-populated section of northern Minnesota.
A large house trailer owned by David Tilton of Rye, N.H., and located in a field beside a small river, our accommodation can sleep nine in a pinch and has a full range of gas and electrical appliances, including a gas furnace and a microwave oven.
Water is toted in jerry cans from an ever-flowing artesian well 60 yards away, and the oversized and heated outhouse is equipped with a warm-water shower.


Spain's Olive Growers Seek Their Day in the Sun - in the U.S.
THIS provincial Spanish town, snug at the base of a mountaintop medieval castle, likes to think of itself as the Riyadh of olive oil.
Fields hereabouts that the Spanish poet Antonio Machado once described as "a sea of olive trees" -- there are 52 million of them, spread over 1.2 million acres -- yield fully 22 percent of the world's olive oil.
So Jaen's olive growers cannot understand why they are being pushed around by the likes of France, Italy and Greece.


It Costs Taxpayers Plenty to Police the World
To the Editor:
"Taxpayers Are Angry" (Week in Review, Nov. 20), on why major budget cuts cannot be made without hitting the middle class, omits a large issue.
The Defense Department budget is some $250 billion this year, down perhaps 15 to 20 percent.


Correction
An article on Oct. 30 about living in Florham Park, N.J., referred incorrectly to the tax status of property used by the Sisters of Charity of St.
Elizabeth.
The religious order pays taxes on part of the property used by the College of St.
Elizabeth and the Academy of St.
Elizabeth.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BEHIND THE PLAYDOUGH CURTAIN  A Year in My Life  as a Preschool Teacher.
By Patti Greenberg Wollman.
Scribners, $21.


From Diversity Come Struggles
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING THAT EVERYONE who is not an American Indian is an immigrant or the descendant of one, so it can scarcely be denied that this country has been immeasurably enriched by the diverse groups of people that have populated it.
Think of the artists who have been immigrants: Albert Bierstadt, Thomas Cole, Arshile Gorky, Willem de Kooning and Louise Bourgeois, among others, and among photographers, Timothy O'Sullivan, Eadweard Muybridge, Jacob Riis (who was so poor at one point that he lived on the street), Robert Frank.
These few came from the acceptable places -- Great Britain, northern and central Europe (although Gorky, an Armenian, barely qualified) -- and made their way up mainstream paths.


April H. Fleisher, Jordan W. Eckert
April Hope Fleisher, a daughter of Elaine Fleisher of Brooklyn and Harvey Fleisher of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Dr.
Jordan William Eckert, a son of Rhoda and Dr.
Bertram Eckert, also of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Melvin Burg officiated at Kingsway Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
The bride, 28, is a physical therapist at Healthwest Regional Medical Center in Phoenix.
She received bachelor's degrees from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and New York University.


HOW TO GET A MAN PREGNANT
LAST WEDNESDAY, "JUNIOR," THE NEW MOVIE STARRING Arnold Schwarzenegger, opened in theaters around the country.
The film centers on the experiences of Dr.
Alex Hesse (played by Schwarzenegger), a scientist who has developed a wonder drug, called Expectane, that insures healthy pregnancies.
The crux of the movie is that when Hesse loses financing for his research, he has a fertilized egg implanted in his body, takes his own wonder drug and becomes pregnant.
From a scientific point of view, the plot of "Junior" is preposterous.
You don't need a science-fiction drug.
You may not need any kind of drug at all.
We have all the technology we need right now to make a man pregnant.
In fact, we had it all nine years ago, and we almost used it.
MY ADVENTURE IN MALE PREGNANCY BEGAN WITH A KINSEY INSTITUTE symposium in 1984.
At that meeting, John Money, a professor of medical psychology and pediatrics at Johns Hopkins University, and Roger Gorski, a professor of anatomy and cell biology at U.C.L.A.
Medical School, discussed technology that was already in place to create in a man the hormonal milieu of a pregnant woman.
I joined forces with another writer, Kathleen McAuliffe, and we researched and wrote an article that ran in Omni magazine, the gist of which was that there was no insurmountable biological or technical barrier to a man carrying a baby to term.


The Devil Is Tough, But Cigar Is Tougher
Devil His Due gave his farewell performance in his typical, driving way when he ran the 38th and final race of his career yesterday at Aqueduct.
But he was upstaged by a long shot named Cigar, who not only outran the great son of Devil's Bag but also beat him by seven lengths in the N.Y.R.A.
Mile.
Cigar?
On a track filled with star older horses, he buried them all: the Devil, who ran second; American Chance, fourth; Brunswick, fifth; Itaka, seventh; Storm Tower, eighth; Bertrando, 10th, and Harlan, 11th.
It was only the second time in 15 months that Cigar had made the winner's circle, and only the third time in his career.
But after he was switched from grass racing to the dirt last month, he won an allowance race by eight lengths and he came back to beat some big ones yesterday by seven.


Phoning Home
To the Editor: This summer I called Rhode Island directory assistance twice from a pay phone at Crane Beach, Mass., north of Boston.
The Oncor phone company charged me approximately $10 for these two calls.
Shocked at this amount, I checked with the Trustees of Reservations, the nonprofit group that operates the beach, a group for which I have great respect.
Peter J. Pinciaro, the superintendent of the beach, responded that the long-distance carrier at the beach phones had always been AT&amp;T.
After my letter, Mr.
Pinciaro wrote, he called his AT&amp;T representative and learned that AT&amp;T had received a computer-generated communication from Oncor shifting long-distance service at the beach to Oncor.
Mr.
Pinciaro said this did not have his approval and Crane Beach was switched back to AT&amp;T on Sept. 15, he wrote.


Sports of The Times; In College Basketball, The Mind Games Begin
JOHN CALIPARI has a theory, which he telegraphs with a wink and a smile, just in case you're a little slow.
When you open your season against the defending national champions, it's only a big game if. . . .
But let his players tell you.
"What do I always say?" Calipari asked a trio of his University of Massachusetts players late Friday.
"It's only a big game if. . . .' "


Resorts Revamped On Paradise Island
The piece of Paradise Island in the Bahamas that once belonged to Merv Griffin -- about 80 percent of the hilly, 826-acre island, -- has undergone dramatic changes since it, along with three resorts, was purchased last May by Sol Kerzner, who built the Sun City complex in South Africa.
Next month two of the properties are scheduled to officially open, following extensive refurbishments.
The former Paradise Island Resort and Casino, renamed Atlantis, Paradise Island, is scheduled to open fully on Dec. 22.
The resort has been partly closed since last May when its $125 million refurbishment began.
The property will include a 14-acre water park with a 3-million-gallon saltwater outdoor aquarium stocked with 100 species of fish, including sharks, rays and barracuda.
There will also be fivepools, waterfalls, water slides and a quarter-mile-long "river ride." The hotel's 1,150 rooms and casino have been redone, and two new restaurants have been built, for a total of 12; one of the restaurants will be entered via a 100-foot-long clear tunnel through the aquarium.
Double rooms will be $130 to $325 a night, depending on date and location.
The Ocean Club, a 71-room resort that once belonged to Huntington Hartford, is being restored at a cost of $7.5 million and is scheduled to reopen Dec. 20.
It has been closed since October.
Double rooms will be $200 to $575 a night, and suites and villas will be $500 to $975.


What Horrifies Roaches and Grows on Trees?
THIS is the time of year when the Osage orange tree drops its fruits to the ground and people go scurrying about city parks and country roads to gather them up.
These yellow-green balls are as big as grapefruits, as bumpy as brains, a little sticky to the touch and oddly perfumed, with an astringency somewhere between those of cedar and citrus.
People love them -- because roaches hate them.
The Osage orange ball is a time-honored organic cockroach repellent.
I know because I've tried it.
I bought a few bumpy balls (for $1 apiece!) two years ago at the Union Square Greenmarket.
I was living in a roach-infested building in the Village and holding the line against exterminators bearing poisons.
Boric acid was fairly effective, but the lone survivor always seemed to scuttle across the kitchen counter just as guests arrived.


Ancient Stories Amid Candle Lighting and Spinning Tops
AT sundown today, as Hanukkah begins, Roxanne Coady will begin her usual celebration.
On each of the holiday's eight days, she will light another candle on the menorah in the window of her store, R. J. Julia Booksellers in Madison, and say a traditional prayer.
"We just do that. People outside can see it," said Mrs.
Coady.
Next Sunday afternoon she will invite people inside for a party, and on other afternoons she will invite them to smaller events featuring Hanukkah stories and traditions.
The events, geared to families, are open to all.
The party was launched in 1990, the year Mrs.
Coady opened her store.
Organizers of Madison's annual Christmas Festival and Parade -- sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce -- asked if she would have a story hour for children as part of the festival.
Mrs.
Coady said she would, but she noted that the 1990 festival occurred during Hanukkah.
"I'd also like to do Hanukkah stories and candle lighting," she said.


RUNNING LATE
Andrea Todd's reckless disregard for her own safety strikes me as fatalistic (Hers: "Running Late," Nov. 6).
Yes, violence is everywhere, and a woman is most likely to be its victim.
This is precisely why we shouldn't simply "get on with . . .  life in spite of it," anymore than we should forgo safe sex in the age of AIDS.


What's Bad for Politics Is Great for Television
WITH REPUBLICAN hopefuls already showing up in Iowa and New Hampshire, and with Democrats scrambling to position themselves for 1996, television gives signs of becoming the toxic-waste dump of politics.
Most of the criticism of the wretched campaign that the nation just endured has been directed at the candidates and their hirelings who turned out those noisome 30-second spots.
They deserve it, but negative advertising is only the tip of the sludge heap.
Television, as it has developed in the United States, is not merely a passive instrument of the cheap-shot gang.
The media manipulators are themselves controlled by the medium's conventions, and the audience is an accomplice to its own exploitation.


Commercial Property/Park Avenue; Landlords, Too, Hold Out for Mr. (or Ms.) Right
PARK AVENUE -- the very name connotes elegance.
Park Avenue doctor, Park Avenue lawyer, the Buick Park Avenue -- all are intended to convey high value at high cost.
Park Avenue landlords are not about to relinquish such name-association lightly.
And therein lies their dilemma.


IN SHORT: FICTION
OEDIPUS AT STALINGRAD  By Gregor von Rezzori. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
Existing-home sales, Oct., mils. ann. rate
3.97
3.90
Tues.
Consumer confidence index, Nov.
87.6
87.3
Wed.
G.D.P., 3d qtr., pct. change
3.4
3.5
Thur.
Construction spending, Oct., pct. chg.
1.6
0.0
Personal income, Oct., pct. chg.
0.6
0.8
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
326
325
Fri.
Unemployment rate, Nov., percent
5.8
5.8
Nonfarm payrolls, change, thous.
194
225
Leading indicators, Oct., pct. chg.
0.0
-0.1
*4*This Week's Developments
Thur.
Chain-store sales released


Saving Books From the Paper They're Printed On
"It started out as an avocation, and it became really an obsession."
Barbara Goldsmith, an author and social historian, was speaking of her 15-year crusade against acidic paper, a self-destructive menace to the written word that has caused millions of books to crumble to dust.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


New Concern for St. Clare's Future
St.
Clare's Hospital and Health Center has had a roller-coaster of a decade, pulling itself out of bankruptcy and making plans for a modern new building on Eighth Avenue.
But today, the building plans are dormant, and some hospital officials fear that the center, whose largely poor clientele includes AIDS patients, the elderly and recovering addicts, may face a greatly diminished future.
Last month, doctors, employees, unions, neighbors and patients formed the Save St.
Clare's Committee, aimed at retaining the center as a full-size, full-service community hospital.
They say they have gathered more than 50,000 signatures on petitions to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and John Cardinal O'Connor.
The state regulates hospitals, and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York owns St.
Clare's.


Giuliani Rejects City Council Budget Plan
As promised, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vetoed the City Council's alternative spending plan to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget yesterday, calling the Council's proposal "blatantly illegal" and "fiscally irresponsible."
The Council's Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, a Democrat, said immediately that the Council would override the veto, setting up a legal confrontation over whose revision of the city's $31.6 billion budget would go into effect.


Versatile Butternut Squash A Cook's Favorite Standby
OF all the varieties of hard-skinned winter squashes, butternut appears to have emerged as the cook's favorite.
And with good reason.
Within the smooth beige shell that covers this oddly shaped vegetable is dense, deep-orange flesh that is richer-tasting and less watery or stringy than most of the sturdy cold-weather squashes.
It is a versatile vegetable, good for baking as well as for cooking.
And because it holds up well at room temperature for weeks, it can be kept on hand to use whenever it is needed.


Snob Appeal
The urge to go browsing in dictionaries, which comes over me often and only when I've got something else that I ought to be doing, has been brought on lately by a book on loan from a friend -- a slim paperback, first published in Paris in 1958, called "Dictionnaire du Snobisme," edited and illustrated by Philippe Jullian.
A whimsical compilation of entries that run the gamut from Anglomania and Bourgeoisie through Pronunciation and the Ritz to Versailles and Yachting, this is a book that has lost none of its charm over the past thirty-some years, though most of the names dropped in its pages now seem a little dated.
A writer by the name of Charles Morgan is quoted, defining snobs as those who invent arbitrary distinctions in place of the real ones.
What's most striking about snobbery as it's delineated here is the seemingly universal impulse behind it, the need not so much to identify oneself with some people as to disassociate oneself from others.
The forms that impulse takes are intricate and various, establishing the superiority of the aristocratic to the merely rich, of the longtime rich to the newly rich, of the newly rich to the bourgeois, of the bourgeois to the hoi polloi.
And then there's reverse snobbery, by which the down-home and the downtown come out in front.


A Wish List for Gadget Lovers
THE gift-giving season is before us, and some of the most interesting travel gadgets this year are refreshingly no-tech.
Perhaps it's the surfeit of batteries in gift packages that make basics seem welcome, or perhaps it's the monotonous rows of airline passengers poking at their laptops and Game Boys.
A favorite new item, the Aquis super-absorbent hair towel, weighs five ounces, uses roughly the luggage space of a T-shirt and makes a spur-of-the-moment swim feasible.
Compared with a luxury towel, this one, of nylon and cotton, seems skimpy, but it blots efficiently and can be packed damp in its own plastic envelope.
The standard version, 18 by 36 inches, is available by mail or phone for $17 plus $4.50 shipping from Traveler's Bookcase, 8375 West Third Street, Los Angeles, Calif. 90048; (213) 655-0575; (800) 655-0053 outside California.
This version and a larger 6-ounce one, 18 by 44 inches are sold at Bed, Bath and Beyond in New York for $16 and $20.
Worry-Free Winter Driving
The prettiest new gadget is the Ice Device, a sculptured-looking clear plastic windshield scraper designed to keep the user's wrist out of the action.
The stout scraper, said to be unbreakable, flows into a large loop handle that the user puts an arm through, taking pressure off the wrist, putting it on the lower arm.
Sixteen inches long, it probably will not fit into the glove compartment.
It was designed by Jonathan Hamilton of Ashland, Ore.; (503) 482-6407.
The Northwest Passages catalogue, which offers it at $12 plus $4.95 shipping, calls it the ergonomic ice scraper.
Northwest Passages, Box 1548, Medford, Ore. 97501; (800) 727-7243.
Last winter's weather has spurred the creation of devices to help drive the car out of snow.
One, the Bear Claw traction mat, is a pair of heavy-duty plastic pads, 6 inches wide and 22 inches long, with studs on both sides.
The pads are forced under the tires to give them something to grip.
A pair is $19, plus $4 shipping from Traveler's Checklist, Cornwall Bridge Road, Sharon, Conn. 06069; (203) 364-0144.
The homeliest item is called a Ranger Vest, which looks like those worn by photographers and is really just a vehicle for 11 pockets.
Maps can go into the big back pocket of the vest; cameras or lenses, small water bottles, jackknives, wallets or passports go into ones inside and out that zip or close with Velcro.
A khaki model, made in China, in small to extra-large sells for $35 at Barson Hardware, 35 West 44th Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 944-8181.
Michelin's big new tourist map of the United States reaches as far south as Monterrey, Mexico, and as far north as Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.
Alaska and Hawaii are cut in.
The scale on this highly legible map is one inch to 55 miles, making the map 40 by 56 inches -- useless for the car but good for papering a wall, although that would rule out using the index on the back.
Land contours are indicated and roads down to the numbered state level are shown, as well as distances.
For a change, this was made in the United States.
Rolled or folded, it is $8; a laminated version is $30.
The map is at bookstores, or it may be ordered by calling Michelin at (800) 423-0485.
The popularity of impromptu picnics has spurred designers to rethink travel utensils.
Zelco, in Mount Vernon, N.Y., is importing Mangia, a full-sized stainless-steel utensil set with a knife that is certainly too sharp to be used by a child, but would deal with apples and roast chicken in short order.
The fork and spoon handles slide into the knife handle; a plastic cap, available in four colors, snaps over the working parts, allowing used utensils to be thrown into a pack unwashed.
The 6-ounce set costs $11 at Landmark Stationers, 330 Madison Avenue in New York; (212) 687-5885.
In the Attitudes catalogue from Sunnyvale, Calif., a set of six is $50 plus $7 shipping: (800) 525-2468.
Shedding Light in Dark
A good safety device for travelers who jog in twilight, or for children who walk home on one-lane roads, is a flattish flashing light three inches in diameter that clips to a backpack, belt or pocket.
Turned on, the six little bulbs light in rotation, creating a spinning effect that is said to be visible from half a mile.
It uses two AA batteries.
The Super Flashing Light is $14 from Barson or Northwest Passages, both listed above.
Fluorescent bulbs, which go easy on batteries, are appearing more often in portable lights.
The Micro Fluorescent Lantern, 6 inches long, 1 1/2 inches wide and 1 inch thick, has a three-inch fluorescent wand that folds out straight or can be set at a 90-degree angle to cast light while the case rests on a flat surface.
This is a fine hide-under-the-covers light for children, but would also help adults read maps in darkness.
The gadget has a flashlight bulb, too.
It weighs 5 1/2 ounces empty and uses four AAA batteries.
By Zelco, it is available for $30 from the Civilized Traveler in New York or the Brookstone catalogue: (800) 846-3000.
Zelco also makes Lumifier, a tiny pop-out magnifying glass with a red light for reading programs in the theater or phone books on the street.
The Museum of Modern Art Design Store in New York carries it, at $20, and it can be ordered by phone from Rand McNally for $15, plus $5 for shipping: (800) 234-0679.
Radio Shack's 6-in-1 Multi-Purpose Lantern, 11 1/2 inches tall, has a fluorescent lamp that casts enough light to read by.
It also has yellow and amber flashers to use by the roadside, a spotlight and a steady red light.
It stands on end and allows various lights to be operated in combination.
This uses six D batteries, or it can be plugged into a cigarette lighter in a 12-volt auto with a plug and cord that are included.
It costs $20 at Radio Shack stores.
Phone orders should refer to item 61-2743; (800) 843-7422.
Shipping costs $4.
Bibs and Talking Frames
If humans had been designed to eat from a tray wedged against their belt buckles, arms locked to their sides, there would be no need for Big Bib, but here it is.
Using a bib that protects chest and lap looks silly, but it may be preferable to walking the plane aisle with a tomato sauce boutonniere.
The five-ounce bib is 17 by 36 inches, terrycloth on top, vinyl underneath, with a Velcro closure.
It is $12.85 plus $3.75 shipping from Magellan's, Box 5485, Santa Barbara, Calif. 93150; (800) 962-4943.
Well, technology cannot be avoided forever, and Magic Memories makes it seem worthwhile.
This 2 1/4-inch, 1 1/2-ounce folding plastic picture frame has a button to press to play back a 10-second message that the giver has recorded.
Traveling parents can hear a greeting or gurgle from the child whose photo is in the frame.
Magic Memories, distributed by Machina in San Francisco, is $20 plus $4.50 shipping from Traveler's Bookcase, at the address given above, or Casual Living in Tampa, Fla. ($4.95 shipping).
It costs $22.95, plus $6.85 shipping, from the Potpourri catalogue in Medfield, Mass.: (800) 388-7798.


The Lion King
Problems with a tattered tiger skin?
A moth-eaten moose head?
Who are you going to call?
Wild Bill's Trophy Hospital in west Los Angeles.
The owner, Bill Ornellas, says: "Game trophies and skins have a number of enemies, including dogs, cats, rodents and insects. Sunlight and dry air also take their toll." Some of Ornellas's repairs are difficult because living relatives of his "patients" are scarce.
"I no longer have tiger or polar bear fur to do repairs with. You can't get it legally." So Himalayan or Tibetan goat doubles for polar bear, and calfskin can pass for tiger.
Some of his projects are small -- fitting rabbit fur tails to Playboy Bunny costumes or replacing glass eyes pried from museum polar bear mounts by screwdriver-wielding youngsters.
Other jobs are big.
Ornellas once restored a prized tiger rug for Sylvester Stallone after the actor's guard dogs mangled it, no doubt mistaking it for a critic.


NY '94
To the Editor: I was amazed to see the letter from Thomas Di Domenico (Sept. 25) about the article by Susan Spano, "New York in a Package" (July 17).
I wrote a letter to Mr.
Di Domenico on July 5, and have yet to hear from him.
In my opinion, Mr.
Di Domenico is guilty of misrepresentation in saying that the Best Western President is a first-class hotel; my friend and I found the room (which we changed once) cramped, beastly hot, with inadequate air-conditioning in the New York heat wave.
Continental breakfast and free-parking were not included, as promised in the NY '94 brochure.


Wall Street; Honor Roll of Honest Companies
PUBLIC companies have been known to fudge, hide, and flat-out lie when it's time to file those irritating Federal disclosure documents.
The big and small fibs provide grist for the mills of everyone from regulators to short sellers to idle financial columnists.
For all the ink spilled on Corporate America's obfuscators, though, scant attention is paid to the players who tell investors honestly -- and in decipherable English -- whether business is up, flat, or about to hit the skids.
So here are some of the companies that supposedly do it right.


Islamic Militants Draw 20,000 in Show of Power at Gaza Rally
The Islamic group Hamas showed its political muscle to Yasir Arafat's self-rule government today, drawing as many as 20,000 supporters to one of the bigger rallies held in the Gaza Strip.
With tensions still running high after deadly battles eight days ago between the Palestinian Authority police and street protesters, all sides tried to keep the gathering from spinning out of control and igniting fresh violence.
They succeeded.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
Brooklyn Botanic Garden To Bask in Holiday Light
Behind 30-foot glass windows, 1,000 white, red and peppermint poinsettias and hundreds of trees and ferns will glow with white lights starting Saturday at a holiday show in the Steinhardt Conservatory at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Inquiry Finds A Researcher Faked Work
In what would be one of the strictest punishments ever levied against a scientist, Federal investigators have recommended that a former researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology be barred from taking part in any federally financed research for 10 years.
The inquiry found that the researcher had faked data and falsified evidence for a 1986 scientific paper.
In a final appeal, the researcher, Dr.
Thereza Imanishi-Kari, has asked the Department of Health and Human Services appeals board to review the findings by the Office of Research Integrity, a department agency.
The appeals board is expected to act quickly on the matter.


Erwin P. Bottinger, Lynne V. Perry
Dr.
Lynne Valencia Perry, an interventional cardiologist in Washington, was married yesterday to Dr.
Erwin Paul Bottinger, a physician-scientist in nephrology at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Clifton Labbe performed the ceremony at Annunciation Roman Catholic Church in Houston.
Dr.
Perry-Bottinger, 33, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her M.D. degree from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Drs.
Levi and Eula Perry of Houston.
The bride's father is a cardiologist and her mother is a pediatrician.
Both practice in Houston.


Erin Kelly and Charles von Simson
Erin St.
John Kelly, a daughter of Norma L. Cummins of Cortland, N.Y., and Sean Kelly of Brooklyn, was married on Friday to Charles Burke Edward von Simson, a son of Kate F. Racine of North Smithfield, R.I., and Ernest von Simson of Manhattan.
The civil ceremony was performed by Walter Curtis, an officiating clerk, at the Brooklyn Municipal Building.
Ms.
Kelly, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the assistant to Anna Quindlen, the columnist, at The New York Times.
She graduated from Concordia University in Montreal.
Her father, a former senior editor of The National Lampoon magazine, is an author and television and film writer.
Her mother is a paralegal in Cortland.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Thomas Cummins and Patricia A. Todd.


Counting the Contribution of the Arts
WHICH statement is true?
Support for the arts comes at the expense of economic development.
Or, the arts are an industry that provides jobs that generate substantial revenues to local, state and Federal governments.
"The first statement is definitely false," said Janet T. Langsam, executive director of the Westchester Arts Council.
"For almost five years we have been researching the role played by the arts in community development, and our findings emphatically dispel any misconceptions about the value of the arts."


School Prayer Can Both Exclude and Coerce
To the Editor:
As a child in New York City in the 1950's, I found myself confused by the contradictions between the prayers permitted in the public school I attended and what I was learning in Hebrew school and my Jewish home.
I sought counsel from my pragmatic mother.
She advised: "Just move your lips. They'll never know."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE FUTURE OF DANCE
An opportunity to review contemporary dance trends will be offered at the Dance Theater Lab at Purchase College on Friday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
The Saturday matinee will be followed by a discussion among dancers, choreographers and the audience.
The event is called "A New Generation of Dance in Westchester," and the featured dancer-choreographer is Wally Cardona, soloist with the Ralph Lemon Dance Company.
Mr.
Cardona will appear in the American premiere of a work he created on commission by Danscentrum in Stockholm.
All the remaining works, created and performed by emerging choreographers and dancers from Westchester and Rockland Counties, were selected by auditions on Oct. 30, or commissions awarded during the year by the Dance in Education Fund, a nonprofit advocacy organization based in White Plains.
Judges at the auditions were Bessie Schoenberg, dance educator; Carol Walker, dean of Purchase College's dance department, and Kevin Ward, choreographer and teacher.
Dawn Watson's "Solas na Gealaigh," drawn from traditional Irish music and dance themes, will be presented along with Karen Schatten's "Haircut," Tim Martin's "Small Feats," Caroline Oxenham's "Driftwood" and Carl Flink's "Doodle for Bunny Boy," a segment of his "Field Songs" scheduled in its entirety at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan next month.
Works by Steven E. Williams, Lea Kraemer and Eun Me Ahn will also be performed to music ranging from Vivaldi to Dave Brubeck and Duke Ellington.
Tickets are $15, $10 for people 62 and older, $7.50 for students and $40 for patrons.
Call 761-1118 for reservations or more information.
ALL ABOUT STAMPS
Michael Endres, owner of the Coin and Stamp Exchange in White Plains, will speak Thursday about stamps, the world's No. 1 hobby and the preferred investment for many collectors.
The lecture is scheduled at 7:30 P.M. in the Greenburgh Public Library, 300 Tarrytown Road, Elmsford, and admission is free.
Mr.
Endres is a certified philatelic appraiser and a member of the American Philatelic Society.
He has been a dealer in White Plains for two decades and a stamp collector for 29 years.
"It's not a short-term investment," Mr.
Endres said, "and to have a good long-term investment you should collect classical material in very good condition, not large quantities of modern issues."
He observed that good buying conditions have existed since 1988 when people started selling their holdings at discount prices during the recession.
"Now we are seeing an increase in price and a shortage of supply," Mr.
Endres said, because what was purchased in the recession "is being held by the buyers for future appreciation."
The Pacific Rim countries, especially China, are the hot spots for stamp collectors today, Mr.
Endres said.
"Some 1970's Chinese issues are extremely desirable," he said.
"They were illegal to own or to use as postage in China because they contained inflammatory political slogans. The Government issued other stamps at the time with which to mail letters." A MUSICAL UPDATE
Victor Herbert's "Babes in Toyland," produced as a touring holiday show by Troupe America under the direction of Curt Wollan, will be presented at Lehman College in the Bronx next Saturday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Decked out in new sets and costumes and accompanied by an ensemble, this version was written by William Mount-Burke and Alice Hammerstein Nathias.
Performances will take place at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, at 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West.
Tickets are $20, $22.50 and $25; children will be admitted for half price at the 7 P.M. performance, and discounts for the elderly are available.
Call (718) 960-8833 for reservations or more information.
HOLIDAY BAZAAR
The Christmas ornaments that will be for sale next Saturday at the St.
John's Episcopal Church Holiday Bazaar in Larchmont can be embellished by Grace Coughlin, a calligrapher who will inscribe them with names or messages.
From 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. the church's Parish Hall on Fountain Square will be filled with gift items handcrafted by parishioners, including knitwear, jewelry, stenciled place settings and topiary.
In addition, there will be books, toys, antiques, textiles, electronic and sports equipment, a white elephant table and home-baked apple and pecan pies.
Children will be kept occupied from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. in a special corner with arts and crafts, games and a confidential chat with Santa, and lunch will be served from noon to 2 P.M.
For more information, call 834-2981.
JOHN JAY CHRISTMAS
The re-creation of Christmases past at historic sites provides a major source of entertainment, and the John Jay Homestead in Katonah, a New York State Historic Site, always puts on a first-rate show.
It will begin next Saturday with tours of the Federal-style mansion from noon to 5 P.M., continuing Sunday and the weekend of Dec. 10 and 11 at the same hours.
The house will be decorated from top to bottom, and a full complement of antique crystal, china, silver and replicated 19th-century foods will be set up in the dining room.
The parlor, where it was customary to adjourn for the last course of the Christmas dinner, will display desserts, and in the study, a punch bowl filled with citrus juices and Madeira will stand at the ready.
The decorations and foods have been carefully researched from notes left by the Jay family, and visitors who do not wish to be part of a tour may stroll through the house at will, guided by a descriptive brochure.
Special programs include Paul Peabody and his puppets on Dec. 10 at 1 and 3:30 P.M.
Children may sit on the floor at the foot of the stage, but chairs will be available for parents.
After each show, cookies and apple cider will be served.
On Dec. 11 the Bedford Bell Ringers will perform at 1 and 3:30 P.M. in the ballroom, and downstairs in the kitchen a costumed cook will talk about preparing Christmas feasts on an open hearth.
Visitors will be offered samples from 19th-century recipes.
More than 5,000 come to the homestead holiday celebrations, and it is wise to arrive for the puppet and bell-ringer performances at least an hour early.
Daily admission is $6, $5 for children and people 65 and older.
Proceeds help maintain the historic site on Route 22 off Exit 6 of I-684.
Call 232-5651 for more information.
ELEANOR CHARLES


Expand NATO -- And Split Europe
At this week's meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels, the Clinton Administration is planning to push the alliance to begin the process of extending security guarantees to the new democracies of Central Europe.
Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary are the most vocal in pressing NATO to fulfill its promise to admit new members.
Visiting Warsaw in July, President Clinton said the Partnership for Peace, NATO'S program of military cooperation with its former adversaries, would lead to an expansion of NATO, and added that it was "no longer a question of whether, but when and how."


A Vote of No Confidence In Spread of Superstores
To the Editor:
I have been watching with dismay the superstores' invasion of New York, discussed in the Nov. 20 article, "Shop Big." It used to be one of the attractions of this city that the huge, homogenized, plasticized, boring chains were not to be seen.


A Long Battle Against Lead Contaminants
Throughout the spring and summer of 1987, a vacuum cleaner-like instrument perched on a factory rooftop here took readings that alarmed this still rustic town a two-hour drive from Manhattan.
Lead -- a cause of brain damage in children -- was drifting in the air.
An investigation by the state's Department of Environmental Conservation quickly focused on Revere Smelting and Refining, a plant that crushes old car batteries, melts down the scrap and salvages the lead for resale.
Over the following months, state officials also found lead in much of the 65-acre plant's soil and in groundwater just a mile from the water supply of this town two miles outside Middletown.


Versatile Butternut Squash A Cook's Favorite Standby
OF all the varieties of hard-skinned winter squashes, butternut appears to have emerged as the cook's favorite.
And with good reason.
Within the smooth beige shell that covers this oddly shaped vegetable is dense, deep-orange flesh that is richer-tasting and less watery or stringy than most of the sturdy cold-weather squashes.
It is a versatile vegetable, good for baking as well as for cooking.
And because it holds up well at room temperature for weeks, it can be kept on hand to use whenever it is needed.


Talk Radio Bulldog Is Really Just a Pussycat, Friends Say
IT'S another wonderful day in the neighborhood, Robert Gigante's neighborhood, and from the postman to the waitresses who serve him his morning pie and coffee, almost all say they are proud to be his neighbor.
Mr.
Gigante is better known to millions in the region as Bob Grant, host of a highly rated -- and sometimes highly criticized -- afternoon talk radio program.


Nov. 20-26: USAir Tries for Turnaround; Committed to Safety And Telling the World
Fighting to stanch a hemorrhage of passengers and avoid bankruptcy, USAir has hired a retired Air Force general in a new position as chief of safety operations and spent more than $1 million on a nationwide advertising campaign stressing the airline's commitment to safety.


Word for Word / Jesse Helms; The North Carolinian Has Enemies, But No One Calls Him Vague
SENATOR JESSE HELMS burst onto the public scene in 1960 as a hard-hitting, hard-right television commentator, and his recent verbal thunderbolts show that he has changed little.
The North Carolina Republican's attacks last week on President Clinton were hardly more vitriolic than those he has made on other favorite targets: homosexuals, Communists, Martin Luther King, leftists in Congress, bureaucrats and diplomats.
While slashing his foes during his 21 years in the Senate, Mr.
Helms has also used his rhetoric to champion values he holds dear.
The Senator, 73 years old, will no doubt get more attention now that he is in line to become chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.
He is already off to a Helmsian, if not a diplomatic, start.
First, he said that President Clinton is not up to the job of Commander in Chief; then -- in a remark he later called a mistake -- he said the President is so unpopular that he "better have a bodyguard" if he visits North Carolina.


The Executive Life; Brokerages Building Women's Strengths
IN the dog-eat-dog world of selling stocks, bonds and other investments via mostly cold calls to a wary public, the competition facing brokers who are women is only getting greater -- and many of them like it that way.
Having long labored at a disadvantage in a business dominated by men, women who are stockbrokers have worked hard to distinguish themselves to their bosses and customers.
But at a number of brokerages, they have been getting significant help in recent years from the firms.
Advest Inc., Dain Bosworth Inc. and Raymond James &amp; Associates, for example, have all established support and networking groups for women that the members hail as an important forum for determining their own style and, in turn, markedly improving their sales.


Republicans Oppose Deal With Koreans
Asserting that President Clinton gave away far too much in the deal to halt North Korea's nuclear program, Republican leaders in Congress say they will seek to overturn the agreement by blocking funds to carry it out.
Republican lawmakers said in interviews this week that they were upset that $4 billion in international aid had been promised to North Korea even though it was not expected to permit inspections of several of its nuclear sites for five years.


Elizabeth Tao, B. E. Scheckowitz
Judge Elizabeth Jacqueline Yalin Tao, the daughter of James C. Tao of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Margot H. Tao, was married on Friday to Bruce Evan Sheckowitz, the son of Myra and Jack Scheckowitz of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Associate Justice Israel Rubin of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, performed the ceremony in his chambers in Manhattan.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a judge in the Housing Part of the New York City Civil Court in the Bronx.
She graduated from George Washington University and New York Law School.
Her father retired as a vice president of Citibank in Manhattan.
The bride's grandfather, T. Y. Tao, was the head of the Shell Oil-Asiatic Petroleum Company in Shanghai.


Fall Cleaning for a Better Spring Show
IT'S time.
Cleanup of the garden should be well under way.
End-of-the-season tending helps make the spring garden spectacular.
All those reminders of the previous year will be gone.
The bulbs, trees and early wildflowers can have the scene all to themselves.
A proper fall season tidy-up also reduces wintering hideouts for many insects, which like to snuggle down in garden debris.
Some insects also lay their eggs in plant detritus and removal of it makes their reappearance less likely.


Business Diary: November 20-25
THE ECONOMY The Stock Market Crumbles: Round Up the Usual Suspects Why, exactly, did stocks unravel Tuesday afternoon, with the Dow industrials losing 91 points, mainly in the last hour?
No one really knew.
There was the usual doubletalk about "support levels" and "corrections," but the only reasonable explanation seemed to be that investors suddenly grasped the idea that with interest rates rising, they could get better yields in bonds.
If so, they were a bit slow on the uptake -- it had been a full week since the Federal Reserve gave its latest shove to rates.
There was also talk that weakness in "cyclical" stocks -- the ones that rely on a strong economy -- yanked the wider market down.
But a lot of it is probably just trigger-happy traders: no economy is as bumpy as this market.
Sure enough, on Wednesday the market steadied, and on Friday the few traders who showed up sent the Dow to a 33-point rebound.


A Landmark Leaves San Francisco


Pharmacy Dean Opposes Tobacco
THE dean of the College of Pharmacy at Rutgers University has come under sharp attack from many drugstore owners for his calls for pharmacies to stop selling tobacco.
But that has not silenced the dean, Dr.
John L. Colaizzi, who leads the 900-student school here that trains the majority of the state's pharmacists.


Believe in Miracles? Well, Try 34th Street
For a few minutes tonight, a light, misting rain fell on the Orange Bowl.
The University of Miami was struggling and Boston College was driving and to many of the assembled crowd of 60,579 and some of the players on the field, it must have conjured images of that eerie night 10 years ago when Doug Flutie threw "The Pass" and Gerard Phelan caught it and B.C. shocked Miami and the country with the upset of the year.
But there were no miracles this time.
The rain stopped, and so did B.C., and Miami stormed back from a halftime deficit to defeat the Eagles, 23-7.


Jessica A. Feder, Alan H. Mentle
Jessica Ann Feder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan M. Feder of Cincinnati, was married yesterday to Alan Harris Mentle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Mentle of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi J. Leonard Romm officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 31, is an associate at the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received her law degree from George Washington University.


Enter Galliano
THE HOTTEST TICKET IN town was an invitation that arrived tucked inside the front cover of an old leather-bound book, wrapped in parchment and tied with twine: a rose had been pressed between the pages.
And so what had perhaps been the library of some illustrious chateau was dispersed among a few hundred fashion editors and buyers, in Paris for 10 days in October to see the spring collections.
The volume addressed to me turned out to be "Principes de la Litterature," published in 1774 with the "approbation" of the king.
A loving attention to detail, a fascination with the artifacts of the past -- all this was no less than what we'd come to expect of John Galliano, the 32-year-old English designer who for years now has been routinely described as "promising."


Increased Free Agents Will Come With Cap
If major league clubs don't like the selection of pitchers currently available as free agents, they need only be patient.
More are on the way.
When the owners, as expected, declare an impasse and implement their salary cap proposal, they will also eliminate salary arbitration, establish a salary scale for players in their first four years in the major leagues and create a new class of free agents -- players who have been in the majors at least four years but fewer than six.


Where Mistrust Dies Hard
The meeting was meant to be an open forum for West Harlem residents to voice their concerns about the corruption scandal that racked the 30th Precinct this fall and to meet the new beat officers who have replaced some of the arrested ones.
And on the surface, that's what Tuesday night's gathering at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church looked like, with a smattering of polite questions from the 150 people in the audience and polite responses from five police officers and one sergeant.
But on a deeper level, fear and skepticism dominated, and those feelings were almost never expressed out loud.


2 Days From Pilgrims to Maccabees; Jews Do a Lot of Celebrating in a Season of Multiple Holidays
Somewhere between the time she popped her turkey in the oven and the time she wiped the crumbs off the table, Suzanne Farber managed to whip up a few latkes and freeze them.
"It's annoying," she said. "But you do it."


Sports of The Times; The N.F.L. Is Asking For Tragedy
YOU'VE seen it too often.
Quarterbacks stretched out as unconscious as a throw rug before wobbling to their feet after having been sacked or slammed.
Wide receivers as limp as a dishrag after having been blind-sided.
In the National Football League, it's known as the chance you take as a target.
Or is it as a trophy?


Are 20 Years Of Market Joy About to End?
IF there is one thing that 1990's investors have had pounded into their heads, it is that stocks are the best long-term investment.
Over the long stretch of history, we are told, stocks produce an average return of about 10 percent a year.
The academic studies prove nothing else does as well.
That belief in this is growing can be seen in the mutual fund industry's boom.
The stock market may have done nothing this year, but three of the four best months ever for stock mutual funds -- in terms of net cash flow from investors -- were in 1994.
Investors have put more money into stock funds than they took out for 48 consecutive months.
To put that in perspective, the industry's old record was 12 months, a string that ended with the 1987 crash.


Homeless Agency Still Dependent on Hotels, in Violation of Law
In yet another sign of the city's inability to provide enough housing for families seeking shelter, the agency responsible for the homeless has not been able to give up the use of commercial hotels for emergency housing despite a city law that restricts it.
On Sept. 1, the city's Department of Homeless Services placed 97 families in four hotels because all of the approximately 5,700 places for families in the homeless system were filled.
A 1993 law prohibits the use of hotel rooms without kitchens for more than 60 days, but last week the agency still had 76 families in three hotels.


Jennifer S. Motz, Garrett L. Going
Jennifer Susan Motz, a daughter of Mrs.
Francois P. Louis of Garden City, L.I., and George M. Motz of Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Garrett Leonard Going, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Going of Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Delaney performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
Mrs.
Going, 23, graduated from Rosemont College and is an interior designer for Jeanne Leonard Interiors in Westhampton Beach and Palm Beach, Fla., an interior design firm that is owned by the bridegroom's mother, Jean Leonard.
The bride's father is the executive vice president of Melhado, Flynn &amp; Associates, an investment management firm in New York.


The Electric Bulb
Like Persephone, fennel traffics between the darkness and the light.
Eaten raw, as crudites in the Italian manner, the white bulb with the pale green stalk has the sweet, sunny flavor of anise.
When fennel is cooked and served with fish or lamb, its aura becomes dark and mysterious, its licorice taste more pronouced.
Fennel is a giving ingredient, behaving like the vegetables it most resembles, onions and celery.
With its subtle, pervasive power, fennel can lend nuance to almost any dish.
But it need not be obtrusive.
Rather, it can serve as the unexpected bright note in a season of rich, heavy foods.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Sharper Image: The N.Y.P.D. Dresses for Success
ARRIVING from Boston last January to become the New York City Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton looked at his 31,000 officers, their two-tone uniforms, 25 pounds of equipment dangling from drooping gun belts, and saw service repairmen.
As a result, the New York City Police Department, will no longer look as approachable as it has for the last 22 years.
It will soon look like the Los Angeles Police Department.
Less Mr.
Goodwrench, more Terminator 2.
By next October the N.Y.P.D. will abandon its medium-blue shirt, putting on navy to match the trousers.
The dark style creates a more militaristic and, yes, more intimidating appearance.
Thus does N.Y.P.D. blue become L.A.P.D. blue (bare bottoms optional).


Diary Of an Urban Priest
"NEW YORK CITY, are you kidding?" the newly ordained John Flynn thought in 1958 as he contemplated his assignment to St.
Raymond's parish in the Parkchester section of the Bronx.
The son of a freight company executive, raised in Westchester and upstate New York, he knew little of the city except its air of danger.
"I knew the grass," he says.
"I knew mountains. I knew fields." A few years later, he took a confession at St.
Raymond's: "Someone said he committed a sin: walking on the grass. I wondered, how could it be a sin to walk on grass?"
Now at age 65, having spent his career ministering to the city folk, he sits in the rectory of St.
Martin du Tours on Grote Street in the central Bronx, the bright-eyed soul of youth not completely extinguished but alternating with the burden of the years.
There is no summing him up: He is a man whose spirit can at one moment leap joyously at the faith of the three women who bothered to attend Friday Mass, and at the next wonder helplessly at a drug operation across the street that delivers the ultimate insult: retailing a brand of crack, St.
Martin Green Cap, named after his church.


A Memorial Service for the Victims of the Estonia Ferry Disaster


IN SHORT: FICTION
ALTMANN'S TONGUE  By Brian Evenson. Knopf, $22.


All-Season Garden Inspires a Career
STERNBERGIA LUTEA, or winter daffodil, bloom in Susan A. Roth's garden.
She listens to the wind rustle her Hakonechloa macra Aureola, or Japanese wind grass.
Its variegated gold-and-green foliage has changed to the color of dried wheat.
She captures each seasonal change with her camera.
Most unplanned gardens offer beauty in a short and intense flowering season.
"Creating a garden full of color and interest throughout the year takes both planning and knowledge," Ms.
Roth said.


North Carolina Rallies For Victory Over Texas
North Carolina 96, Texas 92
Jerry Stackhouse scored a career-high 28 points and made several key plays down the stretch yesterday as No. 2 North Carolina escaped with a narrow victory over visiting Texas.


RUNNING LATE
I moved from New York to the heartland of Iowa more than 25 years ago.
I, too, have a daughter "between 23 and 28 years old" who returned to her city roots.
Weeks, sometimes months go by, and she cannot be located by phone or mail.
It is not that she lacks the money to make a call.
Whom are those "loving children" running from in the night?
THOMAS A. WEINGEIST Iowa City


The Uses of Malcolm
MAKING MALCOLM The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X. By Michael Eric Dyson. 215 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $19.95.


A Museum Space That Has Found a Museum Idea
IN ALMOST EVERY GREAT CITY IN the Western world, subliminal hunting horns have lately been heard.
They are the sound of a museum idea in search of a museum space.
In London, the Tate Gallery has found such a space on the south bank of the Thames, just across from St.
Paul's Cathedral.
In New York, the Museum of Modern Art is scouting for an additional new space.
In Paris, the Musee National d'Art Moderne is distinctly underhoused in the Pompidou Center.
In St.
Petersburg, since the downfall of the Soviet regime, the Russian Museum has been allotted new spaces all over town.


Lindsay de Wolf, Mitchell McKell
Elizabeth Lindsay Colt de Wolf, the daughter of Mrs.
Francis Colt de Wolf Jr. of Washington and the late Mr. de Wolf, was married yesterday to Mitchell Todd McKell, a son of Mrs.
Radames Pierantoni of Louisville, Ky.
Msgr.
Joseph H. Mundell performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Cathedral in Washington.
Mrs.
McKell, 28, is known as Lindsay.
Until recently, she taught ballroom Latin dance in Falls Church, Va.
She and her husband graduated from the Savannah College of Art and Design.
Her father was an insurance broker with Sun Life of Canada in Washington.
Her mother, Doda de Wolf, is an associate broker and vice president at Begg, Long &amp; Foster, a real estate company in Washington.
The bride is a descendant of Samuel Colt, the inventor of the revolver.


Count Dracula, Family Man
To the Editor:
Reviewing two novels about Count Dracula (Oct. 30), Nina Auerbach says: "Stoker's monster was no family man. This blood lover had no blood ties, not even with other vampires."


The Peculiar Dialect Of Sitcomese
A man is in bed, he has just turned out the light when he hears a suspicious noise downstairs.
What does he do?
Turn to his wife, sound asleep beside hime, and say: "Good thinking. I'll go check, see what that is. You stay here, guard the pillows."
He doesn't?
Maybe that's because unlike Harry Anderson, who spoke those lines in a recent episode of the CBS series "Dave's World," this man does not live in Sitcom World.
It's a peculiar planet, one where people sit on only three sides of the dining room table and have a language all their own.
In other words, no one in his right mind would ever say such things in such a situation.
But in Sitcom World, people say all sorts of improbable things, supposedly because they're funny.
Here are some guidelines for speaking elementary sitcomese, with examples from the current season.
ANITA GATES


Alison L. Spear, Carlos J. Gomez
Alison Leelyn Spear, an architect in New York, was married on Wednesday to Carlos J. Gomez, a vice president in the private banking division of Citibank, also in New York.
The Rev.
Richard L. Stanger performed the ceremony at Plymouth Congregational Church in Coconut Grove, Fla.
Mrs.
Gomez, 35, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in architecture and urban design from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold C. Spear of Miami.
Her father is a retired thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon.
Her mother is a writer.
The bride's grandfather the late Harold Spear was a founder of Spear, Leeds &amp; Kellogg, a specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Nets Make Long-Range Plans With Favorite Shot
They always begin after practice, with smiles and a rack of balls.
As they shut the workout down for the day, like some family restaurant closing its doors at 9 P.M. and breaking out the card tables at 9:01 P.M., the Nets begin gambling on their ability to shoot from long distances.
You want to supplement your six-figure income?
Piece of cake.
Grab a ball, place your feet behind the arc and begin firing.


HOW I GAVE UP MY ALIAS
Mary Willis has the right idea: a woman's name is the one she was given shortly after birth, not her husband's (Hers: "How I Gave Up My Alias," Oct. 16).
But why did it take a divorce 26 years later to make her smell the coffee?
What if her marriage hadn't ended?
There's a fair chance she would still be Walker today.


The Man in the Glass House
PHILIP JOHNSON Life and Work.
By Franz Schulze.
Illustrated. 465 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
PHILIP JOHNSON  The Architect in His Own Words.
By Hilary Lewis and John O'Connor.
Illustrated. 200 pp.
New York: Rizzoli. $50.


Q and A
Kosher Tours for Singles  Q.  Could you provide me with information about kosher and Sabbath-observant tours of the United States that would be attractive to young women aged 18 to 25 from abroad? -- Doreen Seidler-Feller, Los Angeles


Memo on Chrysler Door Latches
Lawyers involved in lawsuits against the Chrysler Corporation have circulated a corporate document that indicates that the latches on the rear door of the company's popular mini-vans may be less safe than those of competitors.
The release of the memorandum this past week comes amid dozens of lawsuits as well as a yearlong investigation by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration involving rear lift-gate latches on four million Chrysler mini-vans produced between 1984 and 1994.
The models include the Dodge Caravan, Plymouth Voyager, and Chrysler Town and Country.


How One Bar Found Success In Night-Life City
IT'S as if you took a wrong turn off Canal Street and wandered into Casablanca.
The place is smoky and dark.
The crowd is part bohemian, part Wall Street.
Men and women who order real drinks -- dry martinis -- and smoke unfiltered cigarettes.


A Western Via Switzerland
To the Editor:
In his article "How the Nazis Created a Dream Factory in Hell"  [ Nov. 16 ] , Tom Reiss describes "Der Kaiser von Kalifornien," directed by Luis Trenker, as "a singular achievement: a Nazi western." But the film's singularity must be qualified by the fact that it was adapted from "L'Or" ("Gold"), a 1925 novel by the Swiss Surrealist Blaise Cendrars, who was in turn recounting the true-life story of the Swiss emigrant John Sutter.
STEVEN G. KELLMAN  San Antonio


Woo-Woo Philosophizing
To the Editor:
Karen Karbo's review of Tom Robbins's novel "Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas" (Oct. 30) begins by assailing Mr.
Robbins for his "Cuckoo plots, woo-woo philosophizing, overwrought metaphors and cheerful misogyny" and states that anyone who wasn't imprinted with his work when "19 and stoned" will find him "forever unreadable."
These statements, which precede any discussion of this particular novel, set the stage for a completely nonobjective review by a critic who obviously disliked this author's body of work before even picking up this new book.
Ms.
Karbo, true to this introduction, describes the novel as "vintage Robbins, a recommendation for those of you who can stand it."
Ms.
Karbo has an obvious intolerance for the elements of comic fantasy in Mr.
Robbins's works, and she is not averse to using bias and exaggeration to sway her readers to her point of view.
For example, she says that the cure for colon cancer portrayed in the book "cannot be described in a family newspaper." I'm betting that The Times will not shrink from printing the word "enema" if this letter appears.
I'm also betting that Ms.
Karbo wished her readers to think that Mr.
Robbins had used some "overwrought metaphor" too disgusting for general consumption.
Finally, Ms.
Karbo shares with us that she performed at least part of her critic's task with "a good 'Valley of the Dolls'-style buzz on." Feeling obliged to mix Xanax and chardonnay to "calm my nerves" because of an airport layover, she picked up"Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas" and found it both incomprehensible and "brilliant." Maybe Mr.
Robbins's work is simply beyond her grasp, especially if she insists on working while under the influence.
May I suggest that the editors find an objective and sober critic to review this comic and erotic novel, and consider referring Ms.
Karbo for professional help for her substance abuse problem.
STUART WITTENSTEIN Jersey City


Another View Of Slavery
In an otherwise encouraging article ("The Civil War Draws a Crowd," Nov. 13) two misleading observations were made about slavery that deserve re-examination.
The first was the assertion that there were no slave revolts during the Civil War even though it would have been easy since Southern men were off to war.


Tennessee Runs It Up, Up and Up
Tennessee 65, Vanderbilt 0
James Stewart became Tennessee's career rushing leader and the Volunteers gained a school-record 665 yards yesterday in a 65-0 rout of Vanderbilt in Nashville.


STRANGER THAN FICTION
On Jan. 1, 1992, I retired to pursue my dream of writing a novel (Endpaper: "Stranger Than Fiction" by Richard Liebmann-Smith, Oct. 30).
I spent six months in preparation -- reading, studying, thinking (and learning how to type and use a computer).
But the most helpful thing I did during those months was to get Sol Stein's WritePro.
I found the rules and questions most helpful.
And, unlike your writer, I have finished my novel.
It seems strange that someone who is still "working on a novel" after 19 years has the nerve to make fun of this outstanding instructional tool.
Liebmann-Smith should have put his energies into following the rules instead of making fun of them.
AL BOWERS Alexandria, Va.


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
Miracle on 34th Street  Richard Attenborough, Elizabeth Perkins, Mara Wilson Directed by Les Mayfield PG 114 minutes


From Pizzeria to Red-Sauce Italian Fare
FROM a glorified pizzeria to an Italian palazzo," a reader wrote describing the recent renovations at Umberto's of New Hyde Park. The 29-year-old landmark made an Island-wide name for itself with its hearty Sicilian pizza.
It is still possible to stop by Umberto's for a slice of that pizza or a homemade dessert and cappuccino in the spacious, dolled-up pizza parlor.
The scene is glitz and bustle, red-and-white checked wipeable tablecloths, green-marble columns and ornate brickwork that alone is worth the trip.


After Growing in Success, Recycling Faces Obstacles
When the city with the world's largest garbage dump embarked five years ago on the nation's most ambitious recycling program, many said it would fail.
It was fine for the suburbs, the skeptics said, but in a city as complex as New York, it was the stuff of dreamers and crackpots.
At first it seemed they were right.
Recycling was expensive, the city was short of money, and the effort got off to a rocky start.
Steven M. Polan, the Sanitation Commissioner at the time, says it was put together piecemeal, "with strings and rubber bands."


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Chemical Bank to Provide Day-Care Center in Brooklyn
In a move to ease workers' minds and increase their productivity, Chemical Bank plans to establish a subsidized day-care center in Brooklyn in February.


A Support Program For Healthy Siblings
TWELVE-year-old Craig P. was describing his little brother, George, who was born with cerebral palsy, to a group of other boys.
After telling them about the younger child's wheelchair and his seizures, Craig paused and said quietly: "You know, it's funner having a regular brother. I wish I had a regular brother."
Almost immediately though, he began listing all the good qualities about George.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 27, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
28
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
2
4
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.
3
11
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
2
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in 19th-century Russia.
5
2
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A series of violent deaths.
6
24
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
10
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A young girl disappears.
8
5
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
9
9
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young boy creates a crisis.
10
1
PRINCESS ANNIE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American girl's adventures with 19th-century European royalty.
11
13
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.
12
1
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.
13*
9
THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th century.
14
19
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
15
4
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
16*
22
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in North Vietnam.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
10
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
46
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
9
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
4
5
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
5
577
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
5
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on politics.
7*
3
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44 years of marriage.
8
3
ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an armored cavalry regiment.
9
13
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
10
5
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
11*
2
VAMPS &amp; TRAMPS, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) Essays on subjects ranging from the Clintons to D.H.
Lawrence.
12*
11
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio personality.
13*
44
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
14*
93
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
15*
9
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
16*
28
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
8
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
9
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
3
193
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
50
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Let's Go to Press!
To the Editor:
A postscript to your review of Neal Gabler's biography of Walter Winchell (Oct. 23):
Unable to find a job in New York in 1940, a B.A. from a respectable college notwithstanding, I enrolled in the Therese Aub Secretarial School in the Upper West Side.
I could type, but knew no shorthand.
Our assignment every evening was to take down Wichell's radio talks to all the ships at sea.
When we could do this successfully, we could hold down a job anywhere in Manhattan.
THEDA O. HENLE Arlington, Va.


A Library's Historic Treasures in Tight Spaces
A GIFT of gold cloth reportedly from Captain Kidd, a 300-year-old Indian deed and a 200-year-old atlas from the days when Bay Shore was called Penataquit and Commack spelled Comac are samples of the past in three Suffolk County libraries.
But preserving the past does not come easily, especially in Smithtown, where space and finances are concerns.
Although it has one of the oldest and most extensive collections about Long Island history, the 87-year-old Smithtown Library has been beset with financial problems for several years, quashing any plans for expansion and causing complaints about the housing of its archives.


It Costs Taxpayers Plenty to Police the World; The Price of B-2's
To the Editor:
In "$600 Million Bombers" (letter, Nov. 19), Morris J. Amitay asserts the cost of the B-2 bombers is not $2 billion each and that Northrop-Grumman has made a concrete offer to the Air Force to provide additional B-2 aircraft for slightly less than $600 million each.


Corrections
A map on Nov. 6 with an article about San Francisco hotels located the Museum of Modern Art incorrectly.
It is at 151 Third Street and no longer at 401 Van Ness Avenue; the museum will open at its new location on Jan. 18.


A Thing About Men, and a Thing About Women
D.
H.
LAWRENCE The Story of a Marriage.
By Brenda Maddox.
Illustrated. 620 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Fly Fishing Off the Wild Yucatan
"BONEFISHES, 11:30!" Victor, my Maya fishing guide, whispered hoarsely, jabbing his forefinger toward an invisible constellation cruising slowly across the mud flats.
"Shoot it! Shoot! Going to the left. Don't you see them?"
I saw nothing except the vast expanse of mangrove swamp framing the sparkling blue lagoon.
The breeze, was, as usual, blowing in my face.


Star-Spangled Scandal
TIRED OF GOSSIP from Buckingham Palace?
Sick to the gills of the Simpson trial?
I've got a real scandal for you.
It doesn't have any sex, race or class, but you don't mind that, do you?
It's a scandal of the intellectual kind.
You know, like iatrogenic disease or the Constitution's provisions for slavery.
And it comes from the people we pay to explain the structure of the universe.


Editorial Notebook; East Germany's Last Laugh
In outworn cliche, Germans are as heavy as their national diet, bereft of a sense of humor.
A visitor here quickly learns this is not true of Germans in general, or in particular of Ossis, the former citizens of the Communist East.
This was readily apparent in Berlin this November, the fifth anniversary of the demise of the wall that scarred the city.
The sober German of stereotype was indeed visible in seemingly endless and earnest television talk shows on "die Wende," shorthand for the great change attending unification.
But in bookstores, there was a less formal observance, marked by the dry, even grim humor at which Berliners excel.


School Prayer Can Both Exclude and Coerce; Invasive Government
To the Editor:
The reinvigorated campaign for a school prayer amendment by political and religious conservatives points to an important assumption: that American parents are inadequate to teach their children about the power of prayer at home.
Lacking faith in real family values (that is, the ability of parents to instill values in their own children), conservatives quickly turn their backs on families and instead place their faith in the institutional power of government to do the job.


Monkey Bar: Sound of Success
CHRIS RICCIARDI didn't mind the noise. In fact, she rather enjoyed it.
"It means everyone's having a good time," she said.


Hope H. Jones, Michael Thorne
Hope Haskell Jones, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Jones Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Anthony Thorne, the son of Carol Thorne of Indianapolis and the late Warren E. Thorne.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River.
The bride is a manager at Merri Makers Caterers at Water's Edge in Sea Bright, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the managing partner of Edge Partners, a hedge fund in Shrewsbury, N.J.


Paperless Publishing
To the Editor:
While reading Leigh Hafrey's essay "At Cyberspace University Press, Paperless Publishing Looks Good" (Oct. 30), I had the feeling of "Plus ca change." In 1492, Trithemius, a German Benedictine, wrote "In Praise of Scribes," in which he maintained that the new technology of print was merely novel, unlikely to last and, compared with copying by hand, not morally edifying.
Trithemius's optimism for manuscript production and pessimism for typography were both exaggerations, and many views on the computer revolution evoke this same ambivalence.
Traditional books will always be printed, and in good quantities, for the simple reason that when it comes to actual reading, they are vatly easier to use than a computer and monitor.
It is inconceivable that anyone would want to try to read "The Great Gatsby" (much less "Ulysses" or "Moby-Dick") in any form but a printed one.
On the other hand, as the essay points out so well, computer technology has already radically transformed the character of research, information management and publication.
When it comes to technological innovation, intellectual evaluation often yields to emotional anxiety.
Trithemius was wrong: by itself, print destroyed neither book production nor morality.
It did not even eliminate writing by hand.
If computerphobes take heart in this, computerphiles might take caution from the fact that the technology they seek to replace was itself once trumpeted as the ultimate solution to problems cognitive, pedagogic and economic.
TIM MACHAN Milwaukee


Robin L. Berlin, Matthew B. Lubin
Robin Lois Berlin, the daughter of Jeanne Berlin of Little Neck, Queens, and the late Solomon Berlin, is to be married today to Dr.
Matthew Bruce Lubin, a son of Shirley and S. Lloyd Lubin of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Abraham Eckstein is to perform the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 34, is an associate at Marshall, Conway &amp; Wright, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from New York University and received her law degree from Pace University.


Luxury Train Ride Back in Time
AS the world rocked gently beneath me, I felt as if I were still on the train.
But I was actually standing on a geological high diving board that jutted out from the rim of the Copper Canyon in the state of Chihuahua in northern Mexico.
Looking down, I could see what appeared to be a trickle of water -- really a river -- winding some 7,000 feet below.
I was perched on a boulder known as Balancing Rock because it balances precariously on a tiny stem high above the vast abyss.
It looks like a giant golf ball teed up for flight.
I was an ant on that golf ball.
Shifting my weight from one foot to the other, I could feel the great stone moving beneath me, and I could hear its great, low-pitched rumble of protest.
"Rock and roll!" shouted a member of my party.


The View From 61
WHAT DO YOU do when you're 61 and haven't rehearsed for it?
Well, to take an example, though I've cut my own hair for 30 years, this spring for the first time I put the trimmings out on the lawn for the various birds that search for hair to weave into their nests.
Using an audio tape, I've learned to identify many more bird calls than I knew at 50, and 10 times as many as when I was 20.
I'm up before 6 and when the dawn's chorus ceases I play other music, knitting an aural nest of Bach for organ, Beethoven for piano, Louis Armstrong, "My Fair Lady," Edith Piaf, "Peter Grimes," each day's menu impromptu (my dogs bark sharply when the whale songs come on) -- seldom much that I didn't listen to decades ago, but I pay more attention because after a spell of eye trouble, music and visual color seem central now.
I'm more moderate, gentler in judgment, less self-conscious, though quite cranky, yet recognizing other people's right to be cranky too.
For the sake of harmony I take more for granted and skim over more.
I'm still astonished, ineradicably so, by my generation's failure to push past token gestures to change the world for the good and to be less greedy and violence-prone than the generations before.
But money is old-hat to me, unexciting, although essential, neither of which it seemed in the past.
I used to despise money, which could have made my old age frightening, except that writers do not retire and my earning power has increased.
Sex has become like driving a car with 95,000 miles on it.
You don't go fast or dwell on the details but you do get there.
I know more about children, food, answering mail, theories of health, conversational tact, variants and staples of religious thought, highlights of art, and where I might like to be if a helicopter pilot were willing to lift me anywhere in the world.
When I walk in the woods I carry a stick to part the brush and lend me footing in crossing a stream, but this only reminds me of African spearmen I have hiked with and makes me feel young.
Beyond the memories I have, the balance and heft of a stick in my hand is primeval, as young as mankind can get.
It's a shorter journey back to my early teens, where I'll dawdle a while with Nat King Cole.
I've got the 1949 World Series on tape, Yankees versus Dodgers, the civilized banter of Red Barber and Mel Allen and the suspenseful feats of Tommy Henrich, Yogi Berra, Jackie Robinson, Preacher Roe.
When I need to leave the room, I re-experience that moment of panic that I'll miss DiMaggio's next at-bat -- and can remember the silent tears filling my eyes when the Yankees would lose a game.
I had a friend who grew equally teary on behalf of the Red Sox, so I suggested we call a truce and quit teasing each other about our grief, which just made it worse.
But he said no, that wouldn't be baseball.
I'm still loath to believe he was right, yet the evidence sits right here on the table.
Besides the violin partitas and "Goldberg" Variations that occupy some of the best of my days, I've acquired a radio scanner that plugs me into the muffled shouts of out-of-breath firemen, ambulance attendants, sheriff's deputies chasing a thief, state police zeroing in on a bank robber's flight.
Presumably these emergencies would hold no interest for me if gloating over another person's disappointment when his team loses were not also part of the appeal of sports.
There's malice in us till we die.
I've never met an elderly person fit in his faculties who was completely benign.
But the obverse of that is the incongruous picture we keep of ourselves as remaining forever around the age of 18.
Though closer to death, I am more reconciled, having seen my father, my ex-wife and four or five intimate friends die rather slowly -- events that were, of course, sadly cryptic but because of painkillers were no longer a terrifying mystery, scalding like hellfire, as they would have been hundreds of years ago, when hellfire was a buzzword.
I don't expect to rejoin or "miss" these people in the hereafter, yet, having spent a great deal of my personal and professional life riding a surf of wind-song, wolf howls, elephants snuffling, trees soughing, grasshoppers buzzing, frogs croaking, I do think I'll mix in somehow with all of the above, the wine of human nature blending with the milk of outdoor nature in a mulligatawny soup of soil, rainwater and pondy chemicals, with infinite possibilities once again.
Reincarnation or a heavenly life is the ultimate comfort offered by every religion I am familiar with, and I don't want to be me for more than another 20 years anyway.
Neither eternal oblivion nor me, but something else.
Maybe moss.
One could do worse.
Moss, if left alone, seems to live about as long as people do; then it goes back to mulligatawny soup again.
Having witnessed the Sudanese famine in 1993, I expect to see other scarifying tragedies that will ease me into a grateful grave.
But during my 61st year I also saw India on a first visit, and Antarctica -- tigers and ice.
As Renaissance men of a new kind, we should feast our eyes.
Instead, we fret about civilization.
Civilization is with us to stay.
I worry more about the toads' and the tree frogs' songs.
I want that stew to be yeasty with tadpole, muskrat and otter bones, loons' bills, lady-slippers, skunk cabbage, jack-in-the-pulpits and moose and bear pies, not just an ossuary of human relics.
Otherwise my moss is not going to thrive.


A Glittering 'Sunset' Rises
IT'S HERE AND IT'S A STUNNER.
IF YOU HAVE TO ASK what "it" is, you haven't been paying attention.
It's "Sunset Boulevard," Andrew Lloyd Webber's grand, sometimes to the point of grandiose, musical reincarnation of Billy Wilder's comparatively spare, satiric 1950 melodrama about a titanic Hollywood legend.
She's Norma Desmond, the epitome of camp, a forgotten but not gone silent-film star.
As played and sung by Glenn Close, the Dracula-like Norma is now shaking the I-beams and testing the acoustics at the Minskoff Theater on Broadway in a manner to set precedents.
Never has someone undead been so alluring, so entertaining and, finally, so crazily tragic.
Yet "Sunset Boulevard" is something more than a bizarre Broadway spectacle scored with some of Mr.
Lloyd Webber's loveliest melodies and designed with an extravagance of mind more usually evident at a theme park.
In adapting the classic film for the stage, the composer and his collaborators haven't only pumped up and inflated the Wilder work.
They have also created something original.


Taxes, Vouchers And Parochial Schools
Re: "Schundler Continues to Press Voucher Plan for Jersey City," Oct. 16:
The article on Mayor Bret Schundler's campaign for education vouchers in his community says that if the program is adopted, this would be the first time the nation has allowed public funds "to be spent on parochial education." One recalls that when Virginia attempted an "experiment" in public financing of church education, James Madison fought it, arguing that "it is proper to take alarm at the first experiment with our liberties."


Near, Yet Far: The Lost Exit To Brooklyn
For Safdar Jamil, who drives home in the evening from his job managing a convenience store in Sheepshead Bay, the most agonizing thing about where he lives is being able to see his house so near -- and yet so far.
"I sit sometimes on the ramp for 10 minutes and up ahead, I can see my house is so close, but I have to wait with all the rush-hour traffic," said Mr.
Jamil, 32.


Fashion


Correction
An article last Sunday about competition between big brewers and microbrewers referred incorrectly to the New Amsterdam Brewing Company, a small brewery based in Manhattan.
It remains in operation.


NATO AND THE U.N. QUARREL IN BOSNIA AS SERBS PRESS ON
The United Nations and NATO, confronted by Bosnian Serb forces occupying part of a Muslim enclave the allies had vowed to protect, bickered today as the Serbian assault continued.
Favoring restraint, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the British commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, scrambled to avoid further NATO air strikes against the Serbs.
He enraged the Muslim-led Bosnian Government by blaming both sides for the fighting in the enclave, centered around Bihac town, and insisting that only negotiation could resolve the conflict.


Fast Start By Knicks Erased by Faster Fade
Ten games into the N.B.A. season, the Knicks are not happy with where they are.
"We're not clicking together for some reason," said Patrick Ewing.
"It's been a roller coaster."


Sighting Beauty On the Far Side Of Fear
WHEN HITCHCOCK'S "Vertigo" first came out, I was so scared by that silly spiral revolving out of the woman's eye during the movie's opening credits that I wanted to run out of the theater.
How could I just sit there in the dark and be willingly engulfed by all the creepiness foretold by that image and by Bernard Herrmann's creepy music?
But I stayed, and absorbed what became my earliest memory of art's power to extract pleasure from fear.
Two recent events in architecture brought that memory back to mind.
The first was the death last month of John Lautner, the Los Angeles architect whose dramatic hillside houses, designed over the past four decades, helped define the southern California life style.
The second was the opening of the Rem Koolhaas show at the Museum of Modern Art, an exhibition of public buildings that introduce a rich array of urban images for our time.


The Guns Of Davenport Avenue
WILLIE THOMPSON and Jose Santiago grew up together around Davenport Avenue in New Haven and thought of each other as brothers.
They often played football in nearby Evergreen Cemetery with another close friend, Elvis Crnkovic.
A star pupil and athlete, Elvis was well respected and urged his buddies to try to make something of their lives.
Three and a half years ago, Elvis, 16 years old, was shot dead in a drive-by attack in front of Willie's house.
"Elvis," Willie told a reporter, "was the man who kept me out of trouble."
Early last month, Willie Thompson, 17 years old, was charged with killing Jose Santiago, 21 years old, a few feet from the Crnkovic home.
After hearing the first of a dozen gunshots, Zdravda Crnkovic, Elvis's mother, ran screaming into her house.
Gino Crnkovic, her 22-year-old son, stood stunned, watching his friend bleed to death.
A few minutes before, Willie and Jose had been arguing over a bicycle and Gino had said, "Don't worry, Ma. In a few minutes they'll be best friends again."


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


Perfection: Penn State And Carter
There are no worn stone portals to reflect the passage of time at Beaver Stadium, no faded bricks to hold the memories that other Big Ten schools display, reminders that Red Grange played here, or Tom Harmon, or Howard Cassady.
But these Penn State Nittany Lions, led by the greatest day in Ki-Jana Carter's career, took their place as one of the most successful teams in Big Ten history today with a 59-31 victory over Michigan State that completed a perfect regular season.
With the swiftness and apparent ease that has marked this season from its beginning, Carter ran for 5 touchdowns and 227 yards to lead the Lions to their fifth 11-0 record under Coach Joe Paterno and their seventh undefeated, untied season in his 29 years as head coach.
Five of Penn State's eight touchdowns were scored on drives that were completed in less than two minutes against a Spartan team that began the game with the best pass defense in the conference.


Owners End Up on Opposite Ends of the Ice Over Solution to the Labor Dispute
Howard Baldwin and Ed Snider operate National Hockey League teams in the state of Pennsylvania, but they are coming from different directions in terms of the current labor lockout.
The postponement of the season passed through Day 57 today as talks recessed with no solution in sight.
They could resume as soon as Monday.
In separate telephone interviews recently, Baldwin of the Pittsburgh Penguins and Snider of the Philadelphia Flyers discussed the labor stalemate.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Mark Edmundson's gallant defense of innovative Bennington leaves out one crucial fact: Bennington's target audience is drying up.
No longer does the well-to-do young woman assume that her appropriate calling is a lifetime in the arts.
The woman's movement and changing mores make it likely that Bennington's students will want a more marketable, preprofessional degree.


Wasteland


The Nation; Deciding Who Gets What in America
UNDER the House Republicans' "Contract With America," certain groups, like unwed teen-age mothers and able-bodied unemployed men, are deemed undeserving of the Government's largess.
Both groups were excoriated in campaign rhetoric and cut off from public assistance in the contract's sketchy budget proposals.
But these same budgetary figures reveal something the rhetoric did not.
Among the ranks of the undeserving, by implication, is a group that has played by the rules, paid taxes, and demonstrated family values: legal immigrants.
These are not people who sneaked across the border.
They were granted visas to rejoin family members, to work, or, often, both.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
I would not be surprised to learn that Charles Murray, co-author of "The Bell Curve," likes to eat at Denny's, when he's not sipping Champagne at 30,000 feet.
Although the menu might not be up to the standard of food served at those private dinner parties where he expounds on the correlation of race, economic status and criminal behavior, his ideas would be equally welcome at Denny's.
Murray might not even be disturbed that some Denny's patrons receive more prompt and courteous service than others.
He'd probably attribute it to differences in I.Q.
ROBERT J. YAES, M.D.
Bronx


'The Coming Plague'
To the Editor:
As the New York City Health Commissioner, I would like to respond to Stephen S. Hall's perplexing review of "The Coming Plague (Oct. 30), Laurie Garrett's excellent study of the threat posed by new and re-emergent microbial diseases. Mr. Hall accepts the importance of the issues raised by Ms. Garrett, yet he complains about her thoroughness and attention to detail.
The matters discussed in "The Coming Plague" are serious and of significant concern, not only to scientists and public health professionals but also to the broader public.
The emergence of new infectious disease threats (like AIDS, Legionnaires' disease, Lyme disease, toxic shock syndrome and the newly recognized hantavirus syndrome), as well as the resurgence of old diseases (like tuberculosis, cholera, malaria and, most recently, plague), often in new and drug-resistant forms, should be a powerful warning that we remain extremely vulnerable to the microbial world.
With increasing urbanization, international travel, agricultural manipulation and environmental disruptions, these worrisome trends will only worsen in the years to come.
Indeed, as the AIDS epidemic reminds us, the possibility of lethal viral diseases for which we have no treatment is not science fiction, but an unfortunately real possibility that demands our focused attention.
The subject is well deserving of the comprehensive, sober approach it has received in Ms.
Garrett's hands.
MARGARET A. HAMBURG, M.D.
NEW YORK


'There Is No Excuse. . . . '
To the Editor:
Reducing real tragedies to mere entertainment is base and meretricious, as those involved in the film about the Parker matricide admit  [ "From New Zealand, Heavenly Murderous Creatures," Nov. 13 ] .


Population Trends Hold Surprises
A REPORT issued earlier this month on the county's population has broad implications for educators, health-care workers and taxpayers, demographers and planning officials said last week.
The report, "Westchester County and Municipalities: Population Estimates for Jan. 1, 1993," found that last year's count of 885,731 follows moderate increases since 1990 and reverses a downward trend of the 1970's and 1980's.


POSTINGS: Chez Place des Antiquaires: Daffy's; Antiques Out Off-Price In
"Off-price" was an unwelcome phrase in the elegant subterranean precincts of the Place des Antiquaires, a collection of nearly 100 antiques dealers that dwindled to a handful over its six-year life before closing this year.
But by next fall off-price merchandise will set the tone for the two 27,000-square-foot floors beneath the curved facade of 135 East 57th Street, at Lexington Avenue.
"But we sell upscale off-price stuff," insisted Vance Wilson, the owner of Daffy's, the glitzy New Jersey-based discount clothing outlet that plans to occupy the space.
Daffy's, which already operates three stores in Manhattan, has signed a 15-year lease valued at well over $20 million for the now-vacant antiques showroom, with its artificial skylight, marble walkways and wood paneling.


Political Memo; DEMOCRATIC PARTY STRUGGLES TO FIND NEW EQUILIBRIUM
Three weeks after their top-to-bottom electoral wipeout, Democrats remain uncertain over what to do next and virtually leaderless beyond a President whom many in the party see as a big part of their problems.
Division, of course, is traditional among losing parties, and among Democrats even in the best of times.
But their current disarray has left a near vacuum for triumphant Republicans that is compounding the Democrats' midterm disaster.


The Gentle Art of Creating a Family Film
THE DIRECTOR JOHN Pasquin is well aware that at some point during "The Santa Clause," the new film that stars Tim Allen as a reluctant replacement for the man in red, children may be bored.
"There's a definite ebb and flow in the movie in terms of attention span," he explains.
"The kids are sort of hooked all the way through the North Pole, and then they drift, and then they come back toward the end, when Santa gets in trouble. But the very parts of the film where they start to pull back are exactly the points in the film where the adults start to lean forward."
Mr.
Pasquin made a conscious decision to use lines and situations that would make adults laugh.
Apparently, he succeeded.
Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, called "The Santa Clause" "a clever, entertaining children's film with a realistic edge and a minimum of seasonal mush." It opened to $20 million of business the first weekend and could be considered a model "family film," one that hooks all audiences.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the man who has been designated the majority leader in the New York State Senate misstated his given name in some copies.
He is Joseph L. Bruno, not John.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  UConn Sets Records in Swamping Morgan  Rebecca Lobo scored 18 points and grabbed 13 rebounds yesterday to lead the Connecticut Huskies to a 107-27 victory Morgan State in the Hartford Courant Connecticut Classic in Storrs, Conn.
Connecticut (1-0) recorded its highest point total and largest margin of victory ever.
Its previous records were set in a 103-45 victory over Colgate last season.


School Prayer Tactics
"We can't be here suggesting the social engineering of the right will be more clever than the social engineering of the left."
Thus spake none other than Representative Newt Gingrich.
He was trying to reassure the Republican governors and governors-elect in Williamsburg that he had heard their message.
That message, put simply, was that Mr.
Gingrich should first secure Republican goals on taxes, the budget and welfare before scaring away voters by pushing the social-control agenda of religious conservatives.


Lisa M. Goldenberg, Michael Altman
Lisa Michelle Goldenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip Goldenberg of Lawrence, L.I., was married on Wednesday in Atlantic Beach, L.I., to Michael Tobias Altman, a son of Justices Myriam J. Altman and Herbert I. Altman of New York.
Rabbi Saul J. Berman performed the ceremony at the Sands at Atlantic Beach, a beach club.
Mrs.
Altman, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Deutsch &amp; Frey.
She graduated from Queens College and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the general manager of Prestige Caterers, in Queens Village, Queens.
Her mother, Idella C. Goldenberg is the manager of Elbaum's Judaica, a shop in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Mutual Funds; Reader's Mail: Enduring the Rate Rise
Question.
I own shares in the Vanguard Wellesley Income Fund, which comprises about one-third of my individual retirement account.
The fund has an excellent track record; however, with the rise in interest rates and fluctuation in the bond market, I'm getting nervous.
I do not plan to become wildly rich with this fund, but neither do I wish to lose principal.
Please advise.
Answer.
Wellesley Income has performed exceptionally well during the last 10 years because of generally declining interest rates.
When rates rise, however, Wellesley's relatively static allocation of 60 percent bonds leaves management with few options to protect investors' capital.


Security Council Again Tells Serbs to Halt Attack
The Security Council tonight condemned the assault on the Bosnian town of Bihac and demanded the withdrawal of the nationalist Serb forces, but shied away from ordering any further military response.
The Council endorsed a statement that reiterated past positions demanding that the Bosnian Serbs stop the fighting and accept the peace accord agreed to last summer by all other sides in the Balkan conflict.


A Celebration of Women With an Independent Streak
MOST of the personalities celebrated in "Setting the Style: New Jersey Women Past and Present" made their marks in the 20th century.
Yet the show seems very much of the 19th century, and not just because it is staged in Macculloch Hall, the manse erected in 1810 by George Macculloch, a well-to-do Scotsman.
Nor does it have much to do with the furnishings of the house, which was bequeathed to the town in 1950 by its last owner, W. Parsons Todd.
The show's atmosphere is, rather, determined by its 17 women, whose feminism seems to have been more individualistic than that practiced today.
None were a Florence Nightingale or even a Mrs.
Beeton (who produced her foot-thick cookbook in 1861 only to perish from tuberculosis while still in her 30's).
But each warrants attention for accomplishments (or a personality) going against the grain of her time.


IGNORE SIGN


Dinosaur Site Is Made a Landmark
Unlike the fictional denizens of Jurassic Park, Hadrosaurus foulkii does not inspire terror.
But when its fossil was dug up in 1858 in Camden County, it caused a sensation: it was the first virtually complete dinosaur fossil found in modern times.
Now, with interest in dinosaurs rekindled even as they fade deeper into history, the site of the discovery has been declared a national historic landmark.


Torture by Army Peacekeepers in Somalia Shocks Canada
The snapshots, entered as exhibits in court-martial proceedings, show Canadian soldiers at a desert outpost in Somalia posing with a blindfolded, bruised and bloodied Somali teen-ager, who was tortured until he died a few hours later.
Canadians have been horrified by the pictures, which appeared this month in newspapers and on television, and by the story of what happened on March 16, 1993, at the encampment, at Belet Uen.


In the Defiled Russian Arctic, Hope Is a U.S. Oil Company
It was lunchtime in this downtrodden Arctic fishing village and the sun had already begun to set.
Dawn broke a few hours earlier and a huge blizzard was on the way.
The temperature was 27 degrees below zero.
None of that bothered the villagers.
They had other things to talk about at a meeting in the settlement's unheated culture center.
Their water is polluted.
They have no jobs.
The annual fish catch is half what it was a decade ago.
Cancer rates are soaring and the local government has had its budget cut three years in a row.


How the Japanese Could Lose Rockefeller Center
THE battle has begun for Rockefeller Center, that temple of commerce, consumption and communications that has long symbolized New York.
Between now and February, Mitsubishi Estate Company of Tokyo, which bought control of the complex from the Rockefeller family in 1989, will square off against a growing group of investment bankers and some stock speculators, who could decide to play rough because they would not mind wresting Rockefeller Center away from Mitsubishi.


Dawn Hollinger, Jonathan Barofsky
Dawn Rachel Hollinger, a daughter of Stephanie and Fred Hollinger of Kings Park, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Jonathan Marc Barofsky, a son of Regina and Dr.
Norman Barofsky of Matawan, N.J.
Rabbi Mark Cooper is to officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 25, is a senior physical therapist at New York University Medical Center.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the president of a giftware design company that bears his name, in Kings Park.
Her mother is an assistant to an oral surgeon in East Northport, L.I.


Widowhood and the Family Home
EDITH BLANCHARD sat across the table from her friend Lucy Hall in the vast dining hall at Evergreen Woods, a managed-care residence in Branford, Conn.
She paused to dry her eyes.
"I'm surprised at the tears," she said, smiling and using a napkin to blot her eyes.
"It's just . . . thinking of my house."


Streetscapes/320 West 55th Street; Neglected City Backyard Comes Alive Once Again
ONLY the exceptional owner can muster the will, the cash and, most of all, the vision to keep an urban backyard from deteriorating into littered hardpan.
So it would be unfair to single out the Rota Holding Corporation simply because it has neglected its once lovely back garden at 320 West 55th Street.
But the good news from the tangled back lot of this little 1920 apartment complex is that it is being reclaimed, inch by inch, by Joy Duchon, who makes a two-and-a-half-hour commute from Connecticut to fix up a part of New York that New Yorkers can't even take care of themselves.


A Benefit of Street Fairs: Freedom From the Auto
To the Editor:
Judging by his Oct. 30 Coping column, Robert Lipsyte doesn't like street fairs.
Community boards and city officials have been hearing a lot from the relatively small number of people who, like Mr.
Lipsyte, claim to be inconvenienced by street fairs.
They rarely hear from the hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers and visitors who enjoy attending them.
In fact, with hundreds of well-attended events annually, street fairs are the single most popular outdoor activity in the city.


Becoming the Next Bernstein? (Or Boulez?)
Esa-Pekka Salonen IS IN THE BELLY OF the beast.
The brilliant young Finnish conductor has begun his third season as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, and the city of eternal celebrity is making its ominous presence felt.
A few blocks away, at the Los Angeles County Superior Court, the self-styled "trial of the century" creeps forward; endless banks of satellite dishes beam the epic trivialities of Judge Ito's courtroom into space.
The orchestra's home is the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, better known to billions as the historic arena of the Oscars.
Where Sally Field shrieked and Jack Nicholson smirked, where John Williams accepted an Oscar for his score to "Star Wars," Mr.
Salonen spent a day recently rehearsing Witold Lutoslawski's intricate, ambivalent Piano Concerto.
A decade ago, Mr.
Salonen was organizing sparsely attended avant-garde concerts in Finland.
Now, at 36, he holds the most important musical post in the most media-intense city in the world.
And he has made his task more difficult by maintaining a commitment to 20th-century repertory.
Rather than vanishing in the middle of the season, the Lutoslawski concerto appeared defiantly in the orchestra's gala opening concert, flanked by Prokofiev's "Classical" Symphony and Stravinsky's "Sacre du Printemps." A bias toward the modern also infuses the Los Angeles Philharmonic programs Mr.
Salonen will conduct this afternoon and tomorrow evening at Avery Fisher Hall, with music of Lutoslawski, Ravel, Schoenberg, Bartok, Sibelius and, the odd man out, Beethoven.


Taxes, Vouchers And Parochial Schools
I am afraid the recent article on tax financing of parochial schools dwelt on details of school tuitions and attendance and ignored the broader dangers of forcing citizens to support parochial schools against their wills and religious convictions.
Many deeply religious Americans, Catholics included, are greatly disturbed by the push to obtain public tax funds for New Jersey parochial schools.
It is wrong to demand tax financing for parochial schools when there is now tax exemption for the same schools.
Involuntary tax financing for parochial schools that are contrary to the religion of millions of other Americans will polarize the community along religious lines.
It will endanger the tolerance and religious peace we have enjoyed in America for over 200 years.
Religion is taught in the churches and Sunday schools, in absolute freedom.
That is what they are for.
The public school system, which has helped make America the greatest nation on earth, bar none, will be destroyed in time.
The public simply cannot support multiple high-quality school systems.
The average citizen just can't pay his regular taxes and support his church and support someone else's church, against his will.
Let's be very clear and honest about it: this radical plan means stupendous new taxes.
If the idea is such a panacea, and people are so supposedly for it, put it on a statewide ballot.
If the people vote "yes," fine.
If they vote "no," forget it.
And this is a lay, nonteacher citizen talking. JOHN TOMASIN West New York


The Moon, How Lovely! The Wit, How Elsewhere
BROOKLYN -- Pale and wispy as a trail of smoke, Pina Bausch, the German choreographer, dropped a cigarette with a long European-style ash onto the sidewalk.
Then, with the posture of the dancer she once was, she boarded the bus for Manhattan that was waiting by the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The seats in front were full.
And so, without a word, she made her way to the back, past her international company of performers from the Tanztheater Wuppertal, who had just been behaving on stage as if they were psychotic in the sold-out matinee of "Two Cigarettes in the Dark" on Nov. 20.


Tory Sanderson, Zeke Sieglaff
Victoria Larkin Sanderson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Sanderson of Ithaca, N.Y., and Boca Grande, Fla., was married yesterday to Peter Maynard Sieglaff Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sieglaff of Boca Grande.
The Rev.
Robert M. Wainwright performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Boca Grande.
Mrs.
Sieglaff, who is known as Tory, trains horses at the Woodmere Farm in Venice, Fla.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, a former chief investment officer at Cornell, is the president of Sanderson Capital Management in Boca Grande.


Let's Go to Press!
To the Editor:
A postscript to your review of Neal Gabler's biography of Walter Winchell (Oct. 23):
Unable to find a job in New York in 1940, a B.A. from a respectable college notwithstanding, I enrolled in the Therese Aub Secretarial School in the Upper West Side.
I could type, but knew no shorthand.
Our assignment every evening was to take down Wichell's radio talks to all the ships at sea.
When we could do this successfully, we could hold down a job anywhere in Manhattan.
THEDA O. HENLE Arlington, Va.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Howard Kohn's moving account of the courageous African-Americans who challenged racism at Denny's failed to answer the question of exactly how such racism was ordered and maintained in this economic entity ("Service With a Sneer," Nov. 6).
Blackouts, prepayment policies, calculated coldness, etc., do not just appear.
They must be cultivated, transmitted and reinforced.
The story we have yet to hear is how large bureaucracies can be organized for hatred.
ALAN HYDE New York


BOC's Leg 2 Question: Can Autissier Be Caught?
When Isabelle Autissier went back home to France last month after her astonishing victory in the first stage of the BOC round-the-world race, people recognized her on trains, planes and automobiles.
But nowhere was her identity more honestly revealed than on the taxi ride back to Cape Town, the port where BOC sailors were preparing for the next stage of the race.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


The False Promise of Competition
To the Editor:
"Now, It's the Rick Scott Health Plan" (Oct. 30) includes evidence usually overlooked by policy makers and the media -- your writer included -- especially with regard to the myth that competition drives down costs and prices.


BENEFITS
Helping Children Learn  MONDAY -- Bobby Short will give a concert at 8 P.M. at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue, near East 53d Street, to benefit the Children's Storefront, a private school in Harlem.
The concert will be preceded by cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 427-8525.
Honoring Ronald Perelman  MONDAY -- The Burden Center for the Aging will honor Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of Revlon, at a black-tie dinner-dance to be held at the Rainbow Room, 30 Rockefeller Plaza.
The evening will begin with a cocktail reception at 7.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.
Hanukkah Toy Drive  TUESDAY -- The United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies will hold its annual Hanukkah Toy Drive at 7 P.M. at 130 East 59th Street.
Participants will wrap more than 2,000 toys and books that will be distributed by the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services and the Metropolitan New York Coordinating Council on Jewish Poverty.
A buffet supper will be served.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 836-1169.
Against Domestic Violence  TUESDAY -- An auction and benefit performances by actors, singers and musicians will be held from 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. at 110 Mercer Street, near Spring Street, in the offices of Campaign Headquarters Against Domestic Violence, an organization that provides programs for battered women and the community.
Drinks will be available for purchase.
Tickets, $10, from (212) 226-0832.
NOW Dinner  TUESDAY -- The Legal Defense and Education Fund of the National Organization for Women will honor William B. Harrison Jr., the vice chairman of the Chemical Bank Corporation; Robert Iger, the president of the ABC-TV Network Group; Dawn Mello, the president of Bergdorf Goodman, and Linda Wells, the editor in chief of Allure magazine, at a reception and dinner at the New York Hilton.
The event begins at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Hospital Benefit  TUESDAY -- A dinner-dance to raise money for Montefiore Medical Center will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening will honor Martin S. Davis, the former chairman of Paramount Communications, and Dr.
Francis F. Foldes, a clinical anesthesiologist at Montefiore.
The reception will begin at 7 and will feature a silent auction of items including a trip to Paris.
Dinner will follow at 8.
Tickets, $550, from (718) 920-6134.
Celebrating Two Women  WEDNESDAY -- A dinner and a performance of "Vita and Virginia" will benefit the Acting Company, the American classical theater company.
The event will include a pre-theater dinner at 6 with the play's stars, Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins, at Moreno Ristorante, 65 Irving Place, at 18th Street.
The play, which is about Vita Sackville-West and Virginia Woolf, will follow at 8 at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street, at Park Avenue South.
Tickets, $165, from (212) 564-3510.
Benefit in Three Parts  WEDNESDAY -- The Wooster Group, a nonprofit theater ensemble, will benefit from a three-part evening that will begin with a dinner at 6:30 at Match, 160 Mercer Street, between Houston and Prince streets.
At 8:30, Spalding Gray will perform his monologue "Gray's Anatomy," at Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 17th Street.
And a party will follow at Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for the performance and party, from (212) 966-3651.
Holiday Bazaar  WEDNESDAY -- The Lenox Hill Neighborhood House will present a holiday bazaar that will include a silent auction, a flea market and a gift boutique.
A preview party, with drinks and hors d'oeuvres, will be held from 5:30 to 9 P.M., at 331 East 70th Street.
Tickets for the preview party are $50, from (212) 744-5022, extension 355.
Admission on Thursday and Friday is free.
To Help P.O.W.'s  WEDNESDAY -- The National Alliance of Families, an organization of relatives of P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, will benefit from the premiere of "2266," a play by Alan Yeck.
The performance starts at 8 P.M. at the Fools Company Space, 311 West 43d Street, and will be followed by a reception.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 604-4398.
Helping Youth  WEDNESDAY -- Babson College will sponsor a benefit for the National Foundation for Teaching Entrepreneurship to Handicapped and Disadvantaged Youth, at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins is a chairman for the benefit.
The event begins at 6 P.M. with a cocktail reception, followed by a youth trade show, dinner and a ceremony to honor business leaders.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 233-1777.
Jewelry Sale  WEDNESDAY -- A preview cocktail party for a holiday sale to benefit the American Craft Museum will be held from 5 to 8 P.M. at 40 West 53d Street.
Sale items, many of which have not been shown before, will include modern jewelry and holloware in gold and silver.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 956-3535.
Benefit for Diffa  WEDNESDAY -- The opening evening of a Turkish bazaar at the New York Design Center, 200 Lexington Avenue at 33d Street, will benefit the Design Industries Foundation Fighting AIDS.
A cocktail party begins at 6, and shopping continues until 9.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 727-3100.
Holiday Party  WEDNESDAY -- A holiday party to benefit the Visiting Nurse Service of New York will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. at the agency's headquarters at 107 East 70th Street.
The event includes cocktails, a buffet and dancing.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 794-9200, extension 4820.
Gala for Maimonides Center  WEDNESDAY -- Maimonides Medical Center will hold its annual fund-raising gala at the Plaza.
The event will honor Al Schreiber, the chairman of the medical center's board.
Cocktails will begin at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 283-7041.
After the Cure  WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail party will benefit Cancer Cured Kids, an organization concerned with the emotional and social issues affecting survivors of pediatric cancer.
The party, from 7 to 9 P.M. at Au Bar, 41 East 58th Street, will include an open bar, dancing, hors d'oeuvres and a raffle.
Tickets, $85, from (516) 484-8160, or $100 at the door.
Dinosaurs at Dinner  THURSDAY -- The American Museum of Natural History will celebrate the 125th anniversary of its founding with a black-tie dinner.
A reception in the Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Hall at 7. will be followed by dinner in the Hall of Ocean Life at 8.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 769-5167.
Grand Chinese Dinner  THURSDAY -- A dinner sponsored by the Chinese-American Executives Forum will benefit the New York Downtown Hospital.
Robert Hunter, a senior executive vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank who works with students at Public School 124 in Chinatown, and Dr.
Donald Armstrong, the former medical director of the Chinatown Health Clinic, will be honored at a 12-course dinner at Jing Fong Restaurant, 20 Elizabeth Street, between Canal and Bayard streets.
The evening, which will begin with a cash bar at 5:30, continues with dinner and a jazz performance by Chinese-American artists.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 444-1930.
Gala for Volunteers  THURSDAY -- New York Cares, a volunteer corps, will hold its annual winter gala at the 200 Fifth Club, 200 Fifth Avenue, at 23d Street.
The event, from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M., will include a jazz quartet, an open bar and photographs with Santa Claus.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 228-5000, or $75 at the door.
Centennial for Hudson Guild  THURSDAY -- The Hudson Guild, a New York settlement house, will benefit from a reception and dinner at the David Dubinsky Student Center at the Fashion Institute of Technology, at Eighth Avenue and 27th Street.
The reception, with a cash bar, will begin at 5:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 6:30.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 760-9812.
YIVO Institute Benefit  THURSDAY -- The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research will honor Abraham D. Sofaer, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institute at Stanford University, and James Ingo Freed, a New York architect, at a black-tie dinner at the Plaza.
A reception will begin at 6:30 P.M.
Dietary laws will be observed.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 535-6700, extension 22.
Feed the Hungry  THURSDAY -- A party to benefit the American Express Charge Against Hunger program will be held at Sony Plaza, 550 Madison Avenue, at 55th Street, from 7 to 10 P.M.
It will include a buffet supper, wine tastings and a raffle.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 642-8118.
Benefit for AIDS Program  FRIDAY -- The United AIDS Review Effort, a nutrition and education program of the Middle Collegiate Church, will benefit from a reception and concert starting at 6 P.M. at Flamingo East, 219 Second Avenue, at 14th Street.
The concert follows at 8 at the church, Second Avenue at Seventh Street.
The singers Ann Hampton-Callaway and Joseph Wiggett and the guitarist Richard Barone will perform.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 699-6901.
Planned Parenthood Benefit  FRIDAY -- Alexander C. Sanger, a grandson of Planned Parenthood's founder, Margaret Sanger, will be the host of a party to raise money for Planned Parenthood of New York City.
The party, including an open bar and hors d'oeuvres, will be at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M.
There will be a preview of Christie's vintage Hollywood posters, an auction and a raffle for services donated by Frederic Fekkai, the haircutter, by the Angelika Film Center and by the New York Health and Racquet Club, among others.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 274-7260, or $60 at the door.
Home for the Holidays  FRIDAY -- A benefit for Flemister House, a housing and day program for homeless people with AIDS, will be held from 6 to 9:30 P.M. at the General Theological Seminary, 175 Ninth Avenue at 20th Street.
The event will include a cocktail party, an art auction, a swing band performance and a swing-dance exhibition.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 265-6530.
Blood-Pressure Alert  FRIDAY -- The National Hypertension Association will benefit from an evening that will include dinner, tickets to "Sunset Boulevard" and a private, post-theater party.
Dinner will begin at 6 at A Dish of Salt, 133 West 47th Street, followed by the play at 8.
A bus will take benefactors to the party in Manhattan.
Tickets, $500, or $175 for the show alone, from (212) 889-3557.
Benefit at the Intrepid  SATURDAY -- The actor Charles Grodin will be the guest speaker at a dinner on board the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum, at West 46th Street.
The event will benefit the United Jewish Community of North Hudson and Bergen County, New Jersey.
The evening will begin with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres at 7 and continue with a museum tour and the dinner.
Tickets, $135 each, plus a pledge of $1,500 per family, from (201) 488-6800, extension 338.
Italian Immigration Assistance  SATURDAY -- The San Remo Holiday Ball at the Sheraton Center, Seventh Avenue at 52d Street, will benefit the American Committee on Italian Migration, a nonprofit organization to help Italian-Americans.
The black-tie event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8, with dancing throughout the evening.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 247-7373.
Gala for LaGuardia  SATURDAY -- A concert of music and dance will benefit the scholarship fund of Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and the Arts at 8 P.M. in the school's concert hall, 100 Amsterdam Avenue at West 65th Street.
The event will include a pre-concert reception at 6:30, a viewing of the Cooper Union and LaGuardia alumni art exhibition and a post-concert reception.
Tickets, $50, or $15 and $25 for the concert alone, from (212) 595-1301.
AIDS Benefit Auction  NEXT SUNDAY -- The third annual "Gifts of Love" auction will be held at the International Design Center, at 30-30 Thomson Avenue, between 30th Place and 31st Place, Long Island City, Queens, from 3 to 7 P.M.
The event will benefit the AIDS Center of Queens County.
Items to be auctioned include jewelry, art and trips.
Tickets, $25, from (718) 896-2500.
Benefit Cabaret  NEXT SUNDAY -- A benefit for the scholarship fund of the Winston School, an independent school in Short Hills, N.J., for children with learning difficulties, will be held at the Hilton at Short Hills, 41 JFK Parkway.
A cocktail party at 5:45 will be followed by dinner and a performance by the cabaret singer Julie Wilson.
Tickets, $100, from (201) 379-4114.
Honor for Senator Dole  NEXT SUNDAY -- Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican, and Leslie H. Wexner, the chairman and chief executive of the Limited, will receive honorary doctorates from Yeshiva University at the university's 70th Annual Hanukkah Dinner.
The black-tie affair will begin with the convocation at 5:30 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria, followed by dinner.
Dietary laws will be observed.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 960-0867.
Beautiful Dress  DEC. 5 -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art will hold the annual Costume Institute benefit dinner-dance.
The black-tie evening will begin with cocktails at 7:30 at the Temple of Dendur in the Sackler Wing of the museum.
Dinner will follow at 9 in the museum's restaurant.
There will be dancing from 9:30 until 1.
Tickets, $900, or $125 for the ball alone, from (212) 570-3948.
Civil Liberties Benefit  DEC. 5 -- A cocktail reception from 6 to 8 P.M. at the Robert Miller Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, will benefit the reproductive rights project of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 382-0557.


Let's Go to Press!
To the Editor:
Sitting at the counter of Al's Sandwich Shop on 23d Street in Miami Beach in the 1950's, I noticed Walter Winchell sitting right next to me.
I had a sealed letter addressed to my mother that I intended to mail after eating lunch.
"Would you mind signing on the back of this envelope?" I asked him.
"My mother would love to have your autograph." At frist he said no. but then he asked for the envelope, signed his name and drew lines around his signature.
He preceeded to talk endlessly all through lunch.
Among other things, he told me the difficulties of being a celebrity.
Everywhere he went, people expected him to pick up the check.
He was going broke by doing this.
I sat, entraced, listened as he spoke for more than 30 minutes and hardly uttered a word.
When the waitress tried to hand me my check, he grabbed it and said it was a pleasure for him to pay for my lunch, as I was the most interesting person he had met in a long time.
HELEN EMANUEL ROSENBERG New York


The Spies Who Stayed Out in the Cold
THE STATE WITHIN A STATE The KGB and Its Hold on Russia -- Past, Present, and Future.
By Yevgenia Albats.
Translated by Catherine A. Fitzpatrick. 401 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


A Family Intact, a Promise Fulfilled
In Rebecca Anderson's corner of the South Bronx, families are fragile in the face of poverty and crime.
But despite illness and need, Mrs.
Anderson has fulfilled a promise to keep her family intact.
Just before Mrs.
Anderson's mother died in 1983, she begged her oldest daughter to watch over their growing family.
Now, 30 years after her only child was born, Mrs.
Anderson is a full-time mother again.
At 54, she shares her cramped apartment with five nieces and nephews who otherwise would be in foster homes.


No No. 4, and Don't Even Think of Giving Him a Green Hat
How do you advertise to the thousands of Chinese immigrants in Flushing?
Some simple tips, to begin with.
Avoid the number four, which means death.
Just as many buildings here have no 13th floor, many Chinese high-rise elevators jump from the third to fifth floor, says Roger Lo, an advertising agent in Flushing.
But lucky numbers, like six and eight, are sprinkled liberally in ads.


Sikh Temple Helps to Bind A Community In Mourning
In the quiet Queens neighborhood of Richmond Hill, inside a nondescript brick building, is the heart of the borough's small Sikh community.
It is a Gudwara, or temple, where people isolated by geography, language and religion practice their faith, share a meal or exchange information on jobs and news of their native India.
They are something of a bachelor society.
Many came to the United States without their families, hoping to make enough money to bring their wives and children, siblings and parents from India, and most share apartments with other Sikhs whom they met through the temple.


Holiday Treat: A Turnaround, a Turning On
As the season's first snow fell faintly in downtown Flushing last week, holiday lights were turned on for the first time in a decade, red and green strings of lights crisscrossing Main Street and Roosevelt Avenue.
What had been a holiday tradition fell victim to the area's economic downturn in the early 1980's, said Regina Colletta, manager of Community Board 7.
Funds could not be raised from the new businesses trying to gain a toehold in an area that was changing economically and ethnically.


Data Bank/November 27, 1994
Data Bank/November 27, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
-1.5
0.3
6.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 18
Nov. 11
Nov. 4
In thousands
326
326
333
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 25
Nov. 18
Nov. 11
Rate in percent
5.27
5.33
5.22
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.73
5.78
5.64
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.93
8.12
8.14
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent
7.10
7.35
7.24
Gold
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$384.60
$384.20
$385.20
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.06
$17.47
$18.04


The Neediest Cases
Generosity comes naturally to Rebecca Anderson, but not always easily.
Despite a debilitating illness, she has struggled for years to keep her extended family together, taking in five nieces and nephews, including Omar, who is just 8 weeks old.
Her story is one of good intentions overwhelmed, a problem that the charities served by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund know all too well.
Page 60.


In America; Starve the Weak
The elderly woman was moving slowly up Lexington Avenue in East Harlem, her face ashen and her eyes tearing against the sudden wind and the cold that had rolled in on the day before Thanksgiving.
By the end of the day there would be snow showers, but the snow hadn't started yet.
The sun was still shining on a cold autumn morning that felt like winter.
The woman had a long brown scarf draped over her head like a hood.
Her steps were painfully slow.
She was heading north on Lexington, in search of a meal.
An old man had directed the woman toward Emmaus House, at Lexington and 124th Street, which provides a bit of food for the destitute and the working poor in a setting reminiscent of the Great Depression.


Holiday Food Drives: Where to Share
As the holidays approach, some food programs for the needy are beginning their annual food drives while others are continuing their year-round efforts.
Here is a sampling of programs that accept donations.
ALL BOROUGHS  CITY HARVEST AND THE FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS Holiday canned- food drive at all firehouses and police departments in the five boroughs; these sites are designated to receive packaged and canned foods for City Harvest, a nonprofit agency serving 150 emergency food centers in the city.
No glass except for baby food, and no perishable foods.
Holiday food canned- food drive continues through the New Year.
City Harvest accepts donations year-round, including perishable foods; donors can contact City Harvest for more information.
For the location of nearest firehouse or police station: (212) 463-0456.
SALVATION ARMY Donations go to needy families and individuals.
Turkeys, frozen or fresh, and canned goods are accepted.
No glass or perishables.
Donations accepted Mondays through Fridays; hours vary.Manhattan: 120 West 14th Street, from 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 337-7343; Harlem Temple, 540 Lenox Avenue, from 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 862-3900.
Brooklyn: Brooklyn Citadel, 321 Ashland Place, Fort Greene, from 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (718) 638-2844; 601 Lafayette Avenue, Bedford-Stuyvesant, from 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.(718) 622-0614.
Bronx: Bronx Citadel, 424 East 160th Street, South Bronx, from 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. (718) 665-8472.
Queens: Jamaica Citadel, 90-23 161st Street, Jamaica, from 8:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. (718) 297-4860.
Staten Island: 1295 Forest Avenue, Port Richmond, from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. (718) 442-2145.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES Contributes to churches with feeding programs citywide.
For a referral to a neighborhood church: 281 Park Avenue South, Manhattan, (212) 777-4800, extension 331.
MANHATTAN  BAILEY HOUSE All foods accepted.
Serves homeless people with AIDS.
Open 24 hours daily. 180 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 337-3000.
BETHEL LIGHT COMMUNITY CHURCHA soup kitchen, pantry and shelter for men and women.
All foods except pork and shellfish accepted.
Mondays through Saturdays, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. 36-38 West 123d Street, Harlem, (212) 427-2839.
EMMAUS HOUSE A soup kitchen and pantry accepting donations of all foods, perishable or not.
Open 24 hours daily. 2027 Lexington Avenue, at 124th Street, Harlem, (212) 410-6006.
PETER'S PLACE A 24-hour drop-in service for homeless people operated by the Partnership for the Homeless.
All foods accepted.
Basement of Church of St.
Vincent De Paul, 123 West 23d Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-0725.
PELHAM FRITZ APARTMENTS Transitional housing for homeless families, operated by the Children's Aid Society.
All foods accepted.
Monday to Saturday, 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. and Sunday 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. 17-21 West 118th Street, between Fifth and Lenox Avenues, Harlem, (212) 348-5356.
BROOKLYN  C.H.I.P.S.
Christian Help in Park Slope, a soup kitchen.
All fresh, packaged and canned foods are accepted.
Monday to Friday, 8 A.M. to 3 P.M. 200 Fourth Avenue, Park Slope, (718) 237-2962.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES Accepts nonperishables for distribution to soup kitchens.
Monday to Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. through New Year. 191 Joralemon, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 722-6000.
BREAD AND LIFE Accepts donations of nonperishables year round.
Soup kitchen serving homeless people and low-income families.
Monday to Friday before 11 A.M. 75 Lewis Avenue, Bedford-Stuyvesant, (718) 574-0058.
BOND STREET DROP-IN CENTER Accepts fresh food and nonperishables year round.
Serving homeless people.
Operated by Catholic Charities.
Daily 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. 39-41 Bond Street, Downtown Brooklyn, (718) 935-0439.
QUEENS  QUEENS EAST FAMILY CENTER/QUEENS WEST FAMILY CENTER Operated by the Catholic Charities.
Canned and packaged nonperishables are accepted until the end of the year.
Mondays through Fridays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Thanksgiving Day and Friday Nov. 25.
East: 90-39 189th Street, Hollis, (718) 217-1440.
West: 70-11 48th Avenue, Woodside, (718) 899-8493.
BRONX  PART OF THE SOLUTION Soup kitchen accepting canned goods and nonperishables.
Daily, 9 A.M. to 7 P.M. 2763 Webster Avenue, at 197th Street, Fordham. (718) 220-4892.


KURT MASUR
ALTHOUGH I'VE BEEN AN ex-New Yorker for 15 years I still root for the New York Philharmonic.
Like the Mets, it had seen glory days in the 60's, but by the 80's the orchestra had nearly lost its standing among the top five American orchestras to Los Angeles or St.
Louis.
It no longer had a long-term recording contract or regular radio broadcasts of its concerts.
In his 13 years as musical director, Zubin Mehta had appointed 42 new players but was unable to weld the orchestra into a disciplined team.
In 1991 the Philharmonic hired a new musical director, Kurt Masur, to restore its status.
Masur seemed a surprising choice.
He led the venerable Gewandhaus Orchestra, in Leipzig, but he lacked the renown of contemporaries like Klaus Tennstedt or Carlos Kleiber.
Ironically, Mehta's jet set image may have worked in Masur's favor; he was the least glitzy candidate on the Philharmonic's short list, which included Claudio Abbado, Bernard Haitink and Colin Davis.
With morale at the Philharmonic at a low point, players and administrators decided to replace easygoing glamour with dour precision.


Infra Rad
In the past, kids in school passed surreptitious notes on paper.
Now, companies like Sega and Casio are selling pocket communicator-organizers for $80 and up that let students send messages silently during class with the same infrared-light technology that is used in most television remote controls.
Some devices also allow kids to play a game called Battleship across the invisible link.
A spokesman for Sega insists that the company wants youngsters to pay attention in class and that the toys are meant for use out of school -- in tree forts, say, or at slumber parties.
Cool.


Time Warp
To the Editor: In "Essence of Maui: Quiet Upcountry" (Oct. 30), Lenore Magida reports on visiting the Kula Botanical Gardens.
When we were there the entrance fee was $3, but I see that it has gone up to $4 for adults, $1 for children 6 to 12.
At the time I thought $3 was a bit steep for what looked like a small botanical area.
I asked the woman behind the counter about discounts for us seniors.
I'll never forget how she looked me in the eye and said: "In Paradise we don't age." I paid.
GORDON RAPP  Tenafly, N.J.


School Prayer Can Both Exclude and Coerce; Back to the 50's
To the Editor:
The drive by Congressional Republicans for a constitutional amendment requiring school prayer should come as no surprise.


The Cry Was 'Workers, Unite!' (And Artists Too)
RUSSIAN POSTERS OF THE 1920's evoke in bold lettering and imagery the tumultuous period following the 1917 Revolution.
Among the most compelling are the news and propaganda posters -- intense, even witty bulletins that were printed daily on the cheapest paper and hung for all to see in the shop windows of Moscow.
While the political events pictured are as difficult to decipher as the Russian words describing them, the graphic power is unquestionable.
The broad appeal of this work can be seen in "Rosta, Bolshevik Placards: 1919-1921," an exhibition at the Sander Gallery, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, through Jan. 7. (Wall labels provide rough translations.)


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
SLEEPING BEAUTIES By Susanna Moore.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
This novel, set in Hawaii, traces the difficult maturation of a young girl, Clio, whose struggles to define herself as a woman are complicated by the odd behavior of her mother, her stepmother and her eccentric aunt Emma.
The book "expands a body of work that is eloquent and disturbing," Abby Frucht said here last year.


The Bad and the Ugly
Not every trip is a joy.
But that doesn't mean a bad trip can't be memorable.
In a new book, "I Should Have Stayed Home," 50 novelists, journalists and travel writers rhapsodize about their worst travel experiences.
The journalist Jeff Greenwald got dunked into an electric bath in Tokyo.
And the novelist Barbara Kingsolver was almost tossed out of New York's Rainbow Room (she violated the dress code).
Still, it's all perspective.
The novelist Joe Gores maintains, "Any trip you walk away from in one piece is a winner." The book, from Book Passage Press, is $13.95 at stores or may be ordered by calling (800) 999-7909.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


What if Presidents Vetoed Amendments?
To the Editor:
President Clinton may "fight" Republican initiatives with the veto, but not a proposed balanced budget amendment (editorial, Nov. 21).


Fall Cleaning for a Better Spring Show
IT'S time.
Cleanup of the garden should be well under way.
End-of-the-season tending helps make the spring garden spectacular.
All those reminders of the previous year will be gone.
The bulbs, trees and early wildflowers can have the scene all to themselves.
A proper fall season tidy-up also reduces wintering hideouts for many insects, which like to snuggle down in garden debris.
Some insects also lay their eggs in plant detritus and removal of it makes their reappearance less likely.


A SENSE OF PLACE
DEAR Diary,
Looking back on it now, what a surprisingly delightful season it was, the winter of 1994-1995!
Hardly anything like last year's miserable New Jersey winter.
And certainly far from the predictions in the Farmer's Almanac, which forecast an even more extreme winter in the Garden State than that of 1993-1994.
Yes, of course, there were a few minor travails here and there.
And in truth, the season did present its share of annoyances.
But, Dear Diary -- here in the spring of 1995 -- how pleasant it is to review these pages and recall the bracing challenges of the winds of winter!
How satisfying to look back at the months we remember so well:


A Library's Historic Treasures in Tight Spaces
A GIFT of gold cloth reportedly from Captain Kidd, a 300-year-old Indian deed and a 200-year-old atlas from the days when Bay Shore was called Penataquit and Commack spelled Comac are samples of the past in three Suffolk County libraries.
But preserving the past does not come easily, especially in Smithtown, where space and finances are concerns.
Although it has one of the oldest and most extensive collections about Long Island history, the 87-year-old Smithtown Library has been beset with financial problems for several years, quashing any plans for expansion and causing complaints about the housing of its archives.


S-E-X Is the Talk of China (Well, Not All the Talk)
A sexual revolution of sorts is under way in China, not because the world's largest population has just discovered sex but because it is discovering how to talk about it.
In newspaper columns, on radio talk shows and over dinner, the Chinese are discussing sex, how to enjoy it and how to deal with its consequences more than at any time in this century.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.
RUNNING WILD: When asked to describe the Kennedy High School running attack, tailback Peter Clarke is never at a loss for words.


Wide World of Food in the Capital
WASHINGTON has many faces, all seductive and nearly all reflected, one way or another, in the city's restaurants.
There is imperial Washington, city of monuments and imposing buildings, where the distinctive throb of political power is so different from New York's money and fashion power.
And there's the neighborly Southern town, a place of green parks, tree-lined streets and Georgian row houses.
And then there is international Washington, where the dress code covers everything from saris to sarongs, Mao suits to tribal robes.
Restaurant menus stretch around the world from the Middle East to Malaysia and back by way of West Africa, Central America and points in between.
Kinkead's American Brasserie


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
Junior  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito, Emma Thompson Directed by Ivan Reitman PG-13 107 minutes


POSTINGS: The Dix Hills Wall; Almost a Mile Long, It Gives a Project Privacy
"Something there is that doesn't love a wall" and "makes gaps," wrote Robert Frost in "Mending Wall."
His farm wall had to be mended every spring.
But a wall 7 feet high and 5,000 feet long running the full road frontage of a new Vanderbilt Manors West housing complex in Dix Hills, L.I., is going to remain intact "hopefully for a very long time," said the developer, Charles B. Mancini of the Park Ridge Organization in Ronkonkoma.


Should Historical Buildings Yield to Square Glass Boxes?
A GIANT metal claw started to rip away at the 100-year-old Laurel Street School in Branford one day late in October, only hours after a Federal judge in Hartford concluded that town officials had not acted unreasonably in deciding to demolish the school to make way for a new police station.
The destruction of the school was the culmination of a 10-month sometimes bitter battle between town officials and their supporters, who wanted to raze the school, and a citizens' organization known as SOS (Save Our School).
Eventually the battle also involved the Connecticut Historical Commission and the State Attorney General's office, both of which favored retaining the school building as a historically important structure.


83 Is His Age. His Golf Scores Are Lower.
IN a chance meeting outside the clubhouse at the Race Brook Country Club in Orange, Ed Silver feigned shock when, peering into George Dunham's golf bag, he found an outsized Big Bertha driver and a collection of other up-to-date graphite clubs.
"What are you doing using all of this state-of-the-art stuff?," Dr.
Silver, a retired dentist, asked with a smile.


Kelly L. Noonan, Daniel J. O'Shea
Kelly Lynn Noonan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent C. Noonan of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Daniel Jerome O'Shea, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Shea of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Vincent Gartland performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of Princeton.
Mr. and Mrs.
O'Shea, both 26, graduated from Colgate University.
She is studying for a master's degree in physical therapy at the University of Colorado.
The bridegroom is to begin medical school at St.
Louis University next fall.


Russia Admits to Accidents at Nuclear Plants During Soviet Years
In the early days of the cold war, explosions and fires at three plants in the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons manufacturing complex killed seven workers and injured a dozen others, a Russian newspaper has reported.
Western experts say the disclosures this month by Komsomolskaya Pravda shed light on Soviet efforts to boost nuclear production at all costs and a failure to adequately protect nuclear workers.


As Pope Inaugurates 30 Cardinals, He Condemns War in Bosnia
In a solemn ceremony at the Vatican, Pope John Paul II formally inaugurated 30 new cardinals today, using the occasion to inveigh against the "absurd fratricidal fighting" in Bosnia.
As if to underscore his message, one of the prelates elevated to cardinal was Archbishop Vinko Puljic of Sarajevo.
At 49, Archbishop Puljic was the youngest of those who were chosen to join the College of Cardinals, which will eventually elect a successor to John Paul.


Thrills and Chills of Marketing a CD-ROM Adventure
LIKE most people in the new business of making and selling CD-ROM software, Howard Tullman was very recently doing something else for a living.
Today the former Chicago lawyer and venture capital investor is waiting for royalties from his first big title, a CD-ROM sequel to the film "Blown Away," which starred Jeff Bridges as an Irish revolutionary turned bomb squad hero and Tommy Lee Jones as a vengeful evil genius.


'The Coming Plague'
To the Editor:
As the New York City Health Commissioner, I would like to respond to Stephen S. Hall's perplexing review of "The Coming Plague (Oct. 30), Laurie Garrett's excellent study of the threat posed by new and re-emergent microbial diseases. Mr. Hall accepts the importance of the issues raised by Ms. Garrett, yet he complains about her thoroughness and attention to detail.
The matters discussed in "The Coming Plague" are serious and of significant concern, not only to scientists and public health professionals but also to the broader public.
The emergence of new infectious disease threats (like AIDS, Legionnaires' disease, Lyme disease, toxic shock syndrome and the newly recognized hantavirus syndrome), as well as the resurgence of old diseases (like tuberculosis, cholera, malaria and, most recently, plague), often in new and drug-resistant forms, should be a powerful warning that we remain extremely vulnerable to the microbial world.
With increasing urbanization, international travel, agricultural manipulation and environmental disruptions, these worrisome trends will only worsen in the years to come.
Indeed, as the AIDS epidemic reminds us, the possibility of lethal viral diseases for which we have no treatment is not science fiction, but an unfortunately real possibility that demands our focused attention.
The subject is well deserving of the comprehensive, sober approach it has received in Ms.
Garrett's hands.
MARGARET A. HAMBURG, M.D.
NEW YORK


Katherine Roth, Gabriel L. Boyar
Katherine Roth, a daughter of Nancy and Rabbi Alvin S. Roth of Delmar, N.Y., is to be married today to Gabriel Leigh Boyar, the son of Carol Isaak of Portland, Ore., and Stephen Boyar of New York.
The bride's father is to officiate at the Franklin Plaza, a ballroom in Troy, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel J. Isaak, the bridegroom's stepfather, is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride is the marketing manager at Harper's Bazaar magazine in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, who formerly was the rabbi at Temple Beth Emeth in Albany, retired as a psychologist at the New York State Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities in Albany, where her mother is an assistant counsel.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
It is no great surprise that schools like Bennington are having difficulty attracting students to fill classrooms.
With the cost of a four-year college education beyond the reach of most middle-class families, few can afford to send their offspring to schools that do nothing more than prepare them for "self-invention."


Andrea B. Troxel, Adam J. Kosto
Andrea Beth Troxel, a daughter of Donald E. and Eileen M. Troxel of Belmont, Mass., was married last evening to Adam Joshua Kosto, a son of Gale and Bernard Kosto of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Bernard H. Mehlman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Boston.
Ms.
Troxel, 25, is keeping her name.
The bride and bridegroom, who is 26, graduated from Yale University.
They are Ph.D. candidates at Harvard University, she in biostatistics and he in medieval history.


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
Interview With the Vampire  Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Kirsten Dunst Directed by Neil Jordan R 120 minutes


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


Bosnian Ousts U.N. General From Talks
Bosnia's Prime Minister threw the top United Nations military commander here out of a meeting today, accusing him of blocking NATO air strikes that would help protect the Muslim enclave of Bihac from attacks by nationalist Serb forces.
After the meeting the Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, told reporters that the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, had told him explicitly that the United Nations would not order NATO air strikes against the Serbs.


Northern Ireland Hopes For a Brighter Image
BOMB-SHATTERED storefronts and British soldiers in full combat gear patrolling blighted neighborhoods are hardly images conducive to building tourism, but they have been the reality in Northern Ireland for decades, at least in Belfast and other cities across the province.
But now, with the terrorist organizations on both sides of the Northern Ireland conflict having declared cease-fires and pledged themselves to the peace process, the British Government has high hopes for promoting a more attractive image of Northern Ireland and stimulating a big increase in tourism.


More Glitz Than Substance
To the Editor:
Bill Carter's article on "generic" news reports supplied to local television stations was informative but failed to note the negative aspects of this growing network service  [ "Now, a Live Report From Somebody or Other," Nov. 13 ] .


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IN THE LAND OF GIANTS  My Life in Basketball.
By Tyrone (Muggsy) Bogues  and David Levine.
Little, Brown, $19.95.


The Nation -- Alamo? What Alamo?; Texans Want to Get Closer to Mexico
SOME 158 years ago, Texas firmly declared its independence from Mexico, and its citizens adopted an equally firm sense of self.
Whatever they were, they were not Mexican.
The image of a tall Texas Ranger, his six-shooters still smoking, standing over a stack of limp but conclusively disciplined Mexicans who were inevitably identified as banditos, made Texans feel that all was right with the world.
But now, Texas looks at Mexico and wants back in.
So badly that classes are springing up around the state, sponsored by community colleges, chambers of commerce and government agencies, to help Texans turn themselves into Mexicans.


The World; Begging for Mercy For Rwanda -- Earlier This Time
IT has not been six months since the end of Rwanda's bloodshed, a civil war in which hundreds of thousands of Tutsi were slaughtered and a million Hutu fled into exile.
Now the question is: When will the violence start again?
The President of neighboring Burundi fears that it will be before the end of the year.
United Nations officials in Rwanda say no longer than two or three months.
These people have been observing the soldiers of the former Rwandan Government, who are well equipped -- artillery, mortars, armored personnel carriers, even three helicopters, according to a United Nations intelligence report -- and can buy more with millions of dollars looted from the country's banks.


Let's Go to Press!
To the Editor:
Sitting at the counter of Al's Sandwich Shop on 23d Street in Miami Beach in the 1950's, I noticed Walter Winchell sitting right next to me.
I had a sealed letter addressed to my mother that I intended to mail after eating lunch.
"Would you mind signing on the back of this envelope?" I asked him.
"My mother would love to have your autograph." At frist he said no. but then he asked for the envelope, signed his name and drew lines around his signature.
He preceeded to talk endlessly all through lunch.
Among other things, he told me the difficulties of being a celebrity.
Everywhere he went, people expected him to pick up the check.
He was going broke by doing this.
I sat, entraced, listened as he spoke for more than 30 minutes and hardly uttered a word.
When the waitress tried to hand me my check, he grabbed it and said it was a pleasure for him to pay for my lunch, as I was the most interesting person he had met in a long time.
HELEN EMANUEL ROSENBERG New York


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
98.78
98.59
108.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5599
1.5544
1.7130
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3754
1.3674
1.3290
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5627
1.5666
1.4775
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.60
$384.20
N.A.
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Soccer Field Is a Gift, but Neighborhood Says 'Not on Our Turf'
It has long been said that Americans do not fully appreciate the joys of soccer.
By now, the Norwegian Government might be willing to leave it that way.
In a goodwill gesture during the World Cup last summer, the Norwegians gave an $80,000 field of artificial turf to the community of Red Hook.
Ten days after its dedication, neighborhood youths set it on fire and burned a hole in it.
The field was removed.


Opening Night At the Ballet
A supper ball at Lincoln Center raises funds for the New York City Ballet, Nov. 22.


Rapee Team Leads in Bridge Tournament
One of the world's great veteran players was on track to win yet another title at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall National Championship here today.
George Rapee of Manhattan, who won three world team titles four decades ago and is a youthful 79, is the captain of the team that led after Friday's qualifying stage of the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams.
His teammates, all experienced professionals, are John Solodar of Manhattan; Bill Eisenberg of Boca Raton, Fla.; Richard Reisig of Delray Beach, Fla.; Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Piotr Gawrys of Poland.


New Shock For Politics In Japan
The political earthquake last year that ended nearly four decades of one-party rule here had settled in recent months into quiet maneuvering over who would control the slow reconstruction of Japan's political order and how much the economy would be opened.
But the apparent calm has suddenly been broken, with the conservative rebels who brought down the old system voting to dissolve their new parties in a kind of parliamentary free-for-all and the Socialists, led by Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, on the verge of splitting because of a deep ideological rift.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Marguerite Adams still reigns as the grand dame of Queens Republicans.
History, though, may not be on her side.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Skis.
Hats.
Garbage.
Everyone needs a hook these days in the hyper-competitive Upper East Side bar world.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 Ishmael Reed in the East Village; Caribbean fables on the Concourse.
MOVIE CLOCK 15 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 16 Ethnic harvest in the West Village: Jerk, daube or stew at Caribe; Middle Eastern specialities at Magic Carpet.
SOAPBOX 17 Clearing up the clutter on New York's sidewalks.
Plus, letters and Photographer's Journal.


A Family Intact, a Promise Fulfilled
In Rebecca Anderson's corner of the South Bronx, families are fragile in the face of poverty and crime.
But despite illness and need, Mrs.
Anderson has fulfilled a promise to keep her family intact.
Just before Mrs.
Anderson's mother died in 1983, she begged her oldest daughter to watch over their growing family.
Now, 30 years after her only child was born, Mrs.
Anderson is a full-time mother again.
At 54, she shares her cramped apartment with five nieces and nephews who otherwise would be in foster homes.


Sports of the Times; Pass the Crawfish Pie, It's the Bayou Classic
BY the time Grambling kicked off to Southern to start the 21st annual Bayou Classic yesterday, the tone for this intense intrastate rivalry had already been set.
Friday evening, 40,000 fans jammed special sections of the Superdome for the annual battle of the bands between the two Louisiana schools.
An hour before the competition, Dr.
Issac Greggs, the legendary director of Southern's band, was sitting down away from the field, relaxing.


Habitats/91 Central Park West; Lucky on the West Side
PATRICK ZABATTA looked at a lot of one-bedrooms in six months, many being sold by pregnant women.
"I didn't want to be in the same predicament," he said, then laughed at the unlikelihood that that would happen.
"I meant that even though I don't need the extra bedroom right now, I won't be forced to move out later," he explained.
"I'll be in New York for the foreseeable future and it was time to set down roots."


Woo-Woo Philosophizing
To the Editor:
Karen Karbo's review of Tom Robbins's novel "Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas" (Oct. 30) begins by assailing Mr.
Robbins for his "Cuckoo plots, woo-woo philosophizing, overwrought metaphors and cheerful misogyny" and states that anyone who wasn't imprinted with his work when "19 and stoned" will find him "forever unreadable."
These statements, which precede any discussion of this particular novel, set the stage for a completely nonobjective review by a critic who obviously disliked this author's body of work before even picking up this new book.
Ms.
Karbo, true to this introduction, describes the novel as "vintage Robbins, a recommendation for those of you who can stand it."
Ms.
Karbo has an obvious intolerance for the elements of comic fantasy in Mr.
Robbins's works, and she is not averse to using bias and exaggeration to sway her readers to her point of view.
For example, she says that the cure for colon cancer portrayed in the book "cannot be described in a family newspaper." I'm betting that The Times will not shrink from printing the word "enema" if this letter appears.
I'm also betting that Ms.
Karbo wished her readers to think that Mr.
Robbins had used some "overwrought metaphor" too disgusting for general consumption.
Finally, Ms.
Karbo shares with us that she performed at least part of her critic's task with "a good 'Valley of the Dolls'-style buzz on." Feeling obliged to mix Xanax and chardonnay to "calm my nerves" because of an airport layover, she picked up"Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas" and found it both incomprehensible and "brilliant." Maybe Mr.
Robbins's work is simply beyond her grasp, especially if she insists on working while under the influence.
May I suggest that the editors find an objective and sober critic to review this comic and erotic novel, and consider referring Ms.
Karbo for professional help for her substance abuse problem.
STUART WITTENSTEIN Jersey City


Grand Dame of the G.O.P.
NEVER mind that it was late November and that Election Day had come and gone and that a victory had been won.
There was still work being done the other day at the Old Glory Republican Club, a small storefront on Myrtle Avenue in the heart of Glendale, Queens, Marguerite Adams's main turf, where she has lived since 1923.
"You never seem to have enough time," said Mrs.
Adams, as she studied the unofficial returns on oaktag posters along the wall.
"The day after an election you start to work all over again."


A Bold Work That Honors Survival
AT FIRST GLANCE, IT COULD have been a therapy session.
In a small theater in Madison, Wis., three men and two women sat in a semicircle, looking a little nervous.
But the graceful, powerfully built man seated at the end, the one with the wire-rimmed glasses and closely shaved head, spoke warmly, gently.
Soon people relaxed, even laughed, as they followed his lead.
"I want each of you to stand up and create a movement, a little picture of yourself," he said.
And one by one, the movements flowed.
A wiry young man slapped his chest, then thrust out his arms.
"I am sending myself out into the world," he said.
A little later, the man with glasses asked questions.
"Tell me about the day you learned you were ill. How would you imagine spending your last day?" Each person in the group answered thoughtfully, almost eagerly.
"When I learned I was H.I.V. positive," said an elegant young man, "I became a lot more appreciative of how fragile life is, how ephemeral beauty is, the pleasure in movement." A woman with a French accent spoke next.
"People looked at me and said 'How can you have cancer? You are so healthy.' "


Dolphins After One Thing: Momentum
Jeff Cross, the Miami Dolphins' defensive end, sat at his locker, cutting tape off an injured ankle and drawing hope from the fickle nature of momentum.
"One minute you've got it, another minute you don't," he said.
"Last month we had it going for us and the Jets had it going backward. Today, it's vice versa."


Christmas Eels
Americans like chestnuts roasted on an open fire.
Over in Italy, they like to cook up a mess of eels, which is fortunate for Maurice Bosse, below, of Montross, Va.
Up and down the East Coast, fishermen trap eels, but there's a minuscule domestic market.
In Asia and Europe, however, the slippery fish are smoked, barbecued and stewed.
As vice president and manager of George Robberecht Seafoods Inc., Bosse sends as much as 35,000 pounds of eels a week (and alive) by air -- "The eels are kept cool in waxed cardboard boxes" -- to Frankfurt, from which they're trucked to Holland, Belgium, France and Italy.
He also likes to sample his product.
"I prefer them stewed with greens and herbs," Bosse says.
"Stewed eels are a real treat."


An Embassy Job in Moscow Would Make Any American Testy
To the Editor:
We served at the United States Embassy in Moscow from 1988 to 1992 and believe that your Nov. 18 article about it reflects misunderstanding of embassies.


New Chinese Market: Sellers Are Ready, Buyers Rare
At the new vendors' market in Sara Delano Roosevelt Park on the Lower East Side, Cheng Kin Wah flipped mounds of fried rice and two kinds of noodles on a big grill while his helper fried chicken wings in a large wok (four for $1).
For an hour, the stand was never idle; in fact, the line was at times three or four deep.


Dyer Jones and Kimberly B. F. Skeen
Kimberly B. F. Skeen and W. H. Dyer Jones were married on Monday in Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
Mary Johnstone performed the Episcopal ceremony in the library at Harbour Court, the Newport clubhouse of the New York Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Jones, 34, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myles A. Cane of New York.
She is a painter.
She attended Skidmore College, where her father is the chairman of the board of trustees.
Mr.
Cane is of counsel to Marcus, Montgomery, Wolfson, a law firm in New York.
The bride was a widow.


Bugging the Family Car
It's the classic crime of American teen-agers: "borrowing" the family car for a furtive spin around town, preferably at 90 miles an hour.
Well, no more.
Davis Instruments of Hayward, Calif., has just introduced an Orwellian invention that should give pause to hot rodders everywhere -- the Drive Right "responsible vehicle monitor." The high-tech device, which is installed on the drive shaft, keeps track of the car's behavior.


Past Sheds Light on Clinton and School Prayer
State Senator Luther Hardin received a telephone call from the Governor one day in June 1985.
Bill Clinton wanted to talk about prayer in the schools.
Just days before, the United States Supreme Court struck down an Alabama law, almost identical to the one in Arkansas, that had provided for a period of prayer or silent reflection at the start of each school day.
In light of that ruling, Mr.
Clinton wanted to pass a new bill.


In White Plains, More Than Location
IN an area once barren of restaurants, Sweetwater's has for the last decade filled that void and often quite nicely.
The place has experienced some culinary highs and lows, to be sure.
But we are pleased to report that at the moment the kitchen seems to be on the rise once more.
Sweetwater's has advantages other than its location.
It fulfills the various dietary needs of the surrounding community by offering decent food ranging from lustrous entree-sized salads to hefty two-pound lobsters.
Another amenity, a daily specials menu tucked into the regular menu, lists the fresh fish of the day, and they are worth a look.
And although tight, the casual dining space is also attractive with prints of Parisian street scenes and cascades of greenery.


INSIDE
Reassuring North Korea
The United States, in a letter, assured North Korea about keeping its end of the bargain if the North freezes its nuclear program.
Page 9.
Doctor Resumes Suicide Aid
Hours after a Michigan law banning assisted suicide apparently expired, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian helped a woman end her life.
Page 28.
Instilling Discipline in Albany
The fall of Ralph J. Marino in Albany showed how Governor-elect Pataki intends to flex his muscle against G.O.P. dissidents.
Page 49.


RUNNING LATE
Perhaps Todd should consider paying her phone bill instead of spending $1 to "buy water every night after my run." That extra $30 a month could keep her phone turned on and might really ease her mother's mind.
SUSANNE SHULMAN Brooklyn


The Birth of the Jump Shot
BIG LEAGUES Professional Baseball, Football, and Basketball  in National Memory.
By Stephen Fox.
Illustrated. 522 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company.


Street-Smart Fashion And $1,500 Knockoffs
The poseurs wore pink his spiky hair and her rubber corset.
Another couple with pierced bodies and bondage straps were chased by the paparazzi around the Chinese porcelain.
Rock music echoed through the august marble hall.
The party held in London at the Victoria and Albert Museum to celebrate the opening of an exhibition called "Street Style" was an incongruous mix of the outrageous and the establishment.


Remarks About Venture Are Disputed
To the Editor:
I am very disturbed about being misquoted in your article about Lionel Pincus ("Even in Hard Times, He's Still the Top Player in Town," Profile, Oct. 23).
STANLEY E. PRATT  Boston, Oct. 26  The writer is general partner of Abbott Capital Management, based in Boston.


More Traffic Would Ruin A 'Perfect' Brooklyn Street
To the Editor:
I write to add my voice to that of the president of the South Portland Block Association (Letters, Nov. 13): Traffic from the planned Atlantic Center should be diverted away from that Brooklyn street.


You Mean There Was Information Before CD-ROM?
To the Editor:
Regarding the latest computer whiz kid, Michael Simmons ("Age 16, and Success Is Sweet," Sound Bytes, Nov. 6), it's a shame he couldn't find the motivation to finish Steinbeck's "The Grapes of Wrath." Fortunately he had the electronic form and could still get an "A" -- after all that's the important thing.
It speaks volumes about our current society when we read of a 16-year-old, already earmarked for success, who has mastered the computer keyboard but is "bored" with the account of a family struggling through the Great Depression.
If only the Joad family could have traveled the information highway instead of Route 66, they may have merited more interest from the next Bill Gates.
Tom Joad meant well when he said that, "We're the people, ain't nobody gonna wipe us out," but, of course, he never met the delete key.
Excuse me, this is my exit.
JOSEPH SAN GEORGE  Mesa, Ariz., Nov. 7


Movie Central: Thumbs Up, Thumbs Down
With the opening on Nov. 18 of the Sony Theatres Lincoln Square on Broadway at 68th Street, the Upper West Side has solidified its position as movie central.
There were already 16 movie screens in six theaters between Columbus Circle and 84th Street, including the six-screen Lincoln Plaza and the six-screen Sony Theatres 84th Street.
Sony Lincoln Square -- now the largest theater in Manhattan -- added nine screens, plus an eight-story high Imax screen that shows films in three dimensions.


Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security
A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers.
A sampling follows: To the Editor:


Auctions Aboard Ship
Cruise passengers bored with the usual shipboard activities can now bid on a little culture.
Holland America recently initiated art auctions on two of its ships, the Westerdam and the Maasdam; the line plans to offer them on the entire fleet by early next year.
The art, framed lithographs -- signed and unsigned -- prints and silk screens by artists like Picasso, Erte, Chagall and Norman Rockwell, is mostly in the $500 to $600 range.
The auctions are being run by Concessions Services, based in Miami.
The line will hold four auctions during seven-day cruises and five auctions on 10-day cruises.
Bonus for high rollers: an invitation-only sale on the final day for previous buyers and guests billeted in suites.


Heisman Voting
To the Sports Editor:
William C. Rhoden ("The Heisman Vote's 3-Card Monte," The Times, Nov. 13) believes Steve McNair doesn't have a chance of winning the Heisman because he comes from Alcorn State, a black Division I-AA college.
I believe a better understanding of the Heisman voting will help dispel any injustices associated with the awarding of the trophy.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Magnificent!
Your cover photo!
Two eggs, sunny side up, two rashers of done-just-right bacon, the two pancakes with (dear God!) real butter, two crisp sausages, a pitcher of thick, dark syrup and that friendly sprig of parsley may have tempted Times readers to eat the biggest breakfast they've had in years.
The Denny's cup of coffee identified this masterpiece as the lead-in to an article with a nasty headline and the usual ho-hum complaints by blacks.


Financial Crisis Hangs Over District of Columbia
A man approached the information desk at the District of Columbia's Department of Motor Vehicles the other day and wanted to know how crowded it might be the day after Thanksgiving for a driver's license test.
A woman behind the counter looked glum.
"We may not be open," she said.
"The city is so broke, they're talking about furloughs and we may not be here on Friday."


Georgia O'Keeffe's Drawings in Bermuda
An unexpected side of Georgia O'Keeffe's work may be seen in a small exhibit at the Bermuda National Gallery through Jan. 27.
The artist, so strongly identified with the American Southwest, visited Bermuda in 1933 and 1934.
The exhibit, "Georgia O'Keeffe: The Bermuda Respite," includes 11 of the 14 works she produced during that time, charcoal and pencil drawings depicting banyan trees and banana blossoms.
The curator for the exhibition is the Masterworks Foundation, an organization dedicated to promoting art created by Bermudians or depicting Bermuda.


Liza Landsman, Matthew A. Gold
Liza Landsman, the daughter of Benett A. Landsman of Maple Shade, N.J., and Barbara S. Berci of Los Angeles, is to be married today to Matthew Alexander Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Gold of New York.
Rabbi Ivan Caine is to perform the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.


The Shroud
A GREAT SHROUD has been drawn across the mind of America to make it forget that there is a world beyond its borders.
Except when showing "Star Trek" or some imitation, the three main television networks obsessively focus their cameras on domestic tales and dramas, as if the end of the cold war rendered the rest of the planet irrelevant.
Their news staffs occasionally visit some massacre, famine or shipwreck and their star anchors may parachute into Haiti or Kuwait for a photo op, but these spasms of interest only emphasize the networks' apparent belief that on most evenings the five billion folks out there don't matter one whit.
Midst all the agitation about immigrants in California and Texas, have you seen even one good report on the 23 million refugees roaming the globe?
Or the response to immigrants in Germany or, if it could be found, Canada?
After all the hype given to Charles Murray's portentous I.Q. alarm, did you catch even a single network asking what other societies think about intelligence tests?
Or what they've learned about the relationship between talent and economic growth?


Ina Frankel, Isaac Greszes
Ina Frankel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Frankel of Chicago, was married on Thursday to Isaac Greszes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Greszes of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Yossi Gisinsky officiated at the Fairmont Hotel in Chicago.


Jerusalem to Amman the Slow Way
PEACE had come to the Middle East, at least part of it, and all I had to do last October was travel from one of the countries signing the peace -- Israel -- to its new partner -- Jordan -- to write about it.
Easy.
After all, if two lands have just overcome a hurdle of history and faith, politics and war, surely travel between them must be part of the deal.
Not only that, on the map Jerusalem and Amman are only about 50 miles apart, so shouldn't it be simple to hop in a cab and cross one of the Middle East's great fault lines?


Janet Agoglia, Christopher Andolina
Janet Agoglia, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Agoglia of Glen Cove, L.I., was married there yesterday to Christopher M. Andolina, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore M. Andolina of Amsterdam, N.Y.
The Rev.
Domenick Graziadio performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Rocco.
Mrs.
Andolina, 26, is an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated magna cum laude from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., where she was also elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a consulting engineer at Han Padron Associates, an engineering firm in New York.


Martha Byrne and Michael McMahon
ON the soap opera "As the World Turns," Martha Byrne plays Lily Grimaldi, a young woman who wears Versace suits and tight-fitting gowns and is married to an Italian millionaire.
She lives on a yacht but is about to move into a mansion.
Her emotional life is a disaster -- she has two mothers (one biological and one adoptive) and a former true love who has suffered amnesia because of a car accident and now can't remember her.
Off the set, Ms.
Byrne, 24, is anything but a troubled diva.
She drives a four-wheel-drive Toyota truck, wears jeans and work boots and often spends Saturday nights singing in an Irish pub with friends, few of whom are celebrities.
And on Nov. 12, she married someone who is not at all a show-biz type, Michael McMahon, 27, a New York City police officer.


Paperless Publishing
To the Editor:
While reading Leigh Hafrey's essay "At Cyberspace University Press, Paperless Publishing Looks Good" (Oct. 30), I had the feeling of "Plus ca change." In 1492, Trithemius, a German Benedictine, wrote "In Praise of Scribes," in which he maintained that the new technology of print was merely novel, unlikely to last and, compared with copying by hand, not morally edifying.
Trithemius's optimism for manuscript production and pessimism for typography were both exaggerations, and many views on the computer revolution evoke this same ambivalence.
Traditional books will always be printed, and in good quantities, for the simple reason that when it comes to actual reading, they are vatly easier to use than a computer and monitor.
It is inconceivable that anyone would want to try to read "The Great Gatsby" (much less "Ulysses" or "Moby-Dick") in any form but a printed one.
On the other hand, as the essay points out so well, computer technology has already radically transformed the character of research, information management and publication.
When it comes to technological innovation, intellectual evaluation often yields to emotional anxiety.
Trithemius was wrong: by itself, print destroyed neither book production nor morality.
It did not even eliminate writing by hand.
If computerphobes take heart in this, computerphiles might take caution from the fact that the technology they seek to replace was itself once trumpeted as the ultimate solution to problems cognitive, pedagogic and economic.
TIM MACHAN Milwaukee


In the Region/Westchester; Plans for Tara, an Irish Cultural Center, Make Gains
THE creation of Tara Circle, a multipurpose Irish cultural center in the village of Briarcliff Manor, moved a step closer to reality this month when the village Board of Trustees voted unanimously to approve a special-use permit, allowing the center to be established on the grounds of the 58-acre King's College campus.
This is the first and perhaps most difficult hurdle that faced the group seeking to build "the largest Irish cultural institution outside of Dublin," according to Edward A. Sheeran, chairman of Tara Circle Inc., whose executive committee comprises eight area businessmen.


The World; Bosnia Makes Atlantic Unity An Oxymoron
LIKE a slow cancer, the Bosnian war is eating away at the Atlantic alliance, laying bare a divergence of strategic interests so basic as to raise the question of whether France and Britain can truly be considered America's allies, at least in the way that they were in confronting Moscow during the cold war.
Last week the issue was Bihac, yet another small, hitherto unknown Muslim enclave in Bosnia under assault from Serbs.
The Clinton Administration wanted stronger action beyond the two selective NATO air strikes carried out last week against Serb positions in Croatia and Bosnia.
It proposed an immediate demilitarization of the Bihac area backed by the threat of new, more destructive NATO air raids.


Choose It and Drive It Away
For the driver who insists on a red car or is worried about leg room, National Car Rental says it is now allowing renters to choose their own automobiles.
Once the rental is processed at the counter, customers head for the lot, where they drive away in any car they like -- within the size range they ordered, of course.
National's new system is offered at most major American airports.
To order, call (800) 227-7368.
TERRY TRUCCO


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Mark T. Sullivan, a former reporter for The San Diego Tribune and The San Diego Union-Tribune, has written an extremely deft first novel, THE FALL LINE (Kensington Books, 850 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022; $20).
Not many investigative journalists have the sensitivity and poetry that are exhibited in this book.
The central character is Jack Farrell, a successful investment banker in California who represents a powerful Central American businessman.
Farrell finds himself a hunted criminal because of what his job is really all about: laundering money for a drug cartel.
Mr.
Sullivan effectively interweaves flashbacks, stream of consciousness and, above all, exciting action.
Farrell is a daredevil skier, and heads to the mountains of Utah when he goes on the lam.
He accepts a job offer from a mysterious Frenchwoman who is making a documentary film about skiing.
Meanwhile, Government agents and drug lords are after him.
All of the characters in "The Fall Line" are believable.
The reader identifies with the flawed hero, with his wife, even with the smart, civilized drug kingpin who sets Jack Farrell on the wrong course.
The title of Ross Thomas's latest thriller, AH, TREACHERY! (Mysterious Press/Warner, $21.95), is adapted from Plutarch's characterization of Romulus: "He loved treachery but hated a traitor." And treachery is what this novel is all about.
Mr.
Thomas, a very skillful writer, lets us dangle for a while -- who are the good guys and who are the bad guys? -- as he unfolds his story in natural, free-flowing language laced with humor and sophisticated dialogue.
His protagonist is Edd Partain, a Vietnam War hero who is now a clerk in a Wyoming gun shop.
Partain is sitting on a secret that is political dynamite.
A figure from his past turns up and puts some pressure on him.
Suddenly Partain finds himself working for Millicent Altford, a smart woman who raises money for politicians.
A lot of money has been stolen from her, and she wants Partain to help her get it back.
Things get confusing.
Something very big is going on.
Powerful people want Partain out of the way.
The C.I.A.'s dirty-tricks division shows up.
Two generals try to outwit each other.
Unsavory politics and politicians are laid bare.
Mr.
Thomas makes some pertinent observations.
He is concerned about the ethics problem that has so many American voters convinced that their elected representatives are puppets on the payroll of lobbyists or the special-interest conglomerates.
Millicent Altford knows what to do.
This is her response to a Congressman who has asked for advice on how to reform campaign financing:
"Simple. . . . Do away with soft money. Provide Federal financing. Establish campaign spending limits -- proportional ones, of course -- so somebody running for the Senate in New York can spend more than somebody running for it in South Dakota. You know all the cures. It's just that most of you guys don't want to take them."
We have all read a great deal about the Mafia.
Now here's another crime family, this one from East India.
In Mitchell Smith's novel KARMA (Dutton, $22.95), we are introduced to some especially nasty types.
Evan Scott, an architect in New York, is examining the skeleton of a New York skyscraper his firm is constructing when a woman falls to her death from the building.
An accident?
Murder?
The police actually suspect the architect.
When he and his family find themselves in danger, he assumes the initiative.
The hunted becomes the hunter, and Scott, aided by a sweet, dignified, elderly Indian, uses the skills he acquired as an officer in the Vietnam War.
Mr.
Smith, the author of the thrillers "Daydreams" and "Stone City," is good at depicting mounting terror.
He has created a monster of a killer, an Indian giant working for the crime family.
Toward the end there is a chilling duel on the beams of the skyscraper, and there is a final shoot-out that pushes belief a bit too far.
But no matter.
"Karma" will keep you engrossed.
In IXTAPA (Donald I. Fine, $19.95), E. Howard Hunt brings back Jack Novak, now on special assignment for the Drug Enforcement Administration in Mexico.
Novak's objective is to penetrate a drug cartel, which he does in no-words-wasted pulp prose.
Everything is predictable, but it's fun in a junky, innocent way.
In STONE DANCER (Pocket, $22), the British writer Murray Smith concocts a computer scam that could involve the ruin of the American dollar.
The Israeli Mossad, the Sicilian Mafia and the United States Secret Service all make appearances.
The novel is unbelievable and cliche-ridden, but it's also lively and action-packed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-26  BOSNIA ATTACK CONTINUES  The Serbs continued to press their attack on the town of Bihac in northwest Bosnia as the United Nations and NATO bickered over whether to strike back. 1  A BOSNIA-U.N.
CLASH  The Bosnian Primier angrily criticized the U.N. commander, accusing him of holding up action to force the Government to give in. 20


Slice of Post-Dinosaur Life
"Teeth, Tusks and Tar Pits" is the evocative title of the newly opened permanent exhibit on life after the dinosaurs at the Field Museum in Chicago.
The 7,000-square-foot exhibit picks up where the museum's "DNA to Dinosaurs" exhibit leaves off, with fossils, life-size copies, dioramas and videos exploring climatic change and mammal evolution during the ice age.
Fossils found in Wyoming and dating to 52 million years ago, when that part of the continent had a subtropical climate, include a lake community with water lily leaves, a turtle and a fish in the act of swallowing another fish.


Merchants Plan Gesture to Bridge the Gap With New Jersey
Fed up with what they say is a growing exodus of consumer dollars out of their neighborhood and across the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge into New Jersey, more than two dozen merchants in Bay Ridge are planning to stage a protest against New York State's sales tax.
The merchants, mostly on the commercial strips of Third and Fifth Avenues, have agreed to discount their prices by 8.25 percent, the same percentage as the state sales tax, for a single day.


For the Terminator The Mission Is Unparalleled
The Pagemaster  Macaulay Culkin, Christopher Lloyd Directed by Joe Johnston (live action) and Maurice Hunt (animation) G 75 minutes


In South Salem, a Pipe Organ Worthy of a Bach
IT might be called the Jessye Norman of pipe organs, custom designed and fitted and possessed of a powerful pair of lungs.
But its builder, Stephen J. Russell simply called the organ his Opus 27 as he supervised its recent installation at the South Salem Presbyterian Church here.
Organ experts talk in human terms about their instrument.
Organs have voices, their pipes have lips, ears, feet and toes, they inhabit rooms of their own.
Or, as the organist Robert Fertitta pointed out one recent morning here, the organ room is the instrument, because the chamber is filled with the pipes and wind mechanisms that produce sound.


Why Low-Price Steakhouses
THERE is nothing spontaneous or mysterious about restaurant trends.
They do not just happen.
There are reasons they occur and patterns behind them.
The current surge of budget steakhouses is typical.
They are the hottest ticket on the Island.
This wave of pubby, casual, inexpensive restaurants mmoving across Nassau and Suffolk is beginning to obscure other trends like Italian family style restaurants, California cuisines, tortilla storefronts and even brick-oven pizza spots.


Fall Cleaning for a Better Spring Show
IT'S time.
Cleanup of the garden should be well under way.
End-of-the-season tending helps make the spring garden spectacular.
All those reminders of the previous year will be gone.
The bulbs, trees and early wildflowers can have the scene all to themselves.
A proper fall season tidy-up also reduces wintering hideouts for many insects, which like to snuggle down in garden debris.
Some insects also lay their eggs in plant detritus and removal of it makes their reappearance less likely.


School Prayer Can Both Exclude and Coerce; Not Anti-Religious
To the Editor:
We are concerned that "Clinton Reaches Out to G.O.P. on School Prayer Amendment" (front page, Nov. 16) does not explain fully why a strict separation of church and state is important, thus perhaps leaving the incorrect impression that separationists are anti-religion.


Pataki Camp's New Orders: March in Line Or Not at All
The message sent by Governor-elect George E. Pataki's Thanksgiving purge of Ralph J. Marino as majority leader of the State Senate had all the ambiguity of a mobster's hit in a crowded restaurant.
As Mr.
Pataki and his Republican allies consolidate power after two decades of Democratic rule in Albany, they have sent clear signals that there will be little tolerance for dissent, and little forgiveness for those who gambled against them.
In Albany's new order, it seems, the newly powerful believe it is better to be feared than loved.
That may be because Mr.
Pataki won the governorship with only 49 percent of the vote, and because the driving force behind his victory was the deep disenchantment with his opponent, Mario M. Cuomo, rather than his own popularity.
Or it may simply be a matter of political style by a Republican hierarchy that has won time after time by playing relentless hardball.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Edgemont; Like Scarsdale, but With a Lower Profile
WHEN customers walk into Susan Synder's real estate office in Scarsdale they are usually looking for a house in that affluent village, known for its older-style housing and excellent school system.
"When I hear that their primary interest is the schools," said Ms.
Synder, a broker with Julia B. Fee, "I try to get them to also consider Edgemont. Most of the time, they've never heard of it."


Officer Hurt in Queens Standoff
A man in Queens opened fire on two police officers from his second-floor window yesterday, striking one officer in the left hand, and then barricaded himself in the apartment for about two hours before surrendering, the police said.
The man, identified as James Donikian, 47, of 58-24 43d Avenue, fired five times at the officers with a 9-millimeter pistol as they walked toward the apartment building to investigate a report of an emotionally disturbed man, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a Police Department spokesman.


Nov. 20-26: Defusing a Nuclear Threat; Uranium Brought to U.S. From Ex-Soviet Republic
It sounded like a plot of a novel.
More than half a ton of highly enriched uranium -- enough for dozens of bombs -- lay near a nuclear fuel fabrication plant in a remote area of the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan.
Afraid that the bomb-grade material might find its way to Iran, Iraq, North Korea or some other third world trouble spot, the United States began a project, code-named Sapphire, to bring it to America.
After secret negotiations, a team of American officials went to Kazakhstan and transferred the material into 1,400 stainless steel containers, each the size of a quart can of oil.
Then three huge American C-5 transport planes flew the uranium nonstop to the United States, completing the project just before the winter snows closed in.


Peace and Aid In the Middle East
To the Editor:
"In Israel, a Ho-Hum Response to Peace" (World Markets, Oct. 30) was salutary.
In questioning a so-called peace dividend, Paul Lewis took a step to correct grave misunderstandings about the peace process, a step that may help temper expectations in other areas.


Nancy I. Linneman, William A. Gotsis
Nancy Isobel Linneman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest W. Linneman of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif., was married yesterday to William Anastasios Gotsis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Constantine A. Gotsis of Old Westbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Dr.
Linneman, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a first-year fellow in pulmonary and critical care medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College, and she received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, as did the bridegroom.


A Very Bad Year for the Neediest
A new administration at City Hall has begun the unpleasant task of making the city face fiscal reality.
No department, no program, however worthy, will be untouched by the cuts in funding needed to balance the city's budget.
For New Yorkers who have been just barely hanging on, these cuts will have devastating consequences.
For some people, it will mean the social services they have depended on to keep food on the table, to keep a home intact or to keep their adolescents out of trouble will disappear.
But New York's fiscal troubles will not only mean a reduction in services for the poor.
One of the preferred methods for cutting the city's expenses -- cutting jobs -- will create more poverty.
Many people who hold low-ranking city jobs are minority women.
When layoffs come, they are often the first to go.
For them, such jobs are the difference between self-sufficiency and welfare.
City payroll cuts will inevitably mean a swelling in the welfare rolls, just when the city can least afford it.


Belle of the Bayou
WASHINGTON THROUGH A PURPLE VEIL Memoirs of a Southern Woman.
By Lindy Boggs with Katherine Hatch.
Illustrated. 392 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $24.95.


BENNINGTON MEANS BUSINESS
Elizabeth Coleman is a president any college would be lucky to have; through her leadership Bennington will achieve the best of its possible futures ("Bennington Means Business," by Mark Edmundson, Oct. 23).
But she is not responsible for the redesign of the college.
That buck stops on the board room table.
It was the board of trustees, responding to its legal and fiduciary responsibility, that conducted the symposium, assessed and developed ideas from every quarter and made the decisions set forth in our report, including the criteria that governed personnel decisions.
JOHN W. BARR Chairman, Board of Trustees Bennington College Bennington, Vt.


Little Smoke, Little Tar, but Full Dose of Nicotine
Faced with shrinking markets and mounting attacks by anti-smoking groups, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company plans to market a cigarette next year that produces little smoke or odor and no ash but still contains as much nicotine as regular cigarettes.
The company, which has spent about $500 million in the last decade developing the low-smoke cigarette, is gambling that such a product can bring new life to the industry.


Turkey-Cum-Latke: It's Holiday Fatigue
Just when many Jewish families are recovering from Thanksgiving, they are having to return to their kitchens and dining rooms to celebrate Hanukkah, which begins tonight.
Celebrators have only two days off between the holidays, which are the closest they have been to each other since 1918.


A Crystal Ball
To the Sports Editor:
Less than 24 hours before the Dallas-San Francisco game, Thomas George predicted in "This Matchup Is All It's Pumped Up to Be," (The Times, Nov. 13) that the "unknown, unheralded, unhyped free safety Merton Hanks is a prime candidate to produce the big, game-swinging play." Actually, Hanks made two game-swinging plays by intercepting Troy Aikman twice at the goal line, thereby saving the 49ers from defeat.
Does Mr. George do horse races? MARV AUERBACK  Foster City, Calif.


Holiday Season Selling
EVERYONE'S so busy preparing for the holidays in the month between Thanksgiving and Christmas that it's gained a reputation for being the worst possible moment to sell a home.
Small wonder that the number of new listings tends to fall off dramatically.
So does the traffic.
At William Pitt Real Estate, a Connecticut brokerage, the number of binders typically drops by 30 percent in December compared with the rest of the year.


Phoning Home
To the Editor: I read with great interest the Practical Traveler article "What It Costs to Phone Home" (Oct. 23), in particular the explanation offered by Oncor Communications as to why their rates border on highway robbery.
In September I was traveling in Maryland and stopped for dinner at a fairly expensive restaurant in Frederick, a city that hardly struck me as the sort of backwater Oncor says it serves.
I made a nine-minute credit card call to New Mexico from the pay telephone in the restaurant, which, when I got my telephone bill, logged in at $18.09.
When I called Oncor and pointed out that I could have called Paris for what they were charging, I got the same story they gave your author.


The Executive Computer; Help for Users of Corporate Databases
SO you bought the relational database software; you bought the client/server paradigm; and you bought the pitch that this technology would make information broadly available across your organization, only to discover that you and your employees had to learn to speak fluent SQL?
That's pronounced "sequel," and it's short for structured query language, which is the lingua franca of all modern database management programs.
Unfortunately, SQL bears only slightly more relation to English than it does to Urdu or Klingon, so non-programmers need not apply.
In practice, this has meant that while information might be broadly distributed through an organization, users cannot get at it without the help of the management information systems staff, typically known as M.I.S.


Irish Parties Seem to Be Making Progress Toward New Coalition
Nine days after the collapse of Ireland's Government, party leaders seemed today to be making progress toward forming a new coalition, which would avoid the necessity of calling a general election to end the political confusion.
The turmoil began when Labor Party members protested an effort by Prime Minister Albert Reynolds to promote his Attorney General to President of the High Court.
The Attorney General, Harry Whelehan, had failed to extradite a Roman Catholic priest to Northern Ireland to face charges of child molestation.
Labor pulled out of the Government, and Mr.
Reynolds, a member of Fianna Fail, resigned as Prime Minister on Nov. 17.


'Muggers: Why Do they Exist?'
Crime statistics don't tell all.
In his poem "Muggers," Gabe Leibowitz, a 15-year-old sophomore at the Day School on West 88th Street, explored the toll of everyday fear.
He wrote it at the Poetry Center Schools Project of the 92d Street Y. Muggers -- Why do they exist?
Do they have fears?
Apparently not,  for they attack you Without a thought.
Grabbing hands, rough voices, Sometimes even weapons.
A knife put  to your throat, a gun Aimed at your head.
You think, "What's the point  of resisting?" Your money is gone.
Your bus pass is gone.
What is peace?
Why is it so hard to find?
If you run into a gang, you may As well empty your pockets.
"Hey kid! Give me your money!" "S-s-sure." Safety is hard to find in New York.
Walking the streets, you walk with a Friend, trying to avoid an attack.
Your friend leaves; just  3 more blocks.
But alas, You are mugged again.
When I see a group I feel scared.
I try to walk across the Street, if possible.
But once I didn't And it hurt.
A black kid and a white kid Came up to me and my friend.
They took my pass.
I was very frightened.
But my friend got the worst of it.
In 5 quick minutes His shoes were on the feet of one kid.
After that experience I learned a lesson.
In a flash, I'm across the street When I see a gang.
That is all.


Culture Should Know No Boundries
To the Editor:
As a Canadian consumer, I am growing frustrated by the Government's cultural-protection policies, an example of which is illustrated by Clyde H. Farnsworth's article "The Border War Over Country Music" (Oct. 23).
At the request of a new Canadian country music station, an American channel, Country Music Television, will be expelled after 10 years in Canada.
The two million Canadian receivers of CMT will get the Canadian Country Network instead.


Gun Is Brandished, Plainclothes Officers Fire and 2 Men Die
Two plainclothes officers were patrolling Crown Heights on bicycles on Friday evening, on the lookout for muggers and pickpockets, when they came across a crowd on a street corner that is a frequent outpost of small-time drug dealers.
A man pulled a BB gun from his waistband, prompting both officers to open fire, the police said.
Two people were killed.
One was the man said to have pulled out the BB gun; the police said he was hit nine times.
The other was 300 feet away, walking outside the grocery store where he worked, when he was hit by a stray bullet.


A Truly Swinging Version
To the Editor:
Here in outstate New York, Ken Van Etten, the mainstay of the Corning Grassworks, a local bluegrass band, has been wowing audiences for years with a unique rendition of "In the Pines." His version features a solo on the "sewer pipe" (a crinkled, blue plastic tube about five feet long and three inches in diameter), which, when swung furiously in circles around his head, enables Mr.
Van Etten to produce an eerie wail of varying pitch.
He does it for laughs -- and gets them -- but still, the weird sound combined with that tune and those old words is surprisingly effective.
MARY LU WALKER  Corning, N.Y.


From Rachmaninoff To Holiday Concerts
GET ready for one of the busiest weeks on the Connecticut concert calendar, as more than half a dozen orchestras and at least that many choirs vie for audiences.
Michael Lankester conducts the Hartford Symphony at 8 P.M. on Tuesday and Wednesday at the Bushnell, the program featuring Vaughan Williams's Fifth Symphony and, with Andre Watts as soloist, Rachmaninoff's Second Piano Concerto.
For reservations, call the box office at 246-6807.


Aloha. Pirates Begin Season With Victory in Honolulu.
Seton Hall 69, Southern Illinois 56
Danny Hurley scored 18 points and Adrian Griffin had 14 points and 9 rebounds Friday night, leading Seton Hall to a 69-56 victory over Southern Illinois in the Honolulu Tip-Off Tournament.
The victory gave George Blaney a successful debut as coach of the Pirates.


All of Those Triple Axels Are Leaving the Skating World Dizzy
With the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, figure skating has lost its innocence while experiencing unprecedented popularity, opportunity and chaos.
Ice wars have broken out this fall between so-called amateur or Olympic-style skating and professional skating, which features such familiar and accomplished stars as Kerrigan, Kristi Yamaguchi, Brian Boitano, Katarina Witt, Viktor Petrenko, Scott Hamilton and Paul Wylie.
Promoters, television networks and big money have joined the fray.
Even fans have become embroiled in a sideline skirmish.
At stake is nothing less than control and legitimacy of the sport, the importance of the Winter Olympics and the direction of skating toward the future.


As U.N. Packs Bags, Fear Grows Among Aid Groups in Somalia
As United Nations peacekeeping troops prepare to withdraw from Somalia with no political settlement in sight, fears are spreading among aid organizations that their departure will open the way for looting, violence and the destruction of recently established relief programs that have improved life for many Somalis.
CARE has recently pulled all its workers out of outlying towns and cities, leaving only a small contingent in Mogadishu, the capital.
United Nations refugee and relief agencies met recently in Nairobi, Kenya, to plan a strategy for their widely scattered workers, who will have no international police protection or ready access to aircraft for evacuation after the peacekeeping troops leave.


Singing Praises; Quilting for AIDS
A dinner for St. Thomas boys choir; a preview of designer squares.


Tie Accomplishes One Thing: It Makes Bowl Picture Muddier
The gales gave hot dog wrappers a ride, the players requested thermal underwear and the coaches were thankful to be wearing headphones.
And this was not South Bend.


The Line on 72d St.: Neighbors 1, OTB 0
Many Upper West Side neighborhood battles unfold over decades.
This one took a week -- and the community won.
The Offtrack Betting Corporation operates a betting parlor at 202 West 72d Street, on the southwest corner of Broadway.
When residents learned 11 days ago that the parlor might be moved across the street and halfway down the block toward West End Avenue, they organized overnight.


Sacred Objects: Not for Sale
To the Editor:
Rita Reif's article "A Law, a Legacy and Indian Art"  [ Nov. 6 ]  correctly points out the tremendous, often discouraging difficulties we have had in preventing our sacred objects from being sold and becoming someone's "art."


Juilliard Group Offers 'Art of the Fugue'
THE Juilliard String Quartet is devoting its 8 P.M. concert next Saturday at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College to a performance of Bach's complete "Art of the Fugue." Call 251-6200 for more information.
The Hudson Valley Music Club of Dobbs Ferry is continuing its 70th anniversary celebrations by presenting the husband-wife cello-piano duo of David Finckel and Wu Han in a 2 P.M. recital tomorrow.
On the program at the club's headquarters at 54 Clinton Avenue are sonatas by Grieg and Prokofiev, plus several shorter works.
For reservations or more information about the club itself, call 693-1489.


Jean A. Tuttle, James E. Carr
Jean Ann Tuttle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Tuttle of Barrington, Ill., was married yesterday to James Elson Carr, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elson Carr of Penn Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
Craig P. Baldacci, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Long Grove Community Church in Long Grove, Ill.


The Gotcha! Gang
TO TEST READERS and to pull mail, I occasionally stud my political diatribes with mistakes in English.
These studied solecisms not only make me seem human, but also provide the basis for the annual review in this nonpartisan space of the "Uofallpeople" file.
"Et tu, Safire?" writes Klaus Perls of New York, adding, "Then, English, die!" What moved my corrector to this Caesarean mock-horror was this rhetorical question I posed in telling the Secretary of State how to deal with North Korea: "Which works best, the promise of reward or the fear of punishment?"


Facile Versifying
To the Editor:
Regarding Linda Gregerson's review of John Ashbery's "And the Stars Were Shining (Oct. 23): Again we are treated to panegyrics -- "national treasure," "part of a larger provisionality," etc., etc. This championing of Mr. Ashbery -- a facile versifier at best and an overrated verbal meanderer at worst -- is simply unsupportable. Why isn't it obvious that this writer writes the equivalent of cotton candy? Bite, swallow and there's nothing there.
Having read Mr.
Ashbery and having come to the aforementioned candy conclusion, I thought that listening to him read his own work would show me what I was missing, and as director of the International Poetry Forum I invited him to Pittsburgh some years ago.
Mr.
Ashbery in person gave me the same impression as he did on the page.
Here was seemingly sophisticated dullness raised to new heights.
Why then this cavalcade of praise for such an opaque writer when there are poets like Galway Kinnell, W. S. Merwin, Mona Van Duyn, Linda Pastan, Hayden Carruth, Derek Walcott, Seamus Heaney, Barton Sutter, Brendan Galvin, Peter Makuck, Philip Levine, Charles Causely, Philip Booth, Miller Williams and Naomi Shihav Nye -- writers of genuine talent and vision with something to say -- unignorably among us?
I have heard Mr.
Ashbery's prominence attributed to everything from another example of the tale of the emperor's new clothes to the influence of a friendly cabal on the East Coast.
Who knows and who cares?
The result is that we have pseudo-poetry passed off as the real thing.
SAMUEL HAZO Pittsburgh


One Golfer Does Not a World Tour Make
For any important professional golf event to succeed, it must have four elements: television, venues, sponsorship and players.
This equation is immutable in the golf world, and it can be applied to the current question of a World Tour to determine whether the grandiose plan to start one in 1995 is viable.
Let's begin the process.
Does World Tour Inc., the body that hopes to stage eight tournaments next season, have television?
Yes, resoundingly.
The Fox Television Network, hungry for spring and summer sports programming, has committed to televising all the tournaments.
Does it have venues?
Yes.
John Montgomery Jr., the executive director of the World Tour, has made assurances that many top golf courses are champing at the proverbial bit to play host to tournaments.


SERVICE WITH A SNEER
Kohn's contention that "there is a reform era at Denny's" because "employees must watch a 16-minute videotape about diversity" and "managers must attend sensitivity seminars" perfectly illustrates how the therapeutic mentality infests everything nowadays.


Ishmael Reed Takes On 'American Hypocrisy'
FOR Ishmael Reed, longtime literary provocateur, there may be no better place in New York to showcase his new play than the Nuyorican Poets Cafe.
Good sight lines, decent acoustics, exuberant outlaw clientele and a penchant for multicultural expression: just the right elements for "The Preacher and the Rapper," which runs through Jan. 1.
The play, directed by Rome Neal, examines the philosophical clashes between a rap star, an avaricious vegetarian President and a publicity-hungry minister and illustrates the potential for factionalism in modern society.
"It's about American hypocrisy," Mr.
Reed said after a recent performance.
"In this play we take on the hypocrisy of those who criticize rap for its misogyny and sexism when they belong to institutions that practice the same things themselves."


Hormone Treatments Are Largely Synthetic
To the Editor:
As a senior at Harvard College writing my honors thesis on hormone replacement therapy for postmenopausal women, I found misleading information on estrogen replacement in Dr.
Phillip O. Warner's Nov. 21 letter.


Surprising Rutgers Stays on Its Run
Rutgers played one of the toughest schedules on the college level during the regular season and it is now paying dividends in the playoffs.
After finishing with a regular-season record of 8-9-3, the Scarlet Knights are rolling.
Today, they posted their fifth consecutive victory of the post-season by beating Penn State, 3-2, in overtime before a crowd of 4,115 at Rutgers Stadium.


World Economies


Enola Gay Moves as Debate Goes On
After a 10-year, $1 million renovation, the front part of the fuselage of the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, was moved early Wednesday morning from a warehouse in suburban Maryland to the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum.
Moving the 60-foot-long section of the plane was the quietest step thus far in the preparation of an exhibition, "The Last Act: The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II," a look at the decision to drop two atom bombs on Japan in August 1945.


In All-Male Revue, Art Meets Noise
It is a bland fact of nature that falsetto goes up, not down: men's voices can climb into mezzo-soprano or even soprano registers, while most women's voices cannot likewise descend.
The male transgression most often results in excruciating noise, but it can sometimes attain high art; there are several countertenors presently before the public who produce genuinely beautiful mezzo tone.
In the case of La Gran Scena's all-male opera revue, seen on Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse (Hunter College, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues), moments of high art and excruciating noise produced comedy of a sophisticated kind.
This is the company's 13th year -- what it likes to call its bar mitzvah season -- and it presented a gala array of maimed excerpts from various operatic genres: the "Ride of the Valkyries," the closing trio from "Der Rosenkavalier," the duet of the title character and Arsace from "Semiramide," the St.
Sulpice scene from "Manon" and the entirety, more or less, of Act II of "Tosca." The evening's host was Sylvia Bills (Joe Simmons), "America's most beloved retired diva," expertly sending up the gala chitchat of Beverly Sills.


Honors
*
Robert C. Goizueta, chairman and chief executive at the Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, was awarded the 1994 Distinguished Public Service Award by the Advertising Council. *
Betsy Frank, executive vice president and director for strategic media resources at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, was named among the "women who make a difference" by United Neighborhood Houses of New York. *
Frank DeVito, vice chairman at Lintas Worldwide, New York, will serve as chairman of the National ADDY Awards competition for the American Advertising Federation, Washington. *
Rochelle (Shelly) Lazarus, president at Ogilvy &amp; Mather North America, New York, was named Advertising Woman of the Year by the Advertising Women of New York. *
Edward J. Wax, chairman and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, New York, was named the UJA-Federation Man of the Year. *
Alan Cohen, executive vice president for marketing at NBC, New York, was named the 1994 Interactive Marketer of the Year by Interactive Marketing Newsletter. *
Lawrence G. Foster, a consultant who was formerly corporate vice president of public relations at Johnson &amp; Johnson, was named to receive the Arthur W. Page Society 1994 Hall of Fame Award, for his contributions to public relations.


Why Bosnian Serbs Fear Hostile Muslim Rule
To the Editor:
I am writing less in reply to "Dr. Esma's Lesson" by Anthony Lewis (column, Nov. 21) than to the general view of the tragic conflict in Bosnia in his columns.
As a graduate student in European history I find his view of the Bosnian civil war simplistic and distorted.


Liberal Groups Banking on Republicans for Renewal
In an unusual consequence of Election Day's vast conservative shift, liberal interest groups are anticipating a period of prosperity.
The main reason, their leaders say, is that Newt Gingrich, in line to be the Speaker of the House, is an ideal fund-raising tool.
Groups like the American Civil Liberties Union, Public Citizen and assorted environmental lobbying organizations say they are almost certain to receive sharp increases in donations as a result of the shift in Congress giving the Republicans majorities in both chambers for the first time since the 1950's.
The liberal groups expect increases in their memberships as well.


Ballet Hispanico Finds Its Essence
"Fifteen million Americans speak Spanish," reads a Ballet Hispanico poster in the lobby of the company's headquarters on West 89th Street in Manhattan.
"Their dance speaks for itself." And that has always been the quiet message of the troupe, founded in 1970 by Tina Ramirez.
The dances that will be performed by Ballet Hispanico during its two-week season at the Joyce Theater, where it opens tomorrow night, incorporate ethnic, jazz and modern dance as well as ballet.
But the five premieres -- by Alberto Alonso, Susan Marshall, Amanda Miller, Vicente Nebrada and Ramon Oller, a Catalan modern-dance choreographer new to New York -- are all set to Spanish music, ranging from songs by Gloria Estefan and Willie Colon to flamenco to Catalan songs sung by Marina Rossell.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For marketers with a cause, a venture by A+ America comes up with some new twists.
A START-UP company with the intention of putting more computer and electronic technology into classrooms has pulled together a group of national sponsors to underwrite the effort.
Similar technology-for-school ventures relying on corporate support are already in place in many parts of the country.
But what sets apart the venture begun by A+ America Inc. is that it does not rely on a single sponsor or a retailer in a specific region.


Hard-Fought Ground
The conflict over the Muslim enclave of Bihac has demonstrated the enduring unity of Serbian purpose in establishing a single, contiguous homeland stretching from Belgrade through western Bosnia to the southern heartland of Croatia.
The battle for this small town in northwestern Bosnia has also shown that despite endless resolutions and contortions, the United Nations and NATO have found no effective means and no acceptable peace plan to combat this Serbian nationalist vision that lies at the heart of the current Balkan war.


Washington Memo; A Balanced Budget: What One Looked Like
In mid-January, the House of Representatives will vote on a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget.
It will be, said Newt Gingrich, "our first smashing victory" -- a safe political forecast.
But then what?
If the Senate also passes the amendment, and it is ratified by 38 states and eventually becomes part of the Constitution, can the budget actually be balanced by early in the next century, as the Republicans promise?
And can they do it, as they say they can, without raising taxes or touching Social Security and with cuts in the military budget that are much smaller than those President Clinton has proposed?


One Blitz Too Many Helps Bears Nip Cards
The entire state bought his rhetoric and the defense bought his playbook, but Buddy Ryan is about to renege on his promise.
He told anyone who would listen that the Arizona Cardinals were a playoff team, but today he called the wrong defense at the wrong time and lost his most critical game of the season in overtime.
The Chicago Bears, the team that made him famous, defeated the Cardinals, 19-16, after Ryan blitzed one time too many.
Facing a third-and-7 at its 35-yard line, Chicago picked up Ryan's rushing middle linebacker, Eric Hill, and quarterback Steve Walsh had what seemed like hours to locate Jeff Graham, his undeterred wide receiver, upfield.


A Crusader Adjusts to Life After Apartheid
Through each of her books and across the trajectory of her days, Nadine Gordimer has wrestled with her political surroundings, chronicling for outsiders the personal echoes of life in a racist society.
With apartheid finally ended, the novelist waxes exultant over a sense of renewal in her homeland; the urgency is gone, but the turn of mind remains.
Small surprise, then, that in delivering the Charles Eliot Norton Lecture series this semester at Harvard University, Ms.
Gordimer, a 70-year-old South African, is again combining political commitment with literary insight to focus on Naguib Mahfouz, Chinua Achebe and Amos Oz -- "absolutely wonderful writers" of the developing world who, she contends, have been virtually shut out of Western literary discourse.


The Classic And the Neo As Partners In Motion
George Balanchine at his most ebullient can also be Balanchine at his best, as two Saturday performances by the New York City Ballet proved again with debuts in "Symphony in C" and "Stars and Stripes."
The evening program at the New York State Theater also recalled a truism: it isn't easy to be a choreographer for the City Ballet when your works are virtually framed by Balanchine masterpieces.


Bratton to N.Y.P.D.: Smile When You Say That
Where are you, Emily Post, now that the Police Department needs you?
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, who in the last year has demanded that average New York City police officers be more aggressive in pursuing their duties and has even given them new dark blue uniforms in keeping with the tough image, wants still more.


RESULTS PLUS
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  UConn Wins Event a Fifth Straight Time  Rebecca Lobo scored 21 points and 12 rebounds in leading No. 3 Connecticut to a 92-59 victory over Rhode Island yesterday in the Hartford Courant Connecticut Classic Tournament.
Lobo earned most outstanding player honors for the third consecutive year.
She added seven assists and five blocks.
Connecticut (2-0), which earned its fifth straight tournament title, shot 53.4 percent from the floor and held the Rams to 29.3 percent shooting. (AP)


A Firestorm for a District Attorney; Hail of Accusations Against Him by Officials Stirs Up Suffolk
In January of last year, a call unlike any he had ever received came into the office of Patrick Mahoney, the Suffolk County Sheriff.
The Suffolk District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., was on the line.
As the sheriff tells it, Mr.
Catterson delivered a warning to a deputy: If Mr.
Mahoney did not butt out of the Katie Beers case -- a high-profile case involving the kidnapping of a 10-year-old girl -- Mr.
Catterson would arrest the sheriff and bring him before a grand jury.


Treasury To Sell Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is limited to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.27 percent and on the six-month bill, 5.73 percent.


Corrections
The Evening Hours column in the Styles pages yesterday omitted a picture credit line.
The photographs were by Bill Cunningham of The New York Times.


Beyond Rent Control
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 22 article about the Massachusetts referendum on the issue of rent control reports inaccurately the outcome of the vote: "Only Boston, Brookline and Cambridge voted -- in large numbers -- to keep rent control legal. The rest of the state voted to abolish it."


CONGRESS RETURNS TO SELECT LEADERS FOR THE NEW TERM
With Republicans eager to take charge in the first Congress they have controlled in 40 years, senators and representatives come back to town this week to choose the leaders who will set the legislative tone for the next two years.
Ideology is only minimally involved in the leadership fights.
The competition is more over styles, conciliatory versus combative.
But the legislative record of the 104th Congress may depend more on such mechanics than on the substance of any campaign promises.


Timorese Worry World Will Now Forget Them
This seems like a sleepy place, a dirt-poor region that the Asian economic miracle has left behind.
Goats and pigs wander along the roads.
Vendors in the open-air markets stack their potatoes and peppers in neat piles on the ground and snatch naps in the shade.
Children and adults alike greet the relatively rare Western visitor with "Hello Mister," which seems to be as much English as people know.
"To the normal visitor who spends a couple of days here, it's not obvious that there's something going on," a resident said.
"But if you stay a little longer, you see there is this resentment."


In Guatemala, a New Repression Reigns
To the Editor:
Coverage of the efforts of Jennifer Harbury, a United States citizen, to learn from the Guatemalan Government the truth about her husband, a Guatemalan guerrilla reportedly seen alive in the custody of the Guatemalan Government in a clandestine prison, has ignored the abandonment of constitutional democracy by the Government in power in Guatemala, which underlies a deteriorating human rights situation.
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio was appointed as President of Guatemala by a Congressional vote after an attempted Presidential coup by his predecessor failed; the President was never elected by the people.


New York Starts Spinning Its Dross into Gold
Last summer's empty containers for bleach, spring water, dish detergent, antifreeze, baby wipes, cat litter and motor oil have come back to New York streets this fall as traffic barricades.
Con Edison has ordered 25,000, all white.
The city has bought 3,200 sets of legs made from fabric-softener bottles, all light blue.
The barricades, made by Utility Plastic Recycling in East New York, Brooklyn, use only a small part of the 600 tons of plastic, glass and metal the city recycles every day, but they are a visible sign that the city's recycling program is finding new uses for millions of residential and commercial castaways.


Britain's Civil Liberties Backslide
Britain, sometimes romanticized as the mother of some American liberties, is dismantling its own safeguards against compelled self-incrimination -- at a time when "Miranda rights" seem to enjoy new respect in the United States.
For years British police have been warning arrested suspects: "You do not have to say anything unless you wish to do so, but what you say may be given in evidence." That seems fair enough, though not as informative as the U.S. version.


DANCE
2 Titles Promise Stories But Deliver Portraits  Joyce Theater
Despite its title, Garth Fagan's "Telling a Story" doesn't tell a story, at least not in the usual sense.
Instead, this two-part piece, to recordings by Miles Davis, is a portrait of determined people.
It received a forceful performance when Garth Fagan Dance offered it on Friday night at the Joyce Theater.


A Magazine Contest To Promote Chicago
To help rid Chicago of unflattering images like mobsters and freezing temperatures, Chicago magazine challenged seven local agencies to create print advertisements that promote the city's features to outsiders.
The results, in the magazine's December issue, show a decided tilt to the humorous.
The ad from the Chicago office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners, for example, featured an apple pie in the shape of the United States with the headline "Flaky on the outside, soft and warm in the middle." And the ad by McConnaughy Stein Schmidt Brown carried the headline: "A group of German tourists recently remarked that Chicago was the most beautiful city they'd seen since Paris in the 30's. Should we be worried?"


A Momentous Occasion for Giants' Brown
In the rain and cold, on a field that had all the traction of Silly Putty, Giants quarterback Dave Brown went through another one of his moments.
He has been through plenty of them.
There was the moment when, after the Giants' 3-0 start, he earned the respect of everyone around him.
There was the moment he was benched and his pride was bruised.
There was the moment last week when he lay on the ground, unconscious, for 30 seconds.
And there was today's moment.
It may turn out to be a big one for this season, for his career.
Or it may be a blip on the Brown radar screen.
This moment put Brown back in firmly as the starting quarterback of the Giants, and with the 21-19 victory over the Washington Redskins at R.F.K.
Stadium, it kept the team's slim playoff hopes alive.


A Generation Transformed -- A special report.; Women in Their 50's Follow Many Paths Into Workplace
They were members of the last generation to come of age before the women's movement took hold in the 1960's.
Marrying early and in huge numbers, they had expected not to work.
But their lives have played out much differently.
Women now in their 50's have piled into the work force in big numbers in the last decade and a half.
Today the college-educated among them are as likely to hold jobs as any group of younger women.


Breaking Barriers With Laughter
I confess, the prospect had me wincing.
Watching people with physical disabilities tell jokes doesn't exactly sound like a laugh riot.
But "Look Who's Laughing," an hourlong documentary tonight on PBS, artfully tweaks preconceptions with profiles of six professional comics whose physical disabilities are, to varying degrees, worked into routines that aim, as one puts it, to break down barriers and build bridges.
These particular handicaps are decidedly upfront.
The performers are Brett Leake, who has muscular dystrophy; Chris Fonseca and Geri Jewell, who have cerebral palsy; Kathy Buckley, who is hearing-impaired; Alex Valdez, who is blind, and J. D. England, who is paraplegic.
Their stories are told in clips that include performance samples and interviews.


No Identity Crisis for Hachette Magazines Chief
Conde Nast is known for publishing women's magazines.
So is Hearst.
Meredith Magazines is associated with home-and-hearth publications.
And Time Inc., of course, is identified with weekly news magazines.
But what about Hachette?


Market Place; Tiffany's new sparkle is seen in the eyes of investors.
WHEN Holly Golightly, the ingenue in "Breakfast at Tiffany's," was sad, she would walk through the Tiffany &amp; Company store on Fifth Avenue and the sight of jewels, crystal and silver would cheer her up.
Investors are finding that Tiffany is making them happy, too.
In less than a month, Tiffany shares rose 20 percent -- and there may be a little more upside yet to come.
After suffering in the early 1990's from sagging earnings, Tiffany has begun to turn around.
The end of the recession was good news as customers began to spend more.
Problems at Tiffany's Japanese outlets, which account for more than 25 percent of sales, have been straightened out.
And a rapid expansion in stores, which dampened earnings in the early 1990's, has paid off as those stores have now begun to fill with shoppers.


You Can't Even Trust a Postage Stamp
To the Editor:
The Postal Service made more egregious errors in its "Legends of the West" series than depicting Bill Pickett's brother, rather than the rodeo legend himself, on the stamp (news article, Nov. 20).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SPINS ITS DROSS INTO GOLD
While collection is the most visible and expensive part of New York City's recycling program, officials say it is the reuse of those items -- as everything from traffic barricades to fishing piers -- that justifies the effort and may someday underwrite its cost, now $77 million a year for pickup and processing.
And beyond creating new ways to use old materials, recycling is also creating jobs.
In fact, New York's growing supplies of materials, combined with strong foreign and domestic markets, have spurred the establishment and expansion of so many private processing plants that the city, which contracts with 14 different companies, has all but abandoned a plan to build five city-owned plants.
A1.


New Look at Bosnia Strategy
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said he believes that Bosnia cannot reverse gains by Serbs, even with NATO help.
Page A11.


A Sign of the Season


A Smooth Brazilian Blend
Marisa Monte, an exceptionally sophisticated and engaging pop singer from Brazil, exemplifies the quality in Brazilian music that might be called its all-inclusiveness.
Ms.
Monte, who appeared at the Supper Club on Monday and Wednesday evenings, is only in her mid-20's.
But in common with the most talented Brazilian performers, she displays a masterly blend of disparate elements.
In stirring many different echoes into a personal style that seems utterly uncontrived, Ms.
Monte, who was supported by a superb seven-member band, is a descendant of such Brazilian musical titans as Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso.
Aside from the fact that she writes only a small portion of her material, what distinguishes her from her forerunners is a more modernist taste in pop ingredients.


New Campaigns
*
Fortune magazine, New York, is changing themes in a campaign in newspapers and trade publications.
The campaign, by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, carries the theme "Put it to work," replacing a theme, "Inside the mind of management," which has run since 1988.
The campaign is aimed at readers and business executives as well as advertising decision-makers.
Spending is estimated at more than $2 million.


Harry Abrams Is Dead at 87; Ran Across the Country Twice
Harry Abrams, who twice ran between Los Angeles and New York City in the late 1920's, died yesterday in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
He was 87.
Mr. Abrams discovered he had a brain tumor two months ago, said Dale Adams, a daughter.


On the Right Track
Thirty-one years ago, the shattered marble, travertine and granite columns, caryatids, gods and eagles of Penn Station -- modeled after the monuments of ancient Rome by McKim, Mead and White and built for eternity in 1910 -- were carted off to the Secaucus meadows, giving New Jersey undisputed title to the world's most elegant dump.
Of the eagles that crowned the station's walls, a few tokens were reinstalled in front of the new Madison Square Garden, making the contrast between classical and cheesy terminally (pun intended) clear.
Because what goes around comes around, usually so that you want to laugh or cry, there are plans for a new Penn Station.
The proposal is part of a program in which all of the facilities for Amtrak, New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Railroad will be coordinated for what is now fashionably called intermodal transportation but looks more like a railroad revival and great train station renaissance.


Marino Is at His Best When the Clock is Racing
The Dolphins were trailing, 24-21, and had a first-and-goal from the 8 with 30 seconds to play yesterday when Dan Marino gave a knowing glance to Mark Ingram, who had lined up wide to the right.
Marino, yelling "Clock! Clock! Clock!" made a spiking motion to the ground with his right hand and the deceptive die was cast.
There were 75,606 fans at Giants Stadium.
How could they know what was coming next when the 9 other Dolphin players on the team didn't even know?
The unsuspecting Jets relaxed, thinking Marino was going to spike the ball into the ground to stop the clock.
Instead, Marino fired a dart past Jets cornerback Aaron Glenn right into the stomach of Ingram for a touchdown.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Business Committee for the Arts, New York, to A. D. Lublow Inc., New York. *
City Harvest, New York, to the Alfstad Blank Group, New York.


Take a Realistic Look at Some of These Women on Welfare
To the Editor:
Congress and some of the people it represents must have got the idea somewhere that poor women and their children are using too many tax dollars, that their families are too large, they're having too many children, they don't want to work, and they are living comfortable lives off the rest of us out of laziness.


Colombo Journal; A Nonfiction Journey to a More Peaceful World
When the dean of science fiction writers, Arthur C. Clarke, explains why he chose to move to this island nation off the southern tip of India almost 40 years ago, he says he craved the peace that would have escaped him in his native Britain or in the United States.
"If I had lived in New York or London, I'd be eaten alive," said the 76-year-old Mr.
Clarke, who is the author of more than 80 books and many short stories and scripts, including the Oscar-winning screenplay he wrote with Stanley Kubrick for "2001: A Space Odyssey."


Help Yourself
To the Editor:
After reading your Nov. 17 front-page article depicting elderly citizens picking through garbage bins outside grocery stores, I have a suggestion for supermarket managers.


2 Gunmen Invade A Church Service
Disrupting a church service in East New York yesterday, two men wearing masks and brandishing guns forced about 100 churchgoers to the floor and robbed six women before fleeing, the police said.
The robbery, in which no one was injured, occurred about 1:45 P.M. at the Holy Cross Remnant Church of Jesus Apostolic, at 645 Hegeman Avenue.
After entering, the two intruders fired once at the ceiling, the Rev.
W.
B.
McNeil said.


Editorial Notebook; Undemocratic Vistas
What caused the Holocaust?
Was it Fascism, ushered in by the collapse of the Weimar Republic?
Was it that Germanic fixation on racial superiority and "purity"?
Or was it the Enlightenment and those dirty rotten idealists, Hobbes, Rousseau, Franklin and Jefferson?
Blame the Enlightenment and you've chosen the right villain -- at least in the eyes of Leo Strauss, the political philosopher who held court at the University of Chicago through the 1950's and 60's.
Strauss's students had to gasp when he said that Hitler had sprung full blown from the Enlightenment presumptions that all people were created equal and that society was better governed by reason than slavish devotion to tradition.
Leo Strauss contended that the Philosopher Kings (himself included) were born to rule, servants were born to serve and that only disaster came of letting the rabble get above its station.


INSIDE
Reversal for Religious Group
Voters in Vista, Calif., where religious conservatives established a beachhead in 1992, shifted course after months of tumult.
Page A12.
Feud Divides Sandinistas
The Sandinista Front, one of Nicaragua's most important political and social forces, is riven by differences over basic policies.
Page A9.
Sparring in Suffolk County
The Suffolk County District Attorney is accused of threatening to use the powers of his office to punish county officials who cross him.
Page B1.
A New Insurance Shortfall
A sharp rise in claims for ailments that were little known 10 years ago is leaving disability insurers with millions of dollars in losses.
Page D1.


Abroad at Home; The End of NATO?
For four decades the North Atlantic Treaty Organization kept the peace in Europe.
It was an extraordinary achievement of trans-Atlantic cooperation.
Now NATO may be at the end of its useful life.
Its credibility, and very likely its raison d'etre, died under Serbian assault on the town of Bihac in Bosnia.


Volleying Over Budget Is Heating Up
The battle between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council for primacy over the city's budget grew more heated yesterday as the Giuliani administration asserted that the Council's spending plan would leave the city budget $100 million out of balance.
Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers said yesterday that cuts Council sought in the number of employees in the Mayor's finance office and in the sheriff's department would reduce revenue because of slower processing and collection of city taxes and fines for parking tickets.


Pataki Ally Carves Niche In New Republican Order
In Joseph L. Bruno, in line to become the new majority leader of the State Senate, voters will hear a more conservative voice in state government than they are used to, from a man who says he will question everything from welfare to environmental regulations in the name of cutting spending and taxes.
But in an interview yesterday, he sought to send messages of both conciliation to New York City, concerned that it might bear the brunt of spending cuts, and determination to carry out what he sees as the fiscal mandate of his fellow Republican, Governor-elect George E. Pataki, a colleague in the Senate.


Hope, Faith and Computer Yield One Happy Priest
He surely felt his own tears, but the Rev.
Michael D. Joly may have been the only one of the 500 people at St.
Philip the Apostle Church today who was unaware of the tears on the faces of his family and his parishion ers.
Father Joly, 28, who was ordained on Saturday, has been blind since he was 5 years old.
His fellow priests at St.
Philip the Apostle say he is the only blind man they know of to become a Roman Catholic priest.


Ogilvy Chosen For Krystal Account
The Krystal Company, a fast-food hamburger chain, selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather Atlanta to handle its account, which had been at Publicis/ Bloom in Dallas for the last four years.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


Cab Calloway Memorial
A memorial service for Cab Calloway is to be held tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 110th Street, Morningside Heights.
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins, Bill Cosby and Gen.
Colin L. Powell are the scheduled speakers, and the musicians Milt Hinton, Doc Cheatham and Illinois Jacquet are to play.
The service is open to the public.
Mr.
Calloway died on Nov 18 at age 86.


Virtual Literacy With Illustrated Holiday Books
Let us then for a moment think of books as rest stops along the info-superhighway, places to calm our eyes, flush out our synapses and take our brains for a stroll through the Gutenberg gardens.
The following works, arranged roughly in order of increasing price, seem especially well-appointed places to luxuriate in this holiday season.
THE FRENCH CAFE.
By Marie-France Boyer.
Photographs by Eric Morin. (120 pages. Thames &amp; Hudson. $19.95.) The fun of this witty and instructive volume is immediately apparent in the two-page montage of waiters' black vests that appears near its opening.
From artists' haunts to workers' hangouts, you can almost taste the coffee and croissants.
Includes a guide to the best cafes all over France.


Free Trade and Job Losses
Almost 1,500 jobs in the region have been lost as a direct result of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which took effect Jan. 1, according to the Labor Department.
New York State has seen about 10 percent of the job losses attributed to the accord nationwide.
In general, trade experts credit the strong domestic economy with holding down the job losses in the United States.
Workers who lose their jobs because of the free-trade agreement can receive benefits under the Labor Department's Transitional Adjustment Assisitance Program.
It provides re-employment services, job training and income support beyond unemployment benfits.


Corrections
The main front-page article on Nov. 10 about the Republicans' sweep in the elections referred incorrectly to the experience of Congress members under previous Republican control of the House, in 1955.
One member, Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democrat of Illinois, indeed served at that time, though his service has not been continuous.


RECORDINGS
An Eccentric Wit Scampers In His Idiosyncratic World  Benedict Mason (Bridge, BCD 9045; CD)
Bridge Records gravitates toward the more eccentric and self-determined figures in contemporary music.
Its latest find is the fairly unknown but greatly gifted English composer Benedict Mason, who writes music of deep complexity and high wit.
He is a mysterious figure, now 40, who seems to have turned to composition full time only in the last six or seven years.
He studied with Gyorgy Ligeti and plainly echoes that composer's current blend of textural intricacy and stylistic playfulness.
Otherwise, he inhabits a world very much his own: fiendishly intricate rhythmic patterns, ear-teasing historical allusions, hallucinatory hints of tonal clarity.


Serbs' Gains Irreversible, Perry Asserts
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that the Bosnian Serbs had demonstrated their superiority on the battlefield and that the Muslim-led Bosnian Government would be unable to reverse their gains even if NATO warplanes came to its aid.
"The Serbs have occupied 70 percent of the country," Mr.
Perry said.
"There's no prospect, as I see it, of the Muslims' winning that back."


Patents; A Court Ruling Extends Burroughs-Wellcome's Monopoly on the AIDS drug AZT
IN a ruling that is expected to establish an important precedent for the biotechnology industry, the nation's highest patent court last week rejected a bid by two companies to sell a cheaper generic version of the potent AIDS drug AZT.
The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit appears to put to rest the long tussle between the Burroughs-Wellcome Company and the National Institutes of Health over who should be given credit for developing AZT.


Essay; Robust Or Bust
Sir Michael Rose, the reincarnation of Neville Chamberlain, has just admitted that his U.N. force of 23,000 Europeans is unable to "deter" Bosnian Serbs from destroying cities the Security Council has established as safe havens.
That is tantamount to surrender.
A ragtag splinter group of Serbians, with no power but the weaponry and willingness to kill civilians, has rendered the poseurs and pontificators of the United Nations helpless and contemptible.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Newspapers Opt for Teamwork in a Campaign to Offer Advertisers One-stop Shopping
LAST week, as you may have noticed from those full-page ads in your local paper, was a big week for the American newspaper industry.
After talking about it for nearly a generation, the industry now has a single advertising sales force that can represent virtually every newspaper in the country in an effort to win national advertising from makers of such products as automobiles, cosmetics and household goods.
The ads last week, which ran in big papers like The Chicago Tribune and small ones like The Foothills Sentinel in Cave Creek, Ariz., announced that something newspaper executives call the N.N.N. was open for business.


Military Town Opening Doors As Base Closes
It was the memory of a weed-savaged tarmac and boarded-up buildings at an abandoned military base elsewhere that galvanized James L. Meyer in 1990 when word floated in from Washington that the local Air Force base here, the region's largest employer, was likely to close.
"I remember walking around there and it was so sad," said Mr.
Meyer, referring to a military base in Lake Charles, La.
No one was sure that the base in Alexandria would in fact be shuttered.
But "I said, 'We have to make a contingency plan here or we're doomed.' " Mr.
Meyer recalled.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL H. JORDAN , the chairman and chief executive of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, has been named chairman of the United Negro College Fund, a 50-year-old consortium of 41 private historically black colleges and universities.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BATTLE FOR 'GREATER SERBIA'
News analysis: The battle for Bihac has demonstrated the Serbian will to establish a "Greater Serbia." It has also shown that the U.N. and NATO have failed to combat the Serbs' nationalist vision.
A1


Hynes to Convene Grand Jury On Kingsboro Security Lapses
The Brooklyn District Attorney said yesterday that he would convene a grand jury early this week to investigate security lapses and allegations of financial mismanagement at the Kingsboro State Psychiatric Center in Flatbush.
"Very clearly, there is a security problem, given the breaches of the past 10 days," said the district attorney, Charles J. Hynes.


4 Are Charged After Drug Raid on Queens 'Stash House'
At first glance, there appeared to be nothing unusual about the two-story, tan brick, semi-attached house at 254-17 60th Avenue in Little Neck.
Despite being a multifamily dwelling, it otherwise blended in with the one-family houses along the street that, with its neatly trimmed hedges, mowed lawns and numerous trees, looked as if it belonged in the suburbs rather than Queens.
Among the tenants were a young couple and two small children in the second-floor apartment, described by neighbors as a regular family on a quiet street in a well-to-do neighborhood.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Could Esiason's Sideline Scuffle Have Melted His Cool?
WHEN the Jets were leading, 17-0, the record 75,606 spectators were chanting, "J-E-T-S, Jets, Jets, Jets," but now they were standing in silence.
And in fear.
With the final seconds flashing on the scoreboard, the Dolphins had rallied to 24-21 and Dan Marino was drilling the Jets' defense with passes.
For the Jets and their frustrated followers, the game was on the line.
So was the Jets' new image.
So, possibly, was the Jets' season, if not a berth in the Super Bowl XXIX playoffs.


The Long Journey Home Ends, With a Line


Bucs' Overtime Victory Keeps Vikings on Ropes
Buccaneers 20, Vikings 17
The Minnesota Vikings were thinking Super Bowl three weeks ago.
Now they can't even beat Tampa Bay.


Nets Glimpse a What-If And a What Might Be
Just as the notion of knocking off the Phoenix Suns became tangible, just as this four-game road swing was beginning to look delectable, the Nets swallowed hard tonight, and cautiously pondered their immediate future at a crucial position.
The shooting guard they could have had in the June draft, Wesley Person of Auburn, showed off his offensive talents, scoring a career-high 26 points.
The shooting guard who starts for them, Kevin Edwards, suffered a strain in his left calf that may keep him out of action for the next week.


Anti-Official Art That Survived The Iron Curtain
In 1984, when the hand of Government censorship lay heavy on art in Czechoslovakia, Joska Skalnik, a graphic designer and longtime troublemaker, came up with a very Czech idea.
If unofficial artists could not exhibit, why not create an unofficial salon?
The work could not be exhibited, of course.
But it would exist, and its mere existence would be intensely annoying to the nation's cultural overlords.
Mr.
Skalnik invited each of about 300 artists to accept delivery of a lidless wooden box 6 inches square and 2 inches deep.
The assignment was to create a work of art within the box.
The completed work was to be returned to Mr.
Skalnik.
In all, 244 artists took part in what Mr.
Skalnik called the Minisalon.
The boxes were collected, then hidden in a shed outside Prague.
There they remained until 1989, when the velvet revolution brought down the Communist regime.


Shuler Seeks Positives In a Learning Season
The Washington Redskins, once dominant at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, lost their eighth game in a row here today, 21-19, to the Giants.
But the coach and the quarterback expected to lead this team back to respectability saw progress, even if it came in baby steps.
Heath Shuler was back at the helm for Washington, a team that has split the time at quarterback among Shuler, Gus Frerotte and John Friesz.
Shuler, the rookie from the University of Tennessee, showed promise, but it was sandwiched around shakiness.
His final statistics -- 11 of 28 for 165 yards and 1 interception -- were certainly nothing to rave about.
Nevertheless, Shuler and Coach Norv Turner said they saw some positive signs.


Who Needs Mean Joe Greene Anyway?
Steelers 21, Raiders 3
Remember Pittsburgh's "Steel Curtain" defense of the mid-70's?
It seems the Steelers have revived it for the mid-90's.
Pittsburgh's defense held the Raiders to one field goal and Mike Tomczak threw two touchdown passes as the Steelers beat up Los Angeles, 21-3, yesterday.


Bane of Insurers: New Ailments
Companies that sell disability insurance to individuals are reporting a sharp rise in claims for certain ailments that were little known 10 years ago, leaving the insurers with losses of hundreds of millions of dollars.
The companies are also reporting a big increase in claims by doctors, once among the most prized of the insurance industry's clients.
In response, insurers are adopting new strategies, from offering less generous benefits to pulling out of the business.
Three million people, many of them self-employed, are covered by individual disability policies that generate annual revenues for insurers of $3.5 billion.
Group disability policies offered through employers cover 48 million more people, and offer more limited benefits.


Bridge
The defending champions led a field of 10 strong teams into the two final sessions of the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here this afternoon.
Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Richard Freeman of Atlanta, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Napersville, Ill., Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, both of Dallas, who won a year ago in Seattle, had a small lead over the same team that finished second there.
The qualifiers by captain were: 1st Nickell team, 40.86 boards; 2d, James Cayne of Manhattan, 40.31; 3d, Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, N.Y., 37.89; 4th, Joseph Silver of Hampstead, Quebec, 36.1; 5th, Andy Goodman of San Francisco, 34.79; 6th, Eddie Kantar of Santa Monica, Calif., 34.39; 7th, Bob Crossley of Greenbrae, Calif., 33.09; 8th, Michael Moss of Manhattan, 33.08; 9th, Ron Rubin of North Miami, Fla., 32.79; 10th, Steve Weinstein of Glen Ridge, N.J., 32.63.


A City Pulls Its School Board Back to the Center
In 1992 the religious right established a beachhead in this small Southern California city, winning control of the local school board after a rough-and-tumble campaign that included many of the issues that now top the national agenda.
The usual work of a school board then took a back seat as its 3-to-2 conservative majority fought to limit sex education, promote the teaching of creationism, curtail breakfast programs financed by the government and reintroduce prayer to the school system.


No Headline
"It used to be that a woman's mental health, having peaked in her 20's, declined drastically after age 40. But today the mental health of women in their 50's is as good as, or better than, that of women in their 20's and 30's." -- BETTY FRIEDAN.  [ A1:5. ]


Retailers Cautiously Optimistic
Heavy advertising and promotional campaigns helped draw shoppers into stores during the weekend, and several retailers reported that their sales in the first two days of the holiday shopping season were slightly better than expected.
But most executives were circumspect about business, and one survey of foot traffic in 33 malls around the country found fewer shoppers this year than last year for the first weekend of holiday shopping.


Bosnia Accepts U.N. Plan For Truce in the Northwest
Bosnia tonight accepted a United Nations plan for a cease-fire around the northwestern town of Bihac, which has been under attack by Serbs for more than a week.
The Serbs, from Bosnia and Croatia, renewed heavy artillery and infantry attacks today around Bihac, which was designated a safe area by the United Nations.
The Serbs were attacking Izacic and other villages just beyond the northwestern edge of the Bihac safe area, United Nations officials said.


Israeli Tourists Get New View of Promised Land
For years, during stints of reserve duty in the Israeli Army, Jacob Geva spent long hours patrolling the border between Israel and Jordan, riding along a frontier blocked by mines and an electronic fence.
This week, Mr.
Geva rode across the once-forbidding boundary with one of the first groups of Israeli tourists to come here, and found himself looking at Israel from Jordan for the first time.


Ingram's Career Day Not Just Touchdowns
Clutching the ball he had caught for the winning touchdown as if it were an early Christmas present, Mark Ingram was asked if he could remember the last time he had a game like the one he had against the Jets today.
"Little league, pee wees, flag football, I don't know," the Dolphins flanker said en route to the team bus.


Europe Awaiting U.S. Moves on Trade Pact
The likelihood that Congress will ratify the new world trade agreement this week should encourage approval of the pact by important trading partners like France in coming weeks.
But lingering questions about whether the United States is seeking special treatment could complicate the process, diplomats and trade officials in Europe said.
Most European legislatures have been waiting to see if the United States would ratify the accord before taking up the issue themselves, and several trade officials now say they are optimistic that all of the biggest signers to the agreement, in Europe and around the world, would approve it by the end of the year.


Leading Dissident Writer in Iran Dies After 8 Months in Detention
The leading dissident writer in Iran died today in detention, eight months after being charged with drug abuse and espionage.
Iranian authorities said the cause was a heart attack.
The author, Ali Akbar Saidi Sirjani, 63, was arrested last March and was not allowed to have a defense attorney or a trial.
He was the author of more than 15 books on Iranian history and legend, many of them best-sellers, in which he analyzed the differences between Iran's distinct heritage and Islamic cultures.
His contention that Iranians had a pre-Islamic tradition of respect for individual rights and of fighting tyranny led to the banning of his books in 1991.


Run-and-Shoot Falcons Find Better Way to Win
It is the National Football Conference East that is known for power football and ball control.
Those N.F.C.
West teams tinker here, toss it there, finesse you to death.
That, at least, is how the myth, the reputations, go.
Philadelphia (N.F.C. East) versus Atlanta (N.F.C. West) this afternoon in the Georgia Dome was supposed to be one of those kinds of games, but the Falcons pulled a surprise.
Atlanta ran more plays than Philadelphia (72 to 55).
The Falcons had the ball nearly 13 minutes longer.
The Run-and-Shoot Falcons even ran the ball more than the Eagles (24 to 14).


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
Oct.
Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Nov.
Wednesday  G.D.P. . . . 3d Qtr.
Corporate Profits . . . 3d Qtr.
Revised  Thursday  Personal Income . . .
Oct.
Construction Spending . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Nov.
Leading Indicators . . .
Oct.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Props Fail to Cooperate With 'Mtsensk's' 2d String  Metropolitan Opera
There were few problems in the performance of Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk" on Saturday afternoon, with second-stringers in the main roles, that a better production wouldn't fix.
But such is unlikely anytime soon, since it took the work 60 years to reach the Met in the first place.


Larger Than Life Versus Smaller
Waiting for Leporello: the Metropolitan Opera's revival of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" reached its third performance on Friday evening, still without Bryn Terfel in the cast.
Mr.
Terfel, the young Welsh bass who has riveted the attention of the New York music world this fall by meeting just some of the impossibly high expectations placed upon him in the Met's "Nozze di Figaro" and in recital, injured his back in the dress rehearsal for "Don Giovanni." The Met now says the earliest he could appear is Dec. 6.
He is missed, for the staging of "Don Giovanni" needs every larger-than-life figure it can get.
Franco Zeffirelli's production originated in 1990, and was last presented three seasons ago.
Mr.
Zeffirelli also designed the sets, and they are monumental (of course).


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Apollo Group Inc., Phoenix, an initial public offering of 3.2 million shares.
Smith Barney.


NBC Grabs Young Adults From ABC
NBC has yet to label itself the network that drives families apart, but in a strategic sense that is exactly what it has become -- to its significant profit.
The network has made some big gains this television season by grabbing young adult viewers away from ABC, the leading network in prime time, and has even put a dent in what has always been a stronghold for ABC: 8 P.M. programs.


CHRONICLE
As far as ISAIAH SHEFFER is concerned, Symphony Space might as well be on the Left Bank as on the Upper West Side, so thoroughly has he dipped it into French culture this season.
"Symphony Space has turned into 'Symphonie Fantastique,' " Mr.
Sheffer, the artistic director of the center for performing arts, said the other day.
In addition to a nine-week retrospective of Louis Malle films now going on, Mr.
Sheffer has planned for next month what he describes as "a weekend devoted to French love in letters, poetry, song and cinema."


A Scholar's Memoirs Raise Some Ghosts at Oxford
The sentence could have been written by Poe or Dostoyevsky, the way it summons the unspeakable in a coldly confessional tone: "But it was clear to me by now that Trevor and the college must somehow be separated. My problem was one which I feel compelled to define with brutal candor: how to kill him without getting into trouble."
The words were not written by a poet trawling the depths of the subconscious, and they are not fiction.
They are from a newly published autobiography of Sir Kenneth Dover, one of the world's most renowned classicists.
And they describe a series of events that preceded the suicide of a troublesome colleague at Oxford nine years ago.


Executive Changes
SPRINT INTERNATIONAL, Kansas City, Mo., said Paolo L. Guidi had resigned as its president to pursue other interests.
He will be succeeded by Christopher J. Rooney, the president of business operations for Sprint's long-distance division.
STROH BREWERY CO., Detroit, promoted William L. Henry, president and chief operating officer, to chief executive, succeeding Peter W. Stroh, who continues as chairman of Stroh Brewery Co. and as chairman and chief executive of Stroh Cos.


Half a Policy on Iraq
There are two ways to contain Iraq.
One, as the Clinton Administration recently demonstrated, is to deter war.
The other, which it has neglected, is to encourage moves toward peace.
Yet Washington refuses to acknowledge Iraq's progress on arms control -- a serious and potentially dangerous mistake.
It may be good domestic politics, but it poorly serves America's international interests.
Refusing to recognize positive Iraqi moves discourages further cooperation and drives a wedge between America and other members of the U.N.
Security Council.
Baghdad seriously damaged its credibility last month by staging menacing military maneuvers near Kuwait.
After that ploy backfired, Iraq reversed course and recognized Kuwait's sovereignty and borders.
But its earlier threats devalued that concession; Iraq must now firm up its assurances that it will never again engage in such provocative conduct toward its neighbors by agreeing to restrict its troop movements, give advance notice of future exercises and admit outside observers.


Festival of Lights Begins


New York Civics Lesson: No Mayor Stands Alone
MAYOR Rudolph W. Giuliani has become an involuntary enrollee in that most basic of civics courses, the one that teaches mayors that they cannot go it alone.
They either get along with the governor, legislative leaders and the City Council Speaker or, after riding high in the headlines and the polls for a while, they get into trouble.
As a Federal prosecutor all those years, Mr.
Giuliani could do pretty much as he liked.
Add his strong will and temper to his curriculum vitae and the result is a mayor at odds with many whose cooperation he needs, from the Governor-elect to the latest Giuliani combatant, City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone.


RECORDINGS
From Revueltas, Subtle Irony And a Bloody Uprising Night of the Mayas (Catalyst, 09026-62672-2; CD)
Silvestre Revueltas, who died in 1940, was not merely the greatest composer Mexico has produced; he now appears to have been one of the most original and compelling figures in all of 20th-century music.
His art was distinctive in a number of ways: as a visceral, populist extension of modernist techniques; as a revolutionary fusion of classical and pop idioms, and as a singular instance of a raw, ungovernable talent who composed actively only in the last decade of his short life and mastered whatever genre lay before him.


Bosnia Accepts U.N. Plan For Truce in the Northwest
Bosnia tonight accepted a United Nations plan for a cease-fire around the northwestern town of Bihac, which has been under attack by Serbs for more than a week.
The Serbs, from Bosnia and Croatia, renewed heavy artillery and infantry attacks today around Bihac, which was designated a safe area by the United Nations.
The Serbs were attacking Izacic and other villages just beyond the northwestern edge of the Bihac safe area, United Nations officials said.


Grand Design for Berlin's Center


Jersey City Weighs Effect Of Vouchers For Schools
On school vouchers, the big players in New Jersey do not equivocate.
For the Governor, the Jersey City Mayor, the state teachers' union, vouchers are either all good or all bad, apple-pie American or unconstitutional, the coming salvation or the potential destruction of this city's flagging public schools.
But here on the ground in Jersey City, whose Mayor wants to make it a proving ground for the state's first voucher program, the feelings are much more ambivalent -- even among the parents of Catholic school students who might stand to benefit financially from the plan.


THEATER
Turning to Sex for Laughs In the London of 1675  Bouwerie Lane Theater
It is always ominous when the program lists the time as "not so long ago" and the place as "not so far away" for a 1675 play set in London.
It usually means the director has been free-associating with the text.
In the Jean Cocteau Repertory's contemporary staging of William Wycherley's "Country Wife," the director is Tori Haring-Smith and she turns bawdy satire into burlesque.


The Starks Cure for Slump: Practice, Practice, Practice
More than an hour after the Knicks finished practicing today, John Starks was still on the floor, shooting one jump shot after another over a broom held up by Assistant Coach Jeff Van Gundy.
The idea behind the broom was to simulate the long arms of defenders who get in Starks's face whenever he launches a shot.
The idea behind the overtime was to help Starks snap out of his recent shooting funk.


So Much Perfection. So Who's Champion?
You are from Penn State, and you have every answer you need to know that the Nittany Lions have earned the right to play for a national championship in the Rose Bowl.
You are from Nebraska, and your conviction is inspired by the way the Cornhuskers dealt with the loss of quarterback Tommie Frazier to take a perfect record into the Orange Bowl.


Effort to Sell or Lease Nassau Medical Center Stumbles
The effort to sell or lease the Nassau County Medical Center to private operators is off to a doubtful start, and some officials say it may die a slow death.
Although some health-industry experts say that private management of the medical center, Long Island's largest public hospital, is an idea whose time has come, resistance is growing and bidders complain that the county's requirements make privatization almost impossible.


Dividend Meetings


CHRONICLE
ABE HIRSCHFELD turns 75 on Dec. 13, but he says he will observe the milestone tonight because he always celebrates his birthday on the second night of Hanukkah.
"I was born on the second night of Hanukkah and I have an old friend, Meshulam Riklis, who has the same birthday," he said, referring to the financier.
"About 30 years ago, his mother began making a Hanukkah birthday party for us and that lasted until she passed away about 10 years ago."


Bitter Feud Is Dividing Sandinistas
Beneath the single, flickering bulb in his medical examination room, Dr.
Rommel Martinez Cabeza spoke over the din from the street a few feet away.
"After all the deaths we suffered and we caused, and after all we thought we had achieved, I find myself again in the business of subversion," he said.
For Dr.
Martinez it is the most painful sort of subversion.
He is working to undermine an organization he says he used to believe was as necessary as the medical profession: the Sandinista National Liberation Front.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Women now in their 50's have piled into the work force in big numbers in the last 15 years.
Often, the move into the workplace was forced by economic reasons largely new to their generation.
Yet many say their jobs have been beneficial.  [ Page A1. ]


As Envoy, Crowe, the Old Sailor, Navigates Rough Sea
For someone who has logged 47 years in the military and become Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff through a combination of intelligence and shrewdness, William J. Crowe Jr., the Ambassador to Britain, would seem to be the right man in the right place at the right time.
Ambassador Crowe took up his first diplomatic post six months ago, a time when differences over the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina began to strain American-British relations and raise fundamental questions about the performance and purpose of NATO, which was deploying forces outside its treaty area for the first time.


Ex-Mayor Recuperating
Former Mayor Abraham D. Beame was recuperating from gastrointestinal bleeding at Mount Sinai Medical Center yesterday and was expected to be released early this week, hospital officials said.
Mr. Beame, 88, was in stable condition, said Laurie Anderson, a hospital spokeswoman.


Maria Ewing Cancellation
The soprano Maria Ewing has canceled the public interview with Bridget Paolucci that was to take place tonight at 8 at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
It will not be rescheduled.
Information: (212) 769-7028.


Jersey City Weighs Effect Of Vouchers For Schools
On school vouchers, the big players in New Jersey do not equivocate.
For the Governor, the Jersey City Mayor, the state teachers' union, vouchers are either all good or all bad, apple-pie American or unconstitutional, the coming salvation or the potential destruction of this city's flagging public schools.
But here on the ground in Jersey City, whose Mayor wants to make it a proving ground for the state's first voucher program, the feelings are much more ambivalent -- even among the parents of Catholic school students who might stand to benefit financially from the plan.


The Spike Was a Fake, but the Damage to Jets' Season Is Real
There were no secrets today.
The largest home crowd in Jets history knew what would be happening in those wild final minutes, and so did the Jets.
Dan Marino would be winging that ball.
So tens of thousands of fans stood screaming at Giants Stadium, trying to outroar Dan Marino's throaty commands to his Dolphins.
The fans, the pass rush, it was all the same to Marino, as he stared at Mark Ingram and barked, "Clock! Clock! Clock!"


Iverson's TV Debut Eclipsed
Allen Iverson finally embarked on his long-deferred dream yesterday.
After two months of toiling in McDonough Arena, tuning up against Fort Hood and the Croatia Select team, watching Felipe Lopez gobble up the national spotlight, Iverson made his official college debut on national television.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about Bosnia, showing divisions within the country and among its neighbors, carried erroneous labels for the shading code.
It denoted concentrations of population, not areas of political or military control.


Giuliani Tells Agencies to Use His Budget, Not the Council's
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday instructed city agencies to implement his budget proposals and disregard the City Council's, even as the Comptroller warned that the dispute could hurt the city's fiscal standing.
"The failure to resolve this matter could have costs beyond the institutional battle," Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said.
"Agencies don't know if they are getting reimbursed for the services they provide. And a protracted dispute displays that our financial credibility is in question, which could lead to a downgrading of our credit rating."


William H. Timbers, 79, Judge On Federal Court of Appeals
William H. Timbers, a senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Suffield, Conn.
He was 79 and lived in Darien, Conn.
The cause was kidney failure, said his son William H. Jr.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about lead pollution near a smelting plant in Wallkill, N.Y., misstated the title of Harry Ross, an official of Orange Environment Inc.
He is the group's associate director, not its president.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a Manhattan protest against the use of fur in fashion referred incorrectly to the protesters' attire in some editions.
Their clothes were backless, not topless.


Jamesway Corp.(JMY,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 29


U.S. Drops Effort to Oust a Gay Sailor
The Clinton Administration said today that it would drop its effort to bar a homosexual from serving in the Navy and would not appeal the case to the United States Supreme Court.
Government lawyers insisted that their decision in the case of Petty Officer Keith Meinhold was not intended to convey the message that the military must admit homosexuals.
Rather, they said, it was simply a tactical decision in the long-running court battle between the armed services and gay and civil rights groups over the Pentagon's policy on homosexuality.


Cairo Journal; In the Slums, a Tug-of-War for Hearts and Minds
Sheik Mohammed Ali, a militant Islamic leader, sat in a dimly lighted room in a second-floor apartment and thumbed through a stack of letters.
"This woman got divorced," he said, holding up a sheet of old white wrapping paper with labored Arabic script.
"Her father and brothers have disowned her. She wants money to get married again. We will give her $75."


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Growing Rage in Bay Ridge; Change Breeds Violence in a Once-Quiet Corner of Brooklyn
David O'Connor describes his father's occupation as "drinker." He says that the man exited his life by his second birthday and that his mother, a diner waitress, let him take to the streets of Brooklyn at age 14.
Now 15, he sleeps in a small bedroom in a group home.
He has been arrested once, charged with stealing a car, and is described by administrators at Telecommunications High School in Bay Ridge as a troubled student.
Born to an Irish Catholic family, he says he has no great use for religion.


COURT TO WEIGH 2 SEARCH CASES
Marking its current term as potentially the most important in years for the constitutional law of search and seizure, the Supreme Court today accepted two cases posing long-unresolved questions about drug testing and police searches.
One case asks whether public schools can subject students to random drug tests.
The other asks whether in executing a search warrant police officers must first announce their presence and give the occupant time to open the door before forcing their way inside.


Soulima Stravinsky, Composer, Pianist And Educator, 84
Soulima Stravinsky, a composer, pianist and the youngest son of Igor Stravinsky, died yesterday at the Emerald Oaks Nursing Home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 84.
The cause was respiratory failure after a long illness, said his son, John.


A Piano Recital Program With a Difference
Justin Kolb's piano recital on Sunday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall took a sharp swerve at intermission that might have thrown a few people overboard.
On the first half, Liszt's arrangement of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony; on the second half, music by the Viennese-born American composer Robert Starer.
The pianist's exuberance and confident attack on the keyboard tied his unusual program together.
Mr.
Starer celebrates his 70th birthday this year.
When the history books are written, he will probably land somewhere in the great open middle of American compositional tradition.
His language is sometimes dissonant and even 12-tone in orientation, but it is fundamentally consonant beneath the surface, and his liking for open intervals puts him a shade close to Copland than, say, to Elliott Carter.
Among other qualities, he has a certifiable gift for melody.
Mr.
Kolb gave the world premiere of his Sonata No. 3, an unpretentious but possibly overlong work in three movements.
He also played numerous shorter pieces, among them the "Sketches in Color" familiar to many piano students.


UNUM UNABLE TO REACH REINSURANCE ACCORD
The UNUM Corporation of Portland, Me., said yesterday that it had been unable to agree with another insurance company, whose identity it did not disclose, to reinsure UNUM's existing individual disability insurance.
Earlier this month, when UNUM announced an increase of $192 million, before taxes, in reserves for that business, it said it would seek a reinsurance policy to protect it from additional losses.
The chairman of UNUM, James F. Orr 3d, said the reinsurance was not purchased because its price was too high.
He said the company would proceed with plans to introduce new individual disability policies that it expected would be less risky to the insurance company.
Shares of UNUM rose $1.25, to $38, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


Priscilla Morrill, Actress, 67
Priscilla Morrill, a stage and television actress, died on Nov. 9 at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 67 and lived in Port Hueneme, Calif.
The cause was complications of a kidney infection, said her agent, Richard Bauman.


Astronomy Crisis Deepens As the Hubble Telescope Sees No Missing Mass
IN their audacious reach for understanding of the universe, cosmologists often draw back hands that are maddeningly empty.
They know, for example, there is more out there than meets the eye.
But hard as they try, they are unable to grasp the nature of what lurks in the blackness enfolding the luminous stars and galaxies, that shadowy substance whose gravitational pull must be the organizing force for the evolution and overall structure of the universe.
The abundance of this invisible mass, whatever it is, could dictate the fate of the universe.
Unless there is more mass than scientists so far have been able to measure or infer, that fate would appear to be bleak indeed.


Let Police Run Shelters
To the Editor:
You report that the New York City Police Department's new Homeless Outreach Unit has encountered many problems ("Police Reach Out to the Homeless, but Often Find Efforts Rejected," front page, Nov. 16).
Why not have the police, who take the homeless to shelters, instead supervise the shelters?
I am sure that many of the homeless, who now fear for their lives in the shelters, would more readily go to them if they knew that someone was protecting them.
BARBARA WHITEHOUSE  Middle Village, Queens, Nov. 20, 1994


Virco Manufacturing Corp.(VIR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tiffany Told to Pay for Sexual Harassment
A former head of the estate jewelry department at Tiffany &amp; Company was awarded $365,000 by the New York State Division of Human Rights yesterday after she charged she had been sexually harassed by two superiors at the store and then dismissed when she complained.
Lawrence Wizman, a division spokesman, said $300,000 of the award was for mental anguish, the largest such award ever given by the division in a sexual harassment case.
The other $65,000 was for back pay and interest in the case, which dates to the early 1980's.


N.F.L. May Consider Using a Penalty Box
As a way to curb some of the flagrant violence in the National Football League, at least one team has asked the competition committee to study the use of a penalty box -- similar to the one used by the National Hockey League -- for players who deliver dangerous hits to a quarterback.
Greg Aiello, the N.F.L. director of communication, confirmed that the proposal had been made.
Aiello said it had been discussed by the competition committee in the past, but it has never made it out of the committee for a discussion by the team owners.
He said he did not know the specifics of the latest proposal and would not say which team has made the proposal.


Observer; 'Bunk,' Ford Called It
Political intellectuals are having a nasty argument about what history should be taught to American schoolchildren.
Tales you hear indicate that, whatever history may be taught in the future, at present kids learn practically none of any kind.
My own favorite anecdote stars an apparently normal high school student.
Amazed to hear a graybeard refer to the First World War, he cried, "I never knew there was a First World War!"


ABC Deal To Share Revenues
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. agreed yesterday to form a television production company with the powerful Hollywood team of Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen.
The venture will be the television industry's first in which a broadcast network intends to share advertising income and other revenue with an outside producer.


Neuheisel Gets the Job
RICK NEUHEISEL, an assistant football coach at the University of Colorado, was hired as the school's head coach, replacing BILL McCARTNEY.
"I believe truly no one has more capability to lead this team to new success than Rick Neuheisel," said the university president, JUDITH ALBINO.


In Furor Over Prize, Novelist Speaks Up For His Language
No sooner had James Kelman's novel "How Late It Was, How Late" won this year's Booker Prize for fiction than a full-scale furor erupted.
One of the judges, Rabbi Julia Neuberger, declared that the book was unreadably bad and said that the awarding of the prize, Britain's most important, was a "disgrace." Simon Jenkins, a conservative columnist for The Times of London, called the award "literary vandalism." Several other critics sniped that the book should have been disqualified because of its heavy use of profanity.
Meanwhile, the British literary establishment huddled together defensively as Mr.
Kelman appeared in a business suit at the black-tie Booker affair and, in his heavy Scottish accent, made a rousing case for the culture and language of "indigenous" people outside of London.
"A fine line can exist between elitism and racism," he said.
"On matters concerning language and culture, the distinction can sometimes cease to exist altogether."


Fighter Gives Up Title
PICHIT SITHBANGPRACHAN of Thailand has given up the International Boxing Federation flyweight championship rather than defend against the top-ranked JOSE LUIS ZEPEDA of the United States.
The move was announced yesterday by the I.B.F. president, ROBERT LEE, and took effect last Friday.
Sithbangprachan won a split decision over Zepeda on May 8 in Bangkok, Thailand.
He had been ordered to make a mandatory defense in a rematch by Dec. 4. (AP)


Suspicious Americans Want Review of Championships
The United States swimming federation has called for a review of the results from last summer's world swimming championships in Rome, where Chinese women won 12 of 16 gold medals.
Ray Essick, executive director of U.S.
Swimming, made the request yesterday after a report that a second Chinese champion has tested positive for a banned substance.
Essick is seeking the public disclosure of drug-testing histories for the Chinese swimmers.


Melkite Priest And One Other Guilty in Theft At Brink's Depot
A Melkite Catholic priest who has been hailed as a hero for his work with runaway teen-agers in the East Village in Manhattan was convicted today of conspiring to hide some of the $7.4 million stolen by masked gunmen from a Brink's armored-car depot here almost two years ago.
Another defendant was also convicted of conspiracy.
But prosecutors failed to make their cases against two other men, including a Brink's guard who they said took part in the robbery and was at the center of the conspiracy.
The jury in Federal District Court here acquitted him on all four charges he faced.


Lean on Serbia Now
The Bosnian city of Bihac is supposedly under U.N. and NATO protection, but by now it is probably too late to save it by military means.
Differing European and American agendas and a divided command structure requiring both NATO and U.N. approval ruled out a timely and effective use of air power, though even that might not have been sufficient to turn back the Serbian assault.
Fearing a divisive rift in NATO, the Clinton Administration has dropped its calls for more aggressive bombing, bowing once again to Europe's preference for letting the Serbs batter Bosnia into a negotiated settlement.
There is also talk of rewarding Serbian military gains by redrawing the proposed peace map in their favor.


Jets' Weaknesses Helped Marino Look Strong
It took a mediocre Jets team to blow a 24-6 third-quarter lead, even if the Dolphins have come back so often behind Dan Marino.
First, you keep your hands off Marino, allowing him time to work his magic.


Executive Changes
DEXTER CORP., Windsor Locks, Conn., named Kathleen Burdett, its vice president and controller, chief financial officer.
MANAGED HEALTH NETWORK INC., Los Angeles, a nationwide provider of managed behavioral health care and employee-assistance-program services, appointed Alethea Caldwell president and chief operating officer.


Strong Economic Signs Drive Bond Prices Down
Prices of Treasury securities were down across the board yesterday, as the bond market, having benefited from investors' shifting money out of stocks last week, reversed course.
Kevin McClintock, manager of fixed-income portfolios for Aeltus Investment Management Inc. in Hartford, cited reports of October home sales growth and strong Christmas sales as a troublesome twosome for bonds yesterday.


Automotive Industries
Class A shares of Automotive Industries Holdings hit a 52-week low of $16.25 yesterday, then closed at $16.50.
It was one of five auto parts suppliers whose shares were downgraded by an analyst.


Nepal to Have First Elected Communist Government in Asia
Efforts by the ruling Nepali Congress Party to block Nepal's Communists from coming to power collapsed today, clearing the way for the first democratically elected Communist government in Asia.
Officials at the royal palace in Katmandu said they expected the Communist leader, Man Mohan Adhikary, to make an early visit to King Birendra, possibly on Tuesday, to begin the process of forming a government.


Joanne Rathgeb Is Dead at 64; Was Crusader on Cancer Issues
Joanne Rathgeb, an actress, director and educator who fought for greater awareness and increased resources to fight breast cancer, died of the disease on Nov. 19 at her home in Essex Junction, Vt.
She was 64.
Her cancer was diagnosed nine years ago, but she continued an active life.
She retired last year as a professor of fine arts and drama at St.
Michael's College in Colchester after 30 years on the faculty.
She was the first woman to head the fine arts department there.


Painful Loss Can't Collapse Jets' Playoff Hopes
Give Pete Carroll this the morning after: He continues to discard those bad Jets memories, past and present.
That's why less than 24 hours after a devastating defeat to the Miami Dolphins, the Jets suddenly started thinking out loud today about the playoffs.


Ameritech Plans Charge Of $2.2 Billion
The Ameritech Corporation said today that it would take an after-tax charge of about $2.25 billion against its fourth-quarter earnings, in an acknowledgment that increasing competition is forcing it to replace aging equipment much faster than in the past.
The company said the one-time bookkeeping charge, totaling $4.08 a share, was a result of changing its accounting standards to those used by unregulated companies.


His Fondness for Guns Led Sniping Suspect to Trouble
Above all, the Suffolk County police said yesterday, Peter Sylvester did not want his mother to know about the long-barreled rifle.
Certainly not that he had hidden it in a ceiling she walked under whenever she went to the garage.
Long ago, the police said, she had told him never to bring guns into her ranch-style house in Nesconset, L.I.
Also on her forbidden list was a gun fancier's second love: glossy full-color magazines with shiny weapons spread out across page after page.


Time Warner May Revamp Entertainment Subsidiary
Time Warner Inc. is considering a reorganization involving its entertainment subsidiary, according to industry analysts.
One likely move, the analysts said, is shifting Warner Brothers and the HBO cable network out of the Time Warner Entertainment subsidiary and back under the umbrella of the parent company.
This would leave the entertainment subsidiary with just its cable systems and regional telephone operations.


One Sofa Yam's Guide To Football Announcers
Let's face an inescapable truth: hardly anybody watches games for the announcers.
Perhaps John Madden prevents tune-out during blowouts, but, really, Cowboys fans will watch their team play whether John Madden or Dave Madden -- Reuben Kinkaid of "The Partridge Family" -- is manning the Telestrator.
This sofa yam is the opposite of the regular fan.
I watch games I don't care about to keep tabs on announcers.
It can be tough duty.
Watch Gary Bender and Pat Haden on TNT?
Well, I've learned to do a solo Heimlich maneuver.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


From a Sense of Snow to a Tussle With Time
BORDERLINERS  By Peter Hoeg  Translated by Barbara Haveland. 277 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
Like Peter Hoeg's last novel, the best-selling "Smilla's Sense of Snow," "Borderliners" is one of those books that functions on two levels.
"Smilla" was both a thriller and a philosophical meditation on the human condition; "Borderliners" is both a harrowing tale of an orphan's ordeals within the Danish child-care system and a philosophical meditation on the nature of time.


It's Time for Israel to Risk Peace With Syria
To the Editor:
In "A Peace Pact? Only if It's Genuine" (Op-Ed, Nov. 21), Benjamin Netanyahu paints a bleak picture of the prospect of a Golan-Heights-for-peace deal with Syria in order to scare the American public away from supporting a peace treaty between Israel and Syria.


Success Overnight, in a Sense: Vietnam's Artists Are in Vogue
During the Vietnam War, there was little paper and almost no canvas in North Vietnam, and so one of the fathers of modern Vietnamese painting, Bui Xuan Phai, was often forced to do his work on matchboxes and scraps of newsprint.
Mr.
Phai, who in his lifetime never earned more than the equivalent of a few hundred dollars from his art, had a graceful, fluid painting style that is still much imitated by Vietnamese artists, north and south.
He died in his beloved Hanoi in 1988.


A Cynical Argument Against Execution
To the Editor:
I never thought I'd see the day when I would quarrel with Anna Quindlen's views.
But that day came with her poignant and perceptive piece on capital punishment ("The High Cost of Death," Nov. 19).


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Patterns
Such Familiar Fabric
It could be Walter Cessna's first career, in magazines, that has made Dom Casual, his fashion label, such good copy.
A fall collection with dresses cut from stolen American Airlines blankets was quite a lure for fashion writers.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ASHLAND COAL INC., Huntington, W. Va., which operates deep mines and surface mines that produce low-sulfur coal, said it was negotiating to acquire closely held Quaker Coal Co.'s Kentucky mining operations.
The terms were not disclosed.
BOEING CO., Seattle, said Braathens Safe, a privately held Norwegian airline, had ordered two Boeing 737-500 planes in a deal valued at about $62 million.


Big Babies
Q.
All my friends seem to be having very big babies.
Are more and more very large babies being born?
A.
It depends on how big you think a very big baby is and on who is counting, but at least in New York City, there has been an increase in the rate of large live births over the last four decades.


Mixing Dada, Cher, Middle America
Certain elements of David LaChapelle's shoot for Allure magazine last week were like almost every other fashion shoot organized in the 1990's: the photo assistant with a ponytail and sideburns, the model wearing stiletto heels two sizes too small, the fashion editor dressed for mourning and the crew ignoring the no smoking sign.
But put all those elements inside a gleaming silver conditioning chamber, used to test product durability at New York's Department of General Services Laboratory, and you have some indication of what is setting Mr.
LaChapelle apart in a field where familiarity -- familiar models, familiar sets, familiar fashion -- is breeding contempt.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  U.S.
BACKING OFF ON BOSNIA  The Clinton Administration has backed off its tough approach on Bosnia, and has stopped its talk of using air strikes, bringing it closer to the positon of Western European Governments.
A1


Pataki Meets With City Officials (Minus a Mayor)


Koor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Proposes Letting Banks Enter New Fields
In a step that could lead to big banks selling real estate, computer services or possibly even securities, Government regulators proposed rules today that would allow federally chartered banks to enter new lines of business.
The proposals represent the latest erosion of the Glass-Steagall Act, the landmark law that for 61 years has largely barred commercial banks from trading securities.
Enacted during the Great Depression in response to the stock market speculation that sank many banks in the early 1930's, the act was aimed at limiting banks to more conservative practices that at least in theory, would be less likely to produce large losses and threaten depositors' savings.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a proposal for school vouchers in Jersey City misstated the surname of a State Senator from Lyndhurst who opposes the idea.
He is John P. Scott, not John Stone.


Hollinger Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge Gunman Is Called Angry but Sane
A psychologist testifying for the prosecution yesterday described Rashid Baz, who is on trial in the shooting of a group of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge in March, as a very angry man.
But he said he suffered from no mental condition that would absolve him of criminal responsibility for his actions.
The psychologist, Terrence Kaene, a professor at the Tufts University Medical School, was called to the stand in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to rebut testimony from two psychologists called last week by the defense, which is arguing that Mr.
Baz was insane during the few minutes that he opened fire on the van carrying 15 Hasidic students, killing one and wounding three.


James W. Cook, 90, Longtime Executive Of Phone Company
James Whitney Cook, who was with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and its subsidiaries for 40 years and was active in civic and business affairs in Illinois, died on Sunday at Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
He was 90, and lived in Naples and Osterville, Mass.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Albertson's Inc.(ABS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Ukraine Gets Reformer at the Helm
Andriy K. Denga, one of this bankrupt country's progressive farm managers, is doing just about everything he can to make money.
He has a contract with Italians to make smart leather attache cases.
A sewing shop is making inexpensive clothes for Germany.
Caged minks and foxes are being readied to have their fur made into hats.
People are very angry about the economy, "and a small spark can bring a blowup here," said Mr.
Denga, a onetime local Communist Party boss who wears a suit as he shows weekend visitors plows and cows.
"That's why we have to process agricultural material here rather than sell it at very low prices."


Campbell Soup Takes the Big Plunge Into Salsa
Mmm-mmm spicy!
The Campbell Soup Company, synonymous with the all-American kitchen for 125 years, said yesterday that it would join the nation's torrid salsa craze, acquiring Pace Foods Ltd. of San Antonio, the world's largest producer of Mexican sauces, for $1.115 billion.
Salsas, those spicy mixtures of jalapeno peppers, tomatoes, onion and garlic, have overtaken ketchup in retail dollar sales, thanks to their high markup, analysts said, though Americans still consume more pounds of ketchup.
Mexican sauce sales have grown at an annual rate of 13 percent since 1988 to $800 million in grocery store, club store and restaurant sales.
Thanks to their sharp taste and low fat count, the fast-growing Mexican sauces have been appearing on everything from pizzas to bagels.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Staten Island merchants who gave customers an 8.25 percent discount to protest the New York City sales tax rate misstated the basic rate in New Jersey.
It is 6 percent, not 7.


Vicente Enrique y Tarancon, 87, Cardinal Pivotal to Spain, Dies
Vicente Cardinal Enrique y Tarancon, who played a leading role in the transition from dictatorship to democracy in Spain as Archbishop of Madrid and head of the Council of Bishops, died this morning in Casa de Salud, a hospital in Valencia.
He was 87.
He died of lung cancer, according to his doctor, Eduardo Benlloch.
His body will lie in state on Tuesday in San Isidro Church in Madrid, where he will be buried later as he requested.


An Indochinese Goat Is Imperiled by Its Year of Fame
As much as any animal can be, the sao la is publicity shy.
For thousands of years, small herds of these gentle, goat-like creatures munched their way through the mountainous grasslands of Indochina, drawing so little attention that the outside world had no hint of their existence.
But that all changed a year ago, when the sao la was suddenly thrust into the age of celebrity, pushed in front of the television cameras and celebrated on the pages of National Geographic and People Magazine -- overnight, a zoological superstar.


Redefining Diversity: Biologists Urge Look Beyond Rain Forests
BETWEEN the ever-lengthening menu of Rain Forest Crunch snack foods, the Rain Forest Action Network booths at rock concerts and street fairs, and the ubiquitous jungle-themed coffee mugs, T-shirts, place mats, tote bags, wall clocks, umbrellas and jewelry, the American public has been saturated with the message that tropical rain forests are among the greatest and most endangered of the world's natural wonders.
As the generic eco-lecture has it, tropical rain forests like the Amazon shelter enormous numbers of species, bristling with a variety of life forms so rich that science has barely begun to tally up the multitudes.
Tens of millions of species of plants, insects, fungi, amphibians, lizards, fish, snails and more remain to be discovered in the Edenic bosom of the tropical rain forests, and yet the forests are being turned into so much kindling and cow pasture before anybody has had a chance to know what is out there.


Battle of Fists And Figures
Vinny Pazienza, the International Boxing Council's super middleweight champion, was at Scores on East 60th Street yesterday for a news conference to promote his Jan. 14 rematch with Roberto Duran at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
Duran, stranded by the weather, didn't show up, but Barbara Anne Fenner did, along with several other dancers.
Their presence was appropriate, partly because Scores's owner, Michael Blutrich, is the fight's promoter, and partly because 100 Scores dancers will participate in a beauty contest as part of the pre-bout hoopla.


Vote in Norway Blocks Joining Europe's Union
Bucking a trend set by its Nordic neighbors, Norway early today became the only country to turn down membership in the expanding club of nations known as the European Union.
With almost 90 percent of the votes counted in a two-day nationwide referendum, the "no" votes were ahead of the "yes" votes by 52.8 percent to 47.2 percent.


PRESIDENT STAGES SHOW OF SUPPORT FOR TRADE ACCORD
President Clinton opened the White House this morning to a delegation of Republicans for the first time since Election Day to rally support for the global trade pact whose fate will be the first test of the bipartisanship on which he now must rely.
With the lame-duck Congress back in town to vote on the trade agreement, opponents of the accord were waging last-ditch efforts to block it, contending it could harm American workers and undermine United States sovereignty.
But they conceded that they lacked the votes in the House, which takes up the measure on Tuesday.
And Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, predicted that the measure would win a comfortable victory in the Senate as well when that body votes on Thursday.


Mellon Takes $130 Million Loss on Investments
In yet another example of how rising interest rates can devastate seemingly low-risk activities, the Mellon Bank Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $130 million after-tax loss to bail out customers of its securities lending division for investments gone awry.
A Mellon subsidiary, the Boston Company, had invested its clients' money in bonds that lost value as rates rose.
The bank declined to identify the investments, but people familiar with the bank's position said they included structured notes, securities with terms that can be custom-tailored for an investor.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; R. J. Reynolds Tobacco renews its hope that where there's low smoke, there's marketing fire.
FOR the last couple of days, advertising and marketing executives and Wall Street's tobacco industry analysts have sounded like astronomers: they just can't stop talking about that eclipse.
Their topic, to be precise, is Eclipse, the low-smoke cigarette that the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is testing preliminarily in cities, including Atlanta, Buffalo and Chicago.
The $500 million question -- the cost to date for developing the brand -- is whether Reynolds can surmount the daunting problems it couldn't solve when Premier, its previous "smokeless" product, bombed by failing to satisfy smokers' needs for something that feels, smells and tastes like a cigarette.


S.E.C. Cites 2 Who Worked At Merrill Lynch on Trades
Two former executives of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company have been accused by the Securities and Exchange Commission of various securities law violations arising from bond trades with a defunct Florida insurance company.
The bond trades between Merrill Lynch and the former Guarantee Security Life Insurance Company involved end-of-year transactions in the 1980's, in which the insurer would exchange junk bonds for Treasury securities, thereby creating a false image of financial strength.
The trades were arranged with the cooperation of Richard Allerton Jr., a Merrill Lynch corporate bond salesman, and Joseph G. Cote, formerly co-head of Merrill's junk bond department, according to the S.E.C.


For Freer Trade -- and Better Jobs
Senator Bob Dole, who once threatened to bury the global trade agreement signed by 124 nations, has now put America's interests first.
He has signed onto the accord after extracting innocent side agreements from the White House.
Mr.
Dole, whose threats were harshly criticized on this page, deserves full credit for rising above politics to rescue an agreement fashioned over seven years of tortured negotiations.
His leadership has made it likely, barring last-minute defections by Democrats, that the Senate will approve the agreement on Thursday after the House does so today.
Countries around the world will quickly follow suit.
Though Mr.
Dole's approval removed much of the drama, the importance of the votes should not be overlooked.
The trade accord will deliver a shot of economic adrenaline that few other government policies can match.
By some estimates, it will raise living standards in the U.S. by $1,000 or more per family.
Rejection of GATT would not only squander these gains, but would also prove diplomatically calamitous.


Study Finds Jurors Often Hear Evidence With Closed Minds
THERE is a joke among lawyers about the difference between jury trials in England and the United States: in England, the trial starts once the jury selection ends; in America, the trial is already over.
Now, as the weaknesses of the jury system are coming under increasing scrutiny, a new study shows that substantial numbers of jury members reach verdicts using faulty reasoning.


Bridge Team Still Dominant in Winning 4th Prestige Event
The team led by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., continued its dominance of major team championships by winning the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams here Sunday night at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
His team, which included Richard Freeman of Atlanta, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, has won four of the last five prestige events: the Spingold Knockout Teams in 1993 and 1994, the 1993 Reisinger, and this one.
Its only miss was in the 1994 Vanderbilt Knockout Teams.


Tumult in Suffolk
Even in Suffolk County, L.I., which likes its politics tough and noisy, District Attorney James Catterson is a standout, aggressive in manner and harsh with opponents.
He says he makes enemies because he makes difficult decisions and does not suffer miscreants gladly.
Prominent officials accuse him of threatening to use grand juries against them unless they bow to his wishes.
Those are serious charges, amounting, if true, to abuse of office or misuse of the justice system.
They need investigating -- preferably by a special prosecutor or agency not based on Long Island.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo, whose office is considering a request by the county's executive and legislature for a special prosecutor, is in the best position to devise a proper inquiry before he leaves office.


Gym Rat Who Would Rebuild Pirates
Cozy feelings and warm memories filled George Blaney as he navigated his car through the streets of Jersey City.
With each block, the streets looked more and more familiar, and Blaney felt more and more at home.
Blaney was traveling the same route that he used as a teen-ager to get from the house on Bartholdi Avenue -- where his 86-year-old mother, Anne, still lives -- to St.
Peter's Prep High School on Grand Street.
The sights delighted him.
He was returning to a place he calls the Prep to be honored because he is the new basketball coach at Seton Hall University, but for a moment, he felt like a Prepster again.


Judge in a Bitter Clash With Simpson Lawyer
In a rare, verbally violent exchange in State Criminal Court in lower Manhattan yesterday, a judge did battle with a lawyer on the O.J.
Simpson defense team over the attorney's request to be excused from a case in New York.
The judge, Harold Rothwax, accused the lawyer of misstating facts.
The lawyer, Peter Neufeld, called the judge "shameful," whereupon the judge warned that he would put him in jail for contempt if he did not vacate the courtroom immediately.


U.S.-Russian Space Mission Stumbles, With Delivery Delays at Customs
The first major step in an effort to get beyond the cold war in space has stumbled as the delivery of gear for an American-Russian mission early next year has been delayed by, among other things, problems at Russian customs.
An American astronaut, Norman E. Thagard, is to fly into orbit atop a Russian rocket and work for three months in a Russian space station.
Dr.
Thagard, a physician, was to have performed biomedical experiments with American equipment while aboard the Russian space station, which is known as Mir.


Nevada Player Arrested
Nevada forward JIMMY MOORE, a top scorer in the Big West Conference, will miss at least two games after his arrest on suspicion of three misdemeanor battery charges involving an attack on a woman, the school said yesterday.
The 6-8 Moore led the Big West last season with a 19.2 average. (AP)


The Talk of Hollywood; This Year, Oscar Bets Won't Be Sure Ones
Studio executives plotting their strategies for the Academy Awards have reached some unsettling conclusions.
The first is that once again there were surprisingly few powerful roles for actresses this year, despite the growing list of studio executives who are women and the often-stated proclamations of studio chiefs that they are card-carrying feminists.
Then there is the general paucity of creative and significant films of any kind, despite assurances from some executives that the industry is flourishing and movies are better than ever.


U.N. Reports Shortage Of Diphtheria Vaccine
As many as 40,000 children and adults will contract diphtheria in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union this year because of a shortage of vaccine there, United Nations health specialists said today.
The specialists, from the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund, said the majority of cases were being reported from Russia, Belarus and Ukraine.


Culture By Coercion
For a number of years, American culture has been asked to shoulder obligations once considered the responsibility of our politics, and this has radically altered the way we now regard the arts.
Staggering under large-scale deficits, our nonprofit cultural institutions are nevertheless being asked to validate themselves not through creative contributions but on the basis of community services.
As Alexis de Tocqueville once predicted: "Democratic nations will habitually prefer the useful to the beautiful, and they will require that the beautiful be useful."


Moderate Leftist Elected in Close Uruguayan Presidential Race
In what political analysts call Uruguay's closest election ever, former President Julio Sanguinetti of the opposition Colorado Party claimed victory today in a tight three-way race for the presidency.
He is expected to slow, but not abandon, the process of economic liberalization begun during five years of rule by the conservative National Party.
With 96 percent of the returns counted, the Interior Ministry said today that the centrist Colorado Party had received 32.2 percent of the vote, the National Party 31.1 percent and the leftist Broad Front 30.7 percent.


Chess
The last of the Intel Quick-Play Grand Prix tourneys was won by Gary Kasparov, the Professional Chess Association's world champion, when he defeated Predrag Nikolic of Croatia by 2-0 on Nov. 13 in Paris.
Kasparov not only received the $30,000 first prize for the final tournament but also shared the $100,000 prize for the best overall result with his Russian countryman Vladimir Kramnik.


CHRONICLE
Seems it takes more than a touch of pneumonia to keep DAN QUAYLE down.
The former Vice President went to the emergency room of the Indiana University Medical Center in Indianapolis on Sunday and was told he had walking pneumonia, The Associated Press reported.
But there will be no lolling about in bed for him, said ANNE HATHAWAY, executive director for Issues '96, a political action committee headed by Mr.
Quayle.
He'll take medication, and he plans to keep his full travel schedule, she added.
Mr.
Quayle is considering a run for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996.


The Compuserve Edge: Delicate Data Balance
IN real estate, the saying goes, the three most important considerations are location, location and location.
In the unreal estate of cyberspace, the key considerations are content, content and content.
That is why more than two million people have taken up electronic residence in the Compuserve Information Service, the third stop on our tour of online information services.
Compuserve is the oldest of the Big Three information services (the others are Prodigy and America Online) and it has the richest reservoirs of business, professional and consumer information of any of the major consumer services.


Adrift, and Angry, On Bay Ridge Streets
Two brutal attacks in recent months have put a spotlight on hundreds of alienated teen-agers in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, whose isolation, anger and confusion have brought an edge of fear to one of New York's more stable neighborhoods.
The attacks, officials say, reflect an increase in violence in generally peaceful white enclaves of the city.
Article, page B1.


Mainly Pain At Airports In Spain
Airports across Spain were paralyzed today and more than 100,000 passengers stranded by a strike that Iberia workers staged to protest the state airline's plans to dismiss almost a quarter of its 24,000 employees and start selling off assets.
The strike grounded all Iberia flights, as unions and management tried to reach an agreement to save the airline, which is nearly bankrupt.


Britain and France Criticize U.S. on Bosnia Positions
The divisions between the United States and Western Europe over Bosnia erupted into unusually blunt public feuding today as leaders of Britain and France lashed out at American pressure to lift the arms embargo on the Bosnian Muslims and step up air strikes on Bosnian Serb forces.
With frustration clearly mounting among NATO members after the assault by Bosnian Serbs on the Muslim enclave of Bihac, the British Defense Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, struck back at comments by Senator Bob Dole that implied that Britain was primarily responsible for a lack of a strong military response by NATO.


The History's Overlooked In This Historical Novel
STUART HALPINE, gray-haired and cardiganed, has become positively shocking, and he figures he knows why.
The ex-Mayor, new novelist of New Milford boils it down to 10 pages.
"Barely 10 pages," he said, "out of a book that's over 300 pages long."


Jerry Rubin, 1960's Radical And Yippie Leader, Dies at 56
Jerry Rubin, the firebrand 1960's radical who used to preach distrust of "anyone over 30," died yesterday in Los Angeles.
He was 56 and lived in Los Angeles..
The cause was cardiac arrest, a hospital spokesman said.
Mr.
Rubin was struck by a car on Nov. 15 in Los Angeles.
Local authorities said he was hit while jaywalking.
He underwent surgery later that day, at the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center and subsequently was listed in critical condition there.


Georgia Keeps Goff
Coach RAY GOFF will remain for another season at the University of Georgia, charged with showing significant improvement in 1995.
Goff, 39, completed his sixth season at Georgia Friday with a 48-10 victory over Georgia Tech, leaving the Bulldogs 6-4-1. (AP)


Taking Singing Beyond the Voice
Sylvia McNair's song recital at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon witnessed a fascinating competition between the singer's best friend and worst enemy, both being herself.
Ms.
McNair's mannerisms teeter constantly on the edge of overkill, yet the other elements of her music making are so intelligently devised, and ultimately so compelling, that one forgets and accepts, often happily.
What takes this young American lyric soprano beyond the ordinary is her determination to move the art of singing beyond the voice itself.
Sound becomes a conveyance.
In the four Purcell songs the destination was words, for Purcell the songwriter is Purcell the dramatist, with musical meter shaped to serve language.
From the exquisite "Music for a While" to "The Blessed Virgin's Expostulation," Ms.
McNair's diction and inflection owed as much to the theater as to the concert stage.


Montana Doubtful
JOE MONTANA's injured left foot was found yesterday to be sprained, and the Chiefs quarterback was pronounced questionable for Sunday's game against Denver.
His backup, Steve Bono, took all the snaps yesterday during a light workout.
Montana will be re-evaluated tomorrow. (AP)


Sugar Bowl Victory: Florida State
If high and close rankings count, the Sugar Bowl assured itself a premiere matchup yesterday when Florida State accepted an invitation to play the Southeastern Conference champion in the 61st Sugar Bowl in New Orleans on Jan. 2.
If television clout counts, the Fiesta Bowl guaranteed itself a high rating when it named Notre Dame as Colorado's opponent in Phoenix.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  In a move that could allow banks to sell real estate, computer services and other financial services, regulators proposed easing Depression-era restrictions.  [ Page D1. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
6.03
3.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.27
3.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.86
5.73
3.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.78
5.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.98
7.94
6.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.82
7.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.24
7.27
5.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


This Lady Loves 'Em And Leaves 'Em, Dead
Two contrasting works by Jerome Robbins, which the New York City Ballet presented on Sunday night at the New York State Theater, demonstrated this great American choreographer's ability to devise rewarding roles of many kinds.
The fact that in some forms of insect life, the females kill the males after mating would seem to be an unlikely subject for a ballet.
Yet this curious piece of scientific lore inspired Mr.
Robbins to create "The Cage," a dance-drama to Stravinsky in which a newborn insect matures into a killer.


It's Time for Israel to Risk Peace With Syria; P.L.O. Pact's Necessity
To the Editor:
The last time Benjamin Netanyahu wrote an Op-Ed article for your paper, I chastised his likening the Principles of the Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization accord signed last year at the White House to the Munich appeasement.
I also criticized his debating Israeli politics in The New York Times, an unwritten no-no in Likud party practice.


Mets' Trade With Astros Adds Harnisch To Rotation
Under the current labor situation, a lot of baseball owners were unhappy to see the Houston Astros sign Jeff Bagwell, the National League most valuable player, to a four-year, $27.5 million deal last week.
Apparently, though, the Mets were thrilled.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PATAKI SAYS HE HOLDS NO ILL-WILL FOR CITY
Governor-elect Pataki opened the first line of communication with New York City, assuring eight top officials that the campaign's bitterness was behind him and that the city would not be neglected under his administration.
The second and more vital line is to be opened today: Mr.
Pataki is to meet in a secret spot with Mayor Giuliani, who, feeling the sting of Mr.
Pataki's rebuffs after the election, refused to attend the first meeting.
B3.


Madonna, Blond Ambition, Indeed
There are some biographies that cry out for the cheap slickness and superficiality that television movies insist on cultivating, and a prime specimen is available in tonight's "Madonna: Innocence Lost," formerly titled "Madonna: Unauthorized." Actually, a more Victorian subtitle, something like "Virtue Trampled," would be closer to the mark.
Sitting alone in her dressing room at Radio City Music Hall, the superstar Madonna (Terumi Matthews) looks into the mirror and says, "I didn't expect it to be this way." That's about as sympathetic as she gets in this tale of ambition driven by unceasing selfishness and ruthlessness.
Madonna Ciccone's early years in Detroit, where, she recalls, "I began my career in petulance and precociousness," are condensed to blurbs.
Mom dead of cancer, father (Dean Stockwell, of all people) always there for her, stepmother a problem.
High school: "When I lost my virginity, I considered it a career move."


G.O.P. Should Check Helms's Competence
To the Editor:
Senator Jesse Helms's comment that President Clinton "better have a bodyguard" if he visits the Senator's home state of North Carolina is outrageous for Senator Helms's apparent ignorance of its potential impact (news article, Nov. 23).


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Cincinnati Stops Rutgers  Art Long and LaZelle Durden each scored 17 points as No. 10 Cincinnati held off stubborn Rutgers, 72-61, last night in Piscataway, N.J.
After Rutgers (0-2) cut a 10-point deficit to 50-47 with 11 minutes 5 seconds remaining, Cincinnati (2-0) responded with a 13-4 run to open a 63-51 lead with 6:13 left.
Long had 5 points in the run, including two follows on missed shots.


Marino Says He Is Not Certain He Wants to Be Just a Senator
Still stunned by his ouster as majority leader of the State Senate, Ralph J. Marino said today that he had not decided whether he would remain in the body as simply the Senator from the Fifth District.
"It's been too soon for me, I think, to gather myself together and think about a direction I want to go in," Mr.
Marino said in a telephone interview from his office in Oyster Bay, L.I.
"I told my wife we ought to go to Montauk Point and talk about it, because I really don't know what the future holds.


Sports of The Times; Where McNair Fits Best
THE instinct is to go for the underdog, the one who comes out of nowhere and wins.
Now we have this greatly appealing young quarterback from this small school in Mississippi who grew up in impoverished surroundings in the Deep South.
He is blessed with an arm and head and mobility of a dream athlete and with the potential to enter the pro firmament with the likes of Unitas, or Montana, or, well, Starr.
In about 10 days Steve McNair of Alcorn State will or will not win the Heisman Trophy as the best, or at least most celebrated, college football player in the land.
The controversy, meanwhile, simmers.


Loophole at the Pier: A special report.; For Aliens, a Bahamas Cruise Is an Easy Way Into the U.S.
For illegal immigrants, getting into the United States can be as simple as climbing the gangplank of a cruise ship in the Bahamas and strolling off again in South Florida a few hours later -- without ever showing any proof of citizenship or exchanging even a word with an immigration service inspector.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service's own investigators found more than a year ago that foreign criminal gangs have used day cruises to the Bahamas as a virtual underground railroad for smuggling aliens and drugs into the United States.


U.S., IN SHIFT, GIVES UP ITS TALK OF TOUGH ACTION AGAINST SERBS
In a policy switch intended to close ranks with its Western European allies, the Clinton Administration has dropped talk of using air strikes and other forms of military pressure to stop Serbian attacks and compel the Serbs to agree to a peace settlement.
For months, the Administration has been trying to mobilize support for tough actions or threats of action against the Bosnian Serbs.
But facing a series of high-level meetings in Europe in early December, the Administration has begun issuing carefully coordinated statements about the futility of military action to end the fighting in the Balkans.


Fatigued, Harvard President Takes Medical Leave
The president of Harvard University, Neil L. Rudenstine, is taking a medical leave of absence for "severe fatigue and exhaustion," Harvard officials announced today.
Albert Carnesale, Harvard's provost, said he would serve as acting president while Mr.
Rudenstine, 59, rested at home and had medical tests performed.


CanWest Global reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Stocks Higher in a Day of Seesaw Trading
The stock market, after an early morning surge and then fall, surprised traders yesterday by surging again, lifting prices for a second consecutive session.
But even with the gains, the market has recovered only a little more than a third of the ground it lost last week.
And many traders are skeptical about the stock market's continuing to rise, especially because several important economic reports, including third-quarter gross domestic product figures tomorrow and October new-home sales next Monday, could send the market tumbling.


Principal to Retire From Fogarty Klein
Fogarty Klein &amp; Partners in Houston said yesterday that Art Casper, one of three principals at the agency, would retire on Dec. 31.
The agency is searching outside for an executive to assume his responsibilities.


CHRONICLE
SYLVIA McNAIR, the American soprano, made her much heralded recital debut Sunday at Alice Tully Hall -- and shared the spotlight as she took her bows.
Ms.
McNair had bumped into MARILYN HORNE as they boarded a plane several weeks ago, and Ms.
Horne asked if MARTIN KATZ would be the piano accompanist at her recital.
"When I said yes, she said, 'November 27th is his 50th birthday, and I would like to surprise him with a birthday cake on stage when you have finished all your encores,' " Ms.
McNair said.
Mr.
Katz has also accompanied singers like Frederica von Stade, Leontyne Price and Jose Carreras.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
College of Charleston
The College of Charleston has been the topic of conversation in collegiate soccer circles since the Division I men's tournament started earlier this month.


Guillevin Int'l. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Singer to Help Provide Summer Vacations for New York City Children


Slaughter Fined
The Houston Oilers' new coach, JEFF FISHER, fined wide receiver WEBSTER SLAUGHTER one game check worth $9,529 today and threatened to suspend him for the season for his critical comments following Sunday's loss at Cleveland.
"Nothing Jeff Fisher can do can insult me anymore," Slaughter said after he was removed from the game.
"I just can't see putting forth an effort and playing hard for those people." (AP)


Edwards's Injury Has Nets Waiting
Butch Beard had seen too much promise the past seven days for everything to revert back to his first week as the Nets' coach.
As the starting shooting guard, Kevin Edwards, went down with an injury and the Nets trailing badly against the Phoenix Suns midway through the third quarter on Sunday night, he waited for any sign of resilience from his players.
Fifteen minutes later, Beard's patience was rewarded.


Man Charged As the Sniper In L.I. Attacks
Three weeks ago, several Suffolk County detectives trudged up a mountain in the Catskills looking for a tree with three bullets lodged in its trunk.
"We hiked five miles up the mountain," said Detective Lieut.
John W. Gierasch, the commander of the Suffolk homicide squad.
"The locals thought we were crazy hunting for a tree, but we found it."


A Changing Lineup In Sony's Review
The lineup of finalists in the review for the Sony Electronics account, with billings estimated at $50 million, changed yesterday as one agency dropped out and at least one more was added.
Lou Tripodi, a spokesman for DDB Needham New York, confirmed a report this week in Adweek that his agency had withdrawn from the review.
He cited a conflict with Sharp Electronics, a client of Griffin Bacal, a sibling agency.


Mystic Aquarium to Hire Leading Oceanographer
With aquariums around the country expanding to capitalize on growing public interest in the underwater world, Connecticut appears to have staged a major coup, recruiting Dr.
Robert D. Ballard, the current superstar of deep-sea exploration, to open an institute at its aquarium in Mystic.
Dr.
Ballard, best-known for leading expeditions that discovered the wrecks of the Titanic, the Bismarck and the Lusitania, plans to establish a center at the aquarium devoted to educating the public about the deep sea and to oversee the building of a submarine simulator that will allow the public to go on mock dives of 12,000 feet.
Visitors will witness real undersea expeditions and speak to the scientists conducting them through live video and telephone hookups in an auditorium.
They will also see more conventional exhibitions.


Coach for Georgia Tech
GEORGE O'LEARY, who took over Georgia Tech's floundering program on an interim basis late in the season, was named coach yesterday despite going 0-3.
The 48-year-old O'Leary, who had been the team's defensive coordinator, replaced BILL LEWIS after Tech's record fell to 1-7 with six straight losses. (AP)


By Design; Fake Fur for Real Fun
"Fun fur" used to be the name given to inexpensive pelts like rabbit and curly lamb, but now the real fun furs are fake furs made of synthetic fibers.
The Searle stores have fake raccoon coats in short and long lengths ($300 and $600) that look remarkably like real fur.
In the obviously fake category are Henri Bendel's versions of Mongolian lamb in colors like turquoise and cotton-candy pink.
There are vests at $128 and seven-eighths-length "chubbies" at $198.


Kevorkian Challenges the Motives of 2 Doctors Who Offered to Intervene With His Patient
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian today angrily dismissed accusations by two doctors who said he had refused to allow them to treat the pain of a woman whom he helped to commit suicide on Saturday.
Suggesting that the doctors were primarily looking for publicity, Dr.
Kevorkian said their help was not needed because the ailing woman was already receiving treatment for her pain.


250 New Housing Units for AIDS Patients Is Among Priorities of the State Legislature
The current session of the New Jersey Legislature still has another year to run, but both the Senate and Assembly have been moving several high-profile bills into position for votes before 1994 ends.
All deal with emotionally charged issues.
The newest measure, which its sponsors say is the first of its kind in the country, would provide 250 units of housing spread through five urban areas for people with H.I.V. or AIDS and their families.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $108 million of debentures due in 1997 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The debentures, which are callable in a year, carry an interest rate of 7.89 percent and are priced at par.


INSIDE
Eased Bank Rules Proposed
Banks would gain new power, being allowed to sell real estate, computer services and possibly securities under relaxed rules proposed by Government regulators.
Page D1.
To Catch a Sniper
Long Island police solved the case of the Suffolk County sniper by hiking five miles up a mountain, cutting down a tree, and bringing back the evidence, three bullets.
Page B1.
Priest Convicted in Robbery
A Catholic priest was found guilty of conspiring to hide some of the $7.4 million that was stolen by masked gunmen from a Brinks depot in Rochester two years ago.
Page B1.


No Headline
"It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." -- DR.
BRUCE H. MARGON, astrophysicist.  [ C1:2. ]


CD-ROM Drives Get Plenty Of Fodder
THAT new CD-ROM drive is aching for disks to spin.
It came with an encyclopedia, a golf game and an electronic cookbook, all of which seemed like good ideas at the time.
But the computer is in the spare bedroom, not the kitchen; nobody in the house plays golf, and you do not look up things in an encyclopedia that often.
At around $30 to $100 a disk, few of us can afford to go wild buying software.
And while books are expensive too, at least you can sample them before whipping out a credit card.


Hospitals' New Creed: Less Is Best
Duke University Medical Center, one of the nation's most prestigious academic hospitals, has long operated dozens of specialized laboratories, two for tests involving the thyroid gland, for example, and one for the pancreas.
Now Duke is combining 79 specialty labs into 4 general units, eliminating the need for 100 of 450 technicians.
"There is no reason to have a lab for every gland in the body," said Dr.
Mark Rogers, chief executive of the hospital in Durham, N.C.


After Setback, First Large AIDS Vaccine Trials Are Planned
IN a sharp turnaround driven by a desperate need to stop the AIDS epidemic, the World Health Organization is moving ahead with plans for the first large trials of the two most widely tested experimental AIDS vaccines.
The United States rejected plans for testing the vaccines in this country in June.
By a nearly unanimous decision last month, an advisory panel of experts gave the Geneva-based health organization a green light to design and carry out full-scale trials of the effectiveness of the two experimental vaccines against H.I.V., the AIDS virus.


How Tsunami Smashed Into a Sheltered Shore
GIANT sea waves generated by earthquakes can smash the shore with devastating force.
Sometimes these waves destroy not only coastal areas that directly face them, but also shore locations normally sheltered from the worst ravages of the sea.
Now researchers believe they have discovered how the giant waves, called tsunamis, cause damage in these areas.
Under certain conditions, they say, tsunamis striking ocean islands can divide, circle the land and converge on the other side as a secondary wave with enough force to demolish what should be a sheltered shore.


Serbs Close In on Bosnian Town; U.N. and NATO Unable to Act
Bosnian Serb forces pushed toward a complete encirclement of the Muslim enclave of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia today, demonstrating a military superiority that now seems likely to bring them political rewards.
With all international deterrents to the Serbs crumbling amid recrimination and disarray, they shelled the town center of Bihac and threatened any flights into airport in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, 140 miles to the southeast, by moving a surface-to-air missle system within range of it, Western officials said.


Giants Still Talk About Flagging Playoff Train
So you laugh upon hearing the words "Giants" and "playoffs" in the same sentence.
A chuckle accompanies the thought that a team that lost seven games in a row will somehow make it to the post-season.
There are 10 million reasons why the Giants shouldn't get in, and one of them is that any team losing to the Los Angeles Rams should automatically have the playoff door slammed in its face.
The Jets provide enough amusement, you say, so halt all this playoff nonsense.


Duckwall-Alco Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Louis Weinstock, 91, A Top Communist And a Union Leader
Louis Weinstock, a New York labor union official in the 1930's and 40's who was also a leader of the Communist Party in the United States for more than half a century, died on Saturday at the Brookside Healthcare Center in Redlands, Calif.
He was 91 and lived in Hemet, Calif.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Dress Barn Inc.(DBRN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Jeffrey Dahmer, Multiple Killer, Is Bludgeoned to Death in Prison
Jeffrey L. Dahmer, whose gruesome exploits of murder, necrophilia and dismemberment shocked the world in 1991, was attacked and killed today in a Wisconsin prison, where he was serving 15 consecutive life terms.
Mr.
Dahmer was 34, older than any of his victims, who ranged in age from 14 to 33.
He died of massive head injuries, suffered sometime between 7:50 and 8:10 A.M., when he was found in a pool of blood in a toilet area next to the prison's gym, said Michael Sullivan, secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Corrections.
He was pronounced dead shortly after 9 A.M.


Y.&amp; R. Units Get A Digital Account
The Digital Equipment Corporation in Maynard, Mass., said yesterday that it had assigned the account of its personal computer business unit in Europe to two agencies owned by Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.
Billings were estimated at $30 million.
Advico/Young &amp; Rubicam in Zurich was named to handle creative duties, while Young &amp; Rubicam London will handle media duties.
Both portions were previously handled by Weber Hodel Schmid in Zurich.
Y.&amp; R. is Digital's PC business unit agency in North and South America.


CHRONICLE
Ever wonder if people give those dinners, cocktail parties and other festive events that they buy at auctions for worthy causes?
CAROLEE FRIEDLANDER, founder and president of a jewelry firm, was the high bidder for a tea party at the Washington home of the French Ambassador, at an auction more than a year ago.
Never able to actually give the tea, which was auctioned to benefit the Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center at Georgetown University, she passed it on as a gift to her friend ADRIENNE ARSHT, a banker in Washington.


First Lady Crowns the First Tree


On Top of the Poll: UMass's Minutemen
Massachusetts, which shocked college basketball by trouncing Arkansas in its season opener, took over the No. 1 ranking for the first time yesterday.
The Minutemen, who beat the top-ranked defending national champions, 104-80, in the Tip-Off Classic at Springfield, Mass., on Friday night, received all but 7 of the 65 first-place votes cast by the national news media panel.
The Minutemen moved up two spots in the poll, leapfrogging North Carolina, which received six first-place votes after beating Texas in its season opener.
Kentucky, which had the other first-place vote, moved up one spot to third and Arkansas, which bounced back with a victory over Georgetown, dropped to fourth.


A $675 Million Acquisition In Waste-Disposal Industry
USA Waste Services agreed to buy the Chambers Development Company today for about $675 million in stock, in another sign of the growing consolidation of the trash-disposal industry.
With this purchase, USA Waste, based in Dallas, will have merged and acquired its way in four years to $450 million in annual sales from $3.7 million.


Ewing's Sore Right Knee Has Knicks Hobbling
The Knicks hold themselves to higher standards than most teams.
And Patrick Ewing is held to higher standards than most players.
For those reasons, both the Knicks and Ewing will be searching for more consistency heading into Tuesday night's road game against the Washington Bullets.
Not only have the Knicks (6-4) lost four of their last seven games, but Ewing hasn't performed to his normal level of excellence while still recovering from arthroscopic right knee surgery in July.


William Leonard Tribute
A memorial tribute to William A. Leonard 2d, former president of CBS News, is to be held on Thursday at 1 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
Among those scheduled to speak are Howard Stringer, president of the CBS Broadcast Group; Dan Rather and Don Hewitt of CBS News; the former CBS News correspondent Charles Kuralt, and Joan Konner, dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University.
Mr.
Leonard died on Oct. 23 at the age of 78.


No Bitterness for New York, Pataki Tells City Officials
Looking a shade sunburned from his Florida trip, Governor-elect George E. Pataki opened the first line of communication with New York City yesterday, assuring eight top officials that the campaign's bitterness was behind him and that the city would not be neglected under his administration.
The second and more vital line is to be opened today: Mr.
Pataki is to meet in a secret spot with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who, feeling the sting of Mr.
Pataki's rebuffs after the election, refused to attend yesterday's meeting.


A Limit on Vendor Permits Is Proposed by the Mayor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday proposed restricting food vendors on the city's streets by limiting to two the number of permits any one person can own.
The proposal, part of a long-awaited plan on food carts, comes months after Mr.
Giuliani sharply limited where the vendors could operate in midtown.
Although administration officials said the proposal is intended to put more permits in the hands of individuals, it could also reduce the number of vendors.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Tommy Barrett manager of Sarasota of the Florida State League; Jeff Gray pitching coach of Sarasota; and Bob Geren manager of Utica of the the New York-Penn League.
Announced that Felix Maldonado, manager of the Red Sox of the Gulf Coast League, will return next season.
Named Sammy Ellis minor league pitching coordinator, and Steve Braun minor league batting coach.


The Broadway Alliance Is Theater's Angel for Production Costs
To the Editor:
In a year that smashed Broadway records for attendance and money earned, it was sobering to read "Why Neil Simon Decided to Turn His Back on Broadway" (Arts pages, Nov. 21).
Although it's sad when a playwright of Neil Simon's stature moves his creative genius to more inexpensive digs, the reasoning of his producer, Emanuel Azenberg, should not pass unexamined.


Music Notes
Shaker Surprises
Joel Cohen and his Boston Camerata started out exploring early European music, with an emphasis on Medieval and Renaissance works, but in recent years the group has adopted early American music as a second line of inquiry.
Some of Mr.
Cohen's findings can be heard in "A New World Christmas," the program he and the Camerata are presenting at Gould Hall (55 East 59th Street, Manhattan) on Dec. 19.


It's Time for Israel to Risk Peace With Syria; Nurturing the Process
To the Editor:
"Israeli-P.L.O. Talks: A Growing Mistrust" (news analysis, Nov. 18) should lay to rest "the conventional wisdom" that existed when I founded Interns for Peace.
In 1976 Israeli leaders told me Jewish-Arab hatred would melt once Israel came to peace with its Arab neighbors.
You document that the enmity has not even eroded among the Jewish and Israeli leaders who pursue peace.


Players Set to Stay Off Owners' New Pitches
If this were a lottery, the winning number could be $34,243,314.
Or $34,865,920.
But major league baseball players won't play either one.
They think both are losers.
The players' labor representatives are expected to deliver that message to the owners' negotiating team on Tuesday when they resume bargaining in the dispute that first wiped out the last seven weeks of the regular season, then erased the post-season and now has created chaos in the clubs' off-season planning.


Riser Foods Inc.(RSR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 22


Endangered Middlemen; ABC's Deal With a New Hollywood Team Could Help Rewrite the Role of Studios
In power breakfasts, networking lunches and phone conversations yesterday, entertainment executives chewed on the meaning of the television studio alliance that Capital Cities/ABC Inc. announced Monday with the team of Jeffrey Katzenberg, David Geffen and Steven Spielberg.
And while the ruminations ranged widely on the implications for other Hollywood creative types, many agreed that the impact would fall most directly on the big movie studios -- like Warner Brothers,, Paramount, Universal, Columbia and Disney -- that depend heavily on television production for profits.


Song and Dance in the Fight Against AIDS


Anti-Smoking Groups Move to Keep a Low-Smoke Cigarette Off U.S. Market
Two anti-smoking groups said today that they would petition the Food and Drug Administration to prevent a planned low-smoke cigarette from being marketed in the United States.
The cigarette's maker, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, announced, meanwhile, that it would provide the Government with the list of ingredients in the new product and the manufacturing methods.
The company is trying to convince the Government and critics of the veracity of its assertions that the cigarette, the Eclipse, has little smoke and fewer hazardous chemicals than standard cigarettes.


William Leonard Tribute
A memorial tribute to William A. Leonard 2d, former president of CBS News, is to be held tomorrow at 11 A.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
Among those scheduled to speak are Howard Stringer, president of the CBS Broadcast Group; Dan Rather and Don Hewitt of CBS News; the former CBS News anchor Walter Cronkite; the former CBS News correspondent Charles Kuralt, and Joan Konner, dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University.
Mr.
Leonard died on Oct. 23 at the age of 78.


Haiti Election Is Postponed To Next Year
Elections for a new Parliament, originally planned for next month, cannot be held before March at the earliest, Prime Minister Smarck Michel said today.
"President Aristide would like a December election, but mechanically it's not possible," said Mr.
Michel, who took office three weeks ago.
"So we are now working for the earliest possible date."


The Los Angeles Under the Salonen Spell
The music world was aghast in the late 1980's when Ernest Fleischmann, the managing director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, proclaimed the death of the symphony orchestra.
But perhaps his doomsaying had a local intent: to strike terror into the hearts of the musicians whose careers he controlled in order to get them to play as if their lives depended it.
It's just a theory.
Another is that the vibrancy the orchestra showed in its concerts at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon and Monday evening should be ascribed to Esa-Pekka Salonen, the 36-year-old Finnish conductor who is in his third season as music director.
Actually, the orchestra was in fine shape when Mr.
Salonen took it over.
On its last visit to New York, in 1990, it produced a beautifully blended sound for Andre Previn.
For that matter, the orchestra played gorgeously for Carlo Maria Giulini 15 years ago.


Empire Blue Cross Will Restrict Coverage for Some Applicants
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield announced plans yesterday to stop offering a special type of comprehensive health care coverage to new applicants because the policy, used mostly by those with cancer and AIDS, has cost the troubled company millions of dollars in the past five years.
The move was immediately criticized by advocates for the seriously ill patients who seek the coverage, who contended that the move would leave thousands of people with inadequate health care.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
NBC is challenging the Fox network, asserting that its stations are illegally foreign-owned.
NBC will ask the F.C.C. to rule either that Fox must reduce its foreign ownership or that other American networks may seek unlimited foreign investment.  [ Page A1. ]


Always on the Verge Of Dramatic Adventure
At one point, the plays in repertory at the august Norwegian National Theater in Oslo were "Rosmers holm" and "Jomfrutur." The first is, of course, an Ibsen classic.
The second sounds like something one might have on toast for breakfast.
Translated into English, the title would be "Virgins on a Tour," or, less literally, "Maiden Voyage."
When it is revealed that the leading characters are three Victorian ladies on a whirlwind jaunt to Terra Incognita, theatergoers might recognize "On the Verge," Eric Overmyer's most produced play.
In this and other works, nothing is cognita about Mr.
Overmyer's terra as he zigzags with the Zeitgeist, spoofing consumerism and extremism in all its extremities.


Anderson Expl. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
No doubt it was the local PBS radio station in upstate New York playing "Manhattan Tower" on a recent Saturday morning that made me do it.


Alfred Matthew Lee; Professor, 56
Alfred Matthew Lee, a professor of English and the humanities at New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark, died on Saturday at his home in Maplewood, N.J.
He was 56.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Would a Penalty Box Save the Quarterbacks?
John McVay, the San Francisco 49ers' vice president for football administration, said he has seen more blindside hits on quarterbacks this season than he can ever recall.
That's why he is proposing that the National Football League competition committee study the use of a penalty box, similar to the one used in the National Hockey League, for defensive players who deliver dangerous blows to quarterbacks.
"These same defensive players who avoid punters, holders and kickers are good enough athletes to avoid hitting the quarterback after he's released the ball," McVay said.
"So many people are putting hits on quarterbacks this year that someone needs to come up with something innovative to try to stop it.


Sports of The Times; How Many Will Cross The Line?
LIKE a high, hard heater from a rested Roger Clemens, the flash point of reckoning appears to be closing in on major league baseball players.
Unless they acquiesce sometime this week, accept a deal that impairs their most sacred ideal, they are going to enter uncharted waters that could be over their heads.
It doesn't mean they will collectively drown, in this sports labor war.
They will just find themselves for the first time with the kind of choice that can rattle the soul, and unhinge the heart.
The direct choice between sacrifice and salary, patronage and profit.


Peace Dividend: Troops Turn to Teaching
When Staff Sgt.
Arthur Moore retired last spring after 20 years in the Army, he decided to stop complaining about public schools and do something about them: He applied for a job as a fifth-grade teacher at Samuel Coleridge-Taylor Elementary School here.
City school officials quickly hired him.
"Male teachers are a premium in any public school, but especially at the elementary level," said Emma J. Hamlin, the principal at Coleridge-Taylor, where 7 of the 27 teachers are men.
"We're fortunate to have someone with his background."


Intermarriage Challenges Many, Not Few
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody (Personal Health column, Nov. 23) repeats from the findings of the survey of sexuality by Chicago-based social scientists that the "melting-pot mix of ethnic, religious and racial heritages is relatively rare." This misrepresents the extent of the phenomenon and thereby understates the challenges that confront people who marry those of other cultures.


Abused Women Won't Have to Wait for Justice
To the Editor:
The phone rings, jolting me from a sound sleep.
I'm hardly awake, yet the adrenaline rush makes my heart race.
I'm sure there's been an accident -- or worse.
My hand darts out from under the blankets and gropes in the dark for the receiver.
The clock on the dresser reads 2:15 A.M.
"Good morning, judge. Did I wake you?" It's the duty sergeant at police headquarters in the quiet village of Scarsdale, New York, where I have served as judge for the last seven years.
In that time there have been many middle-of-the-night calls.
Criminal activity does not keep regular hours, and mine is a 24-hour-a-day job.


Ex-Members Compare Campus Ministry to a Cult
When the fog lifted from her mind, Sarah Lieu found herself scrounging pats of butter at the Au Bon Pain restaurant near the student center on the Rutgers University campus.
She was penniless and hadn't eaten for days, she recalled six months after the incident.
Only the gnawing hunger, she said, was able to break a spell that gripped her toward the end of her freshman year.


Whose Money Is It, Anyway?
After a year of nervous wavering in the face of Congressional opposition, the Federal Election Commission is scheduled to vote tomorrow on new rules to restrict one of Congress's most cherished -- and most offensive -- perks: House and Senate members' ability to dip into their campaign treasuries to pay personal expenses.
Action by the highly partisan six-member commission, while no cure-all, would be a big step forward.
A 1979 law bars candidates from converting their campaign funds "to any personal use." But in the absence of F.E.C. rules defining what that means, spending on items like restaurant meals, sports tickets, cars, clothes, travel and club dues has become widespread.
Many members resent the very idea that the F.E.C. would try to impose restrictions.
But the freedom to convert campaign money for personal use allows special interests to stuff money directly into lawmakers' pockets.


In Term Limits Debate, Justices Take Up a 'Very Hard' Case
An intense and sometimes confusing Supreme Court argument today on the validity of state-imposed term limits for members of Congress left one thing clear: no precise legal precedent and no undisputed historical evidence exists to guide the Justices' decisions in the most important case on the structure of the national Government to reach the Court in years.
Prodded by the Justices' questions, the four lawyers who presented the 90-minute argument disputed nearly every proposition, and even ostensible allies could not always agree along the way.


Uniao dos Palmares Journal; From Brazil's Misty Past, a Black Hero Emerges
High on a hill, in the cool shade of a breadfruit tree, candles flickered among earthenware pots containing offerings for the long-ago dead -- honey, corncakes, rice, beans and white flowers.
"The offerings are in honor of Zumbi, and in honor of all the warriors who died here," said Pedro Jose dos Santos, who was dressed head-to-toe in white as prescribed by Umbanda, one of Brazil's largest African-based religions.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Government's decision to drop its effort to bar a homosexual from serving in the Navy misstated a Federal appeals court's rationale in the case.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, found that under the old military policy restricting homosexuals, the Navy officer, Keith Meinhold, could not be discharged for merely saying he is homosexual.
But the ruling did not say the policy violated equal protection guarantees of the Constitution.


Coat Call
Move over, Santa.
New Yorkers are about to get another big, red symbol of holiday generosity: a 40-foot-high red wool coat.
The coat will be installed in Grand Central Terminal on a specially built wooden frame to remind New Yorkers to clean out their closets for the annual "New York Cares" coat drive for the needy.
The drive begins tomorrow.
This worthwhile recycling effort -- now in its sixth year -- collected 65,000 used but wearable overcoats, jackets and parkas in 1993, helping to make a harsh winter that much warmer for the homeless, new immigrants and impoverished seniors and children.
The goal this year is to collect 75,000 adult and kid-size coats before the drive ends on Dec. 31; the giant red coat, contributed by the Searle clothing stores, will itself be cut up to add 100 smaller coats to the collection.


Accounts
Black &amp; Decker Power Tools Group, Towson, Md., and Black &amp; Decker Household Products Group, Shelton, Conn., to McCann-Erickson New York to handle the consolidated media portion of their North American account, with billings estimated at $30 million to $35 million.
The media duties were previously divided among McCann New York; BBDO Canada, Toronto, and the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago.
Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, continues to handle the print media portion for power tools in the United States. *
Calyx &amp; Corolla, San Francisco, to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle advertising for the company, which sells fresh flowers by mail order.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


MTS Systems (MTSC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eating Well; Easy Ways To Have Healthier Holidays
VERY few people swear allegiance to a fat-free diet during the holidays or choose this time to straighten up their eating habits.
In a survey of 771 adults conducted earlier this month by Prevention Magazine and CNN, more than two-thirds said they planned to eat whatever they wanted for Thanksgiving, Christmas and Hanukkah.
Forty percent thought they would gain weight -- an average of about four and a half pounds -- as a result.
Most men thought they would later shed those pounds; the women were less sure.


Toy Theft in the Bronx: 'Like Stealing Christmas'
Standing in the gray light before dawn, Robert Santos wondered if Santa Claus had come early: the security gate installed to protect his Salvation Army building in the South Bronx had been rolled up during the night, and someone had been inside.
A red-suited long-distance delivery specialist?
But Mr.
Santos, a commanding officer of the Salvation Army's social services department in the South Bronx, soon realized that whoever had broken in had stolen the toys, not dropped them off.


Glenn Is Putting Bad Game Behind Him
Aaron Glenn has been trying to take his first bad game as a professional in stride.
"I don't worry about it," Glenn, the Jets' rookie cornerback, said today as he was leaving the team's practice facilities on the Hofstra University campus.
"Everyone is going to get beat. Even Deion Sanders got beat a week ago. It's just something that happens to the corners."


U.S. Policy Shift on Bosnia Creates a Muddle With Allies
The Clinton Administration's latest shift in policy on Bosnia put senior officials on the defensive today and left them struggling to explain how their new strategy would end the war.
The state of confusion within the Administration and between Washington and its allies has also overshadowed the Administration's plan to press for an expansion of NATO and a new security organization for Europe in meetings with the allies this week and next.


Signs To a Global Village In Progress
The 22d Sao Paulo Bienal is a megashow that needs to make up its mind.
Does this hodgepodge of weak art and mixed messages want to be, like its European counterparts, a survey of the artistic mainstream, accessorized with an amorphous, loosely applied theme?
Does it want to redefine the megashow concept into something more egalitarian and genuinely international?
Or does it want to remain the amateurish exercise in nationalism and regionalism that it has tended to be in recent years?
To varying degrees, the answer to all of the above is: yes.


AT WORK WITH: Beverly Harvard; Atlanta's Police Chief Won More Than a Bet
They say that a little bit of knowledge is a dangerous thing.
In the case of Beverly Harvard, it proved to be a fortuitous thing as well.
Chief Harvard, the new head of the Atlanta Police Department, said that had she known 21 years ago that the tests she would have to take to become a police officer would be arduous, grueling and take two months, she probably would not have attempted them.
She took them in response to a challenge -- a $100 bet that she would fail -- from her husband and a family friend who was skeptical about a woman's capacity to do the job.


Rap Artist Tupac Shakur Shot in Robbery
Tupac Shakur, a rap performer who is standing trial on charges of sexual abuse in Manhattan, was shot five times early today as he and two companions walked into a recording studio in midtown, police said.
Mr.
Shakur, 23, and the other men, who were not identified, were walking through the lobby of Quad Recording Studios at 723 Seventh Avenue, near 48th Street, about 12:25 A.M. when three men approached and demanded money, said Sgt.
James Coleman, a Police Department spokesman.
It was not clear why the men then shot Mr.
Shakur and one of his companions, the police said.
Mr.
Shakur, who was struck twice in the head, twice in the groin and once in one hand, was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center where he was listed in guarded condition, said Wes Anglin, a hospital spokesman.
"He is alert," Mr.
Anglin said, and his wounds were not believed to be life-threatening.
The second man was shot twice in the abdomen and was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
His condition was not available early this morning.
The third man with Mr.
Shakur was not injured.
The three robbers fled after taking money or property from the three men, Sergeant Coleman said.
Mr.
Shakur, who starred last year with Janet Jackson in the movie "Poetic Justice," has been standing trial with his road manager, Charles Fuller, on charges of sodomizing and sexually abusing a woman in the Parker Meridien Hotel last November.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of notes due in 1999 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes, which are callable in two years, carry an interest rate of 8.28 percent and are priced at par.


Suspect in Dahmer Killing Said, 'I'm the Chosen One'
The suspect in the beating death of Jeffrey L. Dahmer is a 25-year-old convicted murderer who went to prison two years ago proclaiming that he was the son of God and that a family of voices told him "who I could trust and who was my enemy."
The suspect, Christopher J. Scarver, killed a man in a robbery in 1990, the year before Mr.
Dahmer was arrested on charges that led to 15 consecutive life terms, a sentence that ended Monday in a pool of blood, next to a toilet.


Cordially if Not Enthusiastically, Mayor and Governor-Elect Meet
After all the bitterness and political comedy of manners, George E. Pataki and Rudolph W. Giuliani met for the first time yesterday as governor-elect and mayor, offering a display of cordiality, if not a heartfelt pledge to make up and be friends.
Exactly three weeks after Election Day, the Mayor and the Governor-elect, both Republicans but otherwise at odds since Mr.
Giuliani crossed party lines to endorse Mario M. Cuomo, emerged from their meeting promising to put campaign nastiness behind them and work together for New York City and State.


Footwear Accounts For Two Agencies
Two agencies have been awarded footwear accounts.
The Nine West Group in Stamford, Conn., has named Toth Design and Advertising in Concord, Mass., to handle its Spa line of shoes, which was previously handled in-house and by various agencies on a project basis.
Billings have not been determined.
Toth was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included two New York agencies, Balet &amp; Albert and Ziccardi &amp; Partners.


A Club of Rich Nations Looks Beyond Europe
A prolonged diplomatic battle over who should head the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ended today much as it began earlier this year -- with Jean-Claude Paye of France still in the post of Secretary General and many governments eager to see him replaced.
But after weeks of late-night meetings, the 25-nation economic research group for the world's wealthier nations, did at least agree today on a future settlement of the dispute: Mr.
Paye will be reappointed for only 18 months, and in June 1996 will be succeeded by Donald Johnston, a former Canadian Minister of Economic Development.


Abused Women Won't Have to Wait for Justice; Beating in a Courthouse
To the Editor:
In September of this year one of my clients, the wife of a Rikers Island inmate, was severely beaten by her husband while he was awaiting his hearing in a Brooklyn courthouse.
He had been brought from Rikers and left with her, unguarded and unrestrained, in a waiting room.
She had had him arrested for an assault on her in June.
This second beating occurred before Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's announcement of Corrections Department budget cuts.
What will happen to battered women after these cuts are made?


Government Securities' Prices Fall
The government securities market was clearly settled in a bearish pattern yesterday, as prices fell after a report showed that consumer confidence had surged to a four-year high.
But the decline was tempered by a move by the Federal Reserve to inject money into the banking system.
As part of its regular operations, the Fed buys various notes and bonds, usually about $3 billion to $5 billion worth, for the purpose of tempering interest rates, particularly during the holiday season when money may be in tight supply.


Olympics Are Opened to Serbian Players
Basketball's world governing body has opened the door for Serbian players to participate in the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
At a meeting last Saturday in Munich, Germany, FIBA's European Commission voted to allow the rump state of Yugoslavia, now composed of Serbia and Montenegro, to compete in qualifying for the men's and women's European championships to be held in the summer of 1995.


Rescuer of Youths Proves Justice Isn't Always Blind
ANGEL RODRIGUEZ was intervening.
As director of the Andrew Glover Youth Program on the Lower East Side, Mr.
Rodriguez does that.
He stands up for young people in trouble with the law, stands up before judges, prosecutors, parole officers, drug dealers, gang leaders and relatives.
Sometimes, when it's in the best interest of the community, he stands up to the troubled young.
"You have to weigh various interests," said Mr.
Rodriguez, who has just won an award of $25,000 for his organization as a hero of the Robin Hood Foundation.
"You want to provide alternatives to incarceration, but you also want to do what's in the best interest of the community, and you want to uphold the credibility of the justice system. That may require putting some fear into a kid, maybe letting him do city time so he never wants to do state time."


How Nativism Infects California Proposition
To the Editor:
William Safire should have titled his Nov. 21 column not "Self-Deportation?" but instead "Self-Deception."
Mr.
Safire withdrew his charge that California's Proposition 187 is driven primarily by nativism after considering two counterarguments offered by Gov.
Pete Wilson: that the proposition is anti-illegal-immigrant rather than anti-immigrant, and that most legal immigrants support it.


Cobb's Ghostwrite Sharpens His Pencils
In 1961, Al Stump ghostwrote Ty Cobb's autobiography, "My Life in Baseball," a sanitized account of baseball's greatest hitter and meanest character: a spike-sharpening, bigoted, misogynistic, gun-toting, suspicious hellion despised as much for his vicious personality as he was applauded for his revolutionary aggressiveness on the ball field.
Disputes over how to portray controversies in Cobb's turbulent 74-year life were settled by Doubleday, the publisher, in favor of the man voted first into baseball's Hall of Fame.


Applied Extrusion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Entertaining; Tips From a Perennial Guest
THE fashion designer Jon Haggins is an A-list kind of guy, a self-described perennial guest.
"I've done five parties in a night and made it home by 9," Mr.
Haggins said, adding that he sometimes goes to as many as 12 in a single week.
Mr.
Haggins, who also produces fashion shows, organizes group trips to Africa and is at work on an autobiography, has been invited to so many parties in Connecticut that one host suggested he move there.
And when he's not attending a party, he's more often than not throwing one.
With such an active social life, he knows what makes a party tick and has definite thoughts about entertaining his own guests.
For him, setting the right mood is as important as the food and drinks he serves.


Talks Held On American Brands Unit
Continuing its quest for acquisitions to help overcome stagnant sales in its life insurance business, the American General Corporation said yesterday that it was talking with American Brands Inc. about acquiring that company's life insurance subsidiary.
The American Brands subsidiary, the Franklin Life Insurance Company of Springfield, Ill., is a profitable, well-capitalized company that specializes in sales to middle-income families through a network of about 3,000 agents.
With $6.2 billion of assets, Franklin is about a sixth the size of American General's insurance subsidiaries, which focus on middle- and lower-income customers.


Toehold for Islam -- A special report; Muslim Party Threatens Turks' Secular Heritage
Esref Cosan is a new arrival in this mud-and-concrete satellite of Istanbul, a man of the countryside more used to tending his beehives than hustling for work on construction sites that have no jobs to offer.
In many ways, though, his uprooting from village to city is the story of modern Turkey.
When he and his family arrived here the other day, fleeing the civil war against Kurdish guerrillas in the southeast, they became part of a wave of migration to the cities that has shifted the nation's center of gravity from village to metropolis.
And, propelled from Anatolia's far reaches by poverty and war, needs and dreams, this great column has come to represent another phenomenon, far more troubling to Turkey's authorities and their Western allies -- the grist of an Islamic movement that would challenge the secular core and Western leanings of the 71-year-old republic.


Political Turnabout as Fair Play, Circa 2014
It is hard to figure out what Ishmael Reed is up to in his new play, "The Preacher and the Rapper." But it is not at all hard to see what the director, Rome Neal, and an exuberant cast want the production at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe to be: semiriotous fun.
The lines are often terrific, and one leaves the theater laughing, not at all worried that plot and story were, at best, confused.
The play begins now, in 1994, with stars of religion, politics and the media all pursuing the evil of the day, a rap artist.
But it soon jumps 20 years ahead, when a woman is President; the nation's religion is the witches' cult Wiccan; the rapper is Attorney General, and the Preacher of the title and the Pope are in prison, joined by at least some of the press.
Does that make things right?
Not at all.
Everyone gets punctured, gleefully.


'Amahl' to Be Presented
The Little Orchestra Society is to present its annual performances of Menotti's holiday opera "Amahl and the Night Visitors," at 11 A.M. and 1 and 3 P.M. on Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall.
Amahl is to be sung by Matthew Butler, his mother by Susan Shafer and the Three Kings by Blaine Hendsbee, Gary Simpson and Brian Matthews.
Dino Anagnost is to conduct this production, the composer's own, created for the Little Orchestra Society.
Tickets are $15 to $32.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Yeltsin Threatens Action on Warring Secessionist Area
The civil war in a breakaway region of Russia threatened to enter a dangerous new phase today when President Boris N. Yeltsin declared that he would impose a state of emergency there if fighting did not stop by Thursday.
"Chechnya is a republic within the Russian Federation," he said this morning at a meeting of his National Security Council, which met through much of the day.
"We have no moral right to stand aside and watch this bloodshed. The situation poses an extreme danger to stability and peace in our society."


Croat Warns Of Wider War If Bihac Falls
The Croatian Defense Minister warned the Clinton Administration today that Croatia would enter the war against the Serbs if Bihac fell into Serbian hands.
Defense Minister Gojko Susak said he thought the Bosnian Serbs and Croatian Serbs would probably be satisfied with surrounding Bihac and turning it into a powerless Muslim enclave.
Taking the entire town, he added, would require the Serbs to engage in costly house-to-house fighting.


Replacement Players May Play Ball Next Year
Barring a 180-degree change in baseball's labor negotiations, the owners not only are headed for implementation of their salary-cap proposal next Monday, but they are also hurtling toward the use of replacement players next summer, their chief labor spokesman said tonight in his clearest comments on the controversial weapon in the clubs' bargaining briefcase.
The remarks by John Harrington came -- almost as an afterthought -- at the end of a long, unproductive day in talks between negotiators for the owners and the striking players at the Lansdowne Conference Resort 15 minutes from Dulles International Airport.


Disputing 4 Studies, New Research Supports Chest X-Rays as Cancer Screen
After re-analyzing the data from four major studies, a specialist in cancer treatment yesterday challenged their conclusion that annual chest X-rays are of no benefit to smokers and former smokers.
The studies had found no difference in death rates between the participants who were screened and those who were not.
But the specialist, Dr.
Gary Strauss, a medical oncologist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, reported that he found a benefit when he looked at the data in a different way.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A dispute over radio spots focuses an unlikely spotlight on a rift among conservatives on GATT.
A SPAT over GATT is causing a rift on the right.
Disagreements among some of the nation's most widely known conservatives about the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which is facing a crucial Senate vote tomorrow, are manifesting themselves in an advertising dispute.


CHRONICLE
When word came that Jerry Rubin, a symbol of radical protest in the 1960's, had died in Los Angeles on Monday night two weeks after having been struck by a car, there was no thought among his old friends of postponing a party planned for tonight.
As they have every year since 1990, the year after Abbie Hoffman died, friends and admirers of Mr.
Hoffman, who was Mr.
Rubin's colleague on the barricades, will gather for his birthday at the Wetlands, a downtown music club.
They will also be celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial, in which Mr.
Hoffman and Mr.
Rubin were defendants.


Executive Changes
LEVER BROTHERS CO., New York, named Melinda Sweet senior vice president and general counsel.
NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO., New York, promoted Michael L. Callahan, vice president in charge of the corporate compliance department, and Thomas J. Warga, vice president and general auditor, to senior vice presidents.
It also named Lee Lapioli senior vice president and chief information officer.


Congress's Lame Ducks Sing Their Swan Songs
The end of an era in Congress collided today with the dawn of a new one as departing Democrats sang their swan songs and incoming Republicans tried not to gloat.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, the Illinois Republican and soon-to-be chairman of the Judiciary Committee, carried around a bumper sticker that said it all: "Speaker Gingrich. Deal With It."


Diana
The New York Times Shares of the Diana Corporation, a food wholesaler based in Milwaukee, dropped sharply yesterday after the company reported that earnings in the second quarter fell more than 50 percent.
The company cited falling profits in its meat business and losses on bonds.


School District Is a Candidate For Takeover
While other school districts in New York City have had their share of trouble, the litany of mismanagement and outright corruption in District 17 in Central Brooklyn stands out as a study of the worst problems of decentralization.
Thousands of dollars' worth of books, computers and furniture were taken from a school; officials suspect they were sold to a private school.
At another school, a teacher's aide who had been accused of molesting four girls in an auditorium was elected P.T.A. president, a position he held for months afterward, until he was arrested on charges of molesting another girl at his home.
Administrators of a third school are battling with parents over whose students should occupy a new building.


Traders Seek Direction As Stocks Close Mixed
The stock market, after rising for two days, closed mixed but essentially unchanged yesterday, as long-bond yields again climbed past 8 percent.
The real test for equities will likely come today with the release of third-quarter gross domestic product figures that may confirm or dispel traders' fears of an overheating economy.
As in Monday's trading, the number of advancing stocks -- 1,155 -- almost equaled the number of decliners -- 1,075.
The narrow division underscores traders' indecision about the direction of the market.
But 107 stocks established new lows and only 11 set new highs.


Coleman Blisters Nets After Another Fade
The first morsel of distressing news for the Nets occurred in the second quarter when it was learned that the starting shooting guard Kevin Edwards would miss at least three weeks with a partially torn left Achilles' tendon.
The next morsels of distressing news occurred over and over again in the fourth quarter, when the Nets revealed a fatal flaw in failing to protect a 16-point lead at home against the Los Angeles Lakers.


Ritualizing Grief, Love and Politics; AIDS Memorial Services Evolve Into a Distinctive Gay Rite
The stage was dark at the Astor Place Theater in the East Village, except for a screen flashing slides of a glittery disco scene from the early 1980's.
A black-and-white poster, made from a photograph, of a smiling man raising a glass hung from wires, looking suspended in air.
The images transported the audience to a time in the life of New York City's gay populace that one mourner described as "filled with magic," a time when the man in the picture, Bruce Mailman, was still strong and healthy, before AIDS began stealing lives away by the thousands.


U.N. TO WITHDRAW UNLESS THE FIRING IN BOSNIA CEASES
Humiliated and harassed by Bosnian Serb forces, the United Nations has decided to inform the warring parties in Bosnia officially that it will end its peacekeeping mission unless a countrywide cease-fire is reached quickly.
Senior Western officials said today that the planned visit to Sarajevo on Wednesday by the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, was conceived to put the maximum political weight behind a warning that fighting must stop now or United Nations forces will leave.


Food Notes
For Starters
Many people who entertain at this time of year do most of the cooking themselves but still rely on some outside sources.
Items that are time-consuming to make, like hors d'oeuvre tidbits and desserts, can easily be purchased.
With that in mind, here are some suggestions.
It is best to order at least two days in advance and confirm pick-up or delivery arrangements.
Sumptuous gougeres, the French savories made of cream-puff pastry and cheese, perfect to pass at a party or to cut into wedges for a cocktail buffet, are from FLAVORS , 8 West 18th Street.
A large gougere is $16; the minis, $6 a dozen.
Warm them before serving.
Telephone: (212) 647-1234.


Yeltsin Threatens Action on Warring Secessionist Area
The civil war in a breakaway region of Russia threatened to enter a dangerous new phase today when President Boris N. Yeltsin declared that he would impose a state of emergency there if fighting did not stop by Thursday.
"Chechnya is a republic within the Russian Federation," he said this morning at a meeting of his National Security Council, which met through much of the day.
"We have no moral right to stand aside and watch this bloodshed. The situation poses an extreme danger to stability and peace in our society."


Supreme Court Upholds Government's Ambiguously Written Child Pornography Law
The Supreme Court salvaged the Federal law against child pornography today by editing it to make clear that the Government must prove that a defendant knew that the performers in sexually explicit photographs or films were under the age of 18.
Congress almost certainly intended to include a knowledge requirement even though "the most natural grammatical reading" of the densely written law does not find one, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist said in a 7-to-2 decision.


PGA Ready to Play Hardball
The PGA Tour today issued a formal response to the World Golf Tour, and it can be summed up in two words: no compromise.
After a two-day meeting of its Tournament Policy Board in Tampa, the PGA Tour decided to hold a hard line in all dealings with the World Tour, which two weeks ago announced its intention to stage eight worldwide events in 1995 worth $25 million, televised by the Fox Television Network and featuring the top 30 players on the Sony World Rankings and 10 selected other players.


Lois/USA Chosen By Press Group
The American Business Press, which represents about 660 trade and business publications, said yesterday that it had selected Lois/USA in New York to handle its account, previously handled in-house.
Billings are estimated at $2 million in the next two years.
Gordon T. Hughes 2d, president of the association in New York, said Lois/USA was awarded the account after a three-month review that was narrowed to that agency and three other New York-based finalists: the Gotham Group, Lotas Minard Patton McIver and Mad Dogs and Englishmen.


Norstan Inc.(NRRD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Lobbying in the Video Age


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday about a problem with the Intel Corporation's Pentium computer chips omitted a decimal point in an example of the type of arithmetic mistake that sometimes occurs when the chips are used to perform division.
In the example, the mathematical significance of the error in the calculation by the Pentium, compared with the original data, was 6.1/100,000 , not 61/100,000 .


The City Council's Soft Numbers
The budget standoff between Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the New York City Council is about power.
The Council is trying to regain clout it lost when the Mayor pushed his original budget through without much opposition.
In fairness to the Council, the struggle is also about the concerns of Council members for their constituents, especially the poor who depend on city services.
In dollar terms, the two sides are not far apart.
At issue is roughly $100 million of cuts in the city's $31.6 billion budget.
The budget was supposedly balanced at the time it was adopted in June, but lagging tax collections and rising expenses have opened up a new gap that must be closed.
Last month the Mayor presented a package of $800 million in spending cuts to help close it.
The Council agreed with $700 million of his cuts, but last week adopted its own plan for the other $100 million.


Public &amp; Private; 17 Going On 18
Dear Golden Girl,
Got a letter from your mom the other day.
Her description did you proud: "At seventeen she is at the high end of meeting every parent's expectations, including mine," she wrote.
"An A student, captain of the tennis team, president of her high school service organization."
But her tone was despondent, disappointed and angry.
You've started to smoke, and she wants me to persuade you to stop.


Matthew A. Meyer; Publisher and Agent, 84
Matthew A. Meyer, a New York book publisher and literary agent, died on Friday at Charlene Manor, a nursing home in Greenfield, Mass.
He was 84.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Victor Seen In Santa Fe Bidding
The Union Pacific Corporation, once considered a long-shot spoiler in a bidding war to buy the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, has emerged as the likely winner.
Union Pacific won a crucial agreement yesterday from Santa Fe officials to meet for the first time to share financial information and discuss terms of a merger of the railroad companies.


Cellular Fraud in New York
Cellular telephone fraud in New York City has become so rampant that a cellular service in Washington will temporarily block its customers from using their wireless phones when they travel in New York.
Cellular One of Washington-Baltimore, owned by SBC Communications Inc., has sent its customers letters notifying them that it would block the service beginning on Thursday because it had compiled a huge backlog of phone numbers used in New York that appeared to be fraudulent.


Red Apple to Sell Up to 20 Stores
Red Apple Group, owner of the Sloan's, Gristede's and Red Apple supermarket chains in New York City, will sell from 17 to 20 of its 75 stores to Rite-Aid, the nation's largest drugstore chain, in the next four months, the company's chief executive said yesterday.
Ten stores will be sold by Dec. 31, and 7 to 10 additional stores will be bought by Rite-Aid by the end of March and converted into drugstores, said John Catsimatidis, owner of the privately held supermarket unit, of which the Red Apple Group is the main holding company.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Region Briefs; Jury Weighs Charges In Carpenter Murder Case
Jury deliberations began today in the retrial of a Larchmont carpenter charged with breaking into his childhood home and killing the couple that bought the house from his parents years before.
The carpenter, Paul Cox, 27, admits killing Dr.
Shanta Chervu, 51, and her husband, Lakshman Rao Chervu, 58, while drunk, though he said he had no direct memory of the crime.
His lawyers have argued that he was temporarily insane and acting out a fantasy of killing his parents.


New York, Nostalgically
Some of the joys of growing up in New York City between the 1930's and the 1950's are on show in "Wish You Were Here," a nostalgia-marinated offering in WLIW's "New York the Way It Was" series.
Home movies, newsreels and, especially, smiling reminiscences picture the city and its watering places as a grand fun house for the young of all ages.


NBC Is Challenging Fox TV Operations As Foreign-Owned
In a direct challenge to the very existence of the Fox television network, NBC will file a petition with the Federal Communications Commission today asserting that the stations that form the heart of Fox are illegally foreign-owned.
NBC will ask the commission to rule either that Fox must drastically reduce its level of foreign ownership or that all other American networks may seek unlimited foreign investment.


Knicks Take Stutter Step in Right Direction
The Knicks built an 18-point lead tonight, but it almost wasn't enough.
Using a 16-0 run that started late in the third quarter and carried into the fourth, the Washington Bullets put a charge into the sellout crowd, while putting a scare into the Knicks.
But by making crucial plays during the last five minutes, New York held on for a 99-91 victory before 18,756 at the USAir Arena, sending the new-look Bullets (4-7) to their sixth consecutive defeat.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 25
Nov. 18
Nov. 26
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.9
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.5
Gasoline stocks
210.3
208.4
218.5
Distillate stocks
143.6
140.5
142.1
Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.1
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.6
1.3
Crude stocks
337.7
338.4
334.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
95.0
94.1
91.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


City Council Alters Anti-Smoking Bill, Easing Some Curbs
After a vigorous campaign by the tobacco industry and local restaurants, New York City Council leaders yesterday offered a revised anti-smoking bill that would loosen some proposed restrictions on smoking in restaurants and offices.
But it would still be much tougher than the current law, banning smoking in virtually all public places, including outdoor sports stadiums, zoos and bingo parlors.


Home Entertaining; How to Put Life In the Party, With Ease
AH, for the days of champagne and caviar, those halcyon 1980's, when a hostess needed only to produce a culinary extravaganza, summon professionally accomplished people to dinner and watch as the expensive food became the lodestar of powerful networking.
There was a certain ease in knowing that fabulous dinner parties could be bought.
But that ease is fading as the pendulum of popular taste swings away from conspicuous consumption.


Chief to Turn Over B.P. Reins to Supporter
David Simon, who as group chief executive at British Petroleum led the company's turnaround by reducing debt and shedding businesses, will turn over the reins to one of his key supporters, the board of directors announced yesterday.
John Browne, 46, will take over the post on July 1, when Mr.
Simon, 55, will become chairman.


Miscellany
*
Showtime Networks and Blockbuster Entertainment, both owned by Viacom Inc., have teamed up for a joint promotion.
Blockbuster will promote Showtime's cable programming in commercials running on monitors in video stores nationwide.
And in eight markets, consumers who rent three videotapes from Blockbuster will receive coupons offering $10 rebates on new subscriptions to Showtime and its sibling network, the Movie Channel. *
Ron Louie, creative director at the Evans Group, Seattle, has left to open his own agency, Lola, in Redmond, Wash.


Diana Corp.(DNA,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 15


Christians Shouldn't Want Prayer in Schools
To the Editor:
"School Prayer Tactics" (editorial, Nov. 27) and letters of the same day omit crucial points that confirm that school prayer has nothing to do with genuine religious impulses.
Government-led or -sponsored prayer is an implicitly anti-Semitic step in the efforts of the Christian right to make America "a Christian nation," and is an explicit repudiation of Thomas Jefferson's opposition to tyranny over the mind of man.


HOUSE APPROVES TRADE AGREEMENT BY A WIDE MARGIN
The House of Representatives tonight overwhelmingly approved American participation in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the most ambitious world trade accord put forth in more than two generations.
The issue now moves to the Senate, where its fate in a vote on Thursday is still uncertain.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORPORATION, Newark, completed the acquisition of Baltimore Bancorp for about $348 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  U.N.
ULTIMATUM TO BOSNIANS  The United Nations has decided to inform the warring parties in Bosnia that it will end its peacekeeping mission unless a cease-fire is reached quickly.
A1  U.S.
POLICY IN DISARRAY  The decision to abandon talk of air strikes against the Serbs and emphasize NATO solidarity has thrown the Clinton Administration into disarray.
A1


Corrections
A brief report on the obituary page yesterday about a memorial tribute to William A. Leonard 2d, former president of CBS News, misstated the time of the program, which is to be held tomorrow at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
It is 11 A.M., not 1 P.M.


Longtime Adviser Is Chosen To Serve as Pataki's Counsel
In the first appointment to his new administration, Governor-elect George E. Pataki today named his old friend, campaign adviser and former law partner, Michael C. Finnegan, to the position of counsel to the governor.
Mr.
Finnegan is expected to play a central role in developing Mr.
Pataki's legislative agenda and working to get it enacted, as he did as Mr.
Pataki's legislative counsel in the State Senate.
In that role, the position of counsel would become much more powerful than it has been under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who looked to his counsels mainly for legal advice.


Revamping Set at Kmart Book Unit
Borders-Walden Inc., the big bookstore division of the Kmart Corporation, announced a major shake-up yesterday that industry officials said was intended to strengthen the bookseller for the public offering of its stock, presumably next year.
The reorganization is also intended to accelerate the growth of the "superstore," a free-standing store that carries as many as 100,000 titles, which has been highly successful for Barnes &amp; Noble Inc.


Don't Rush to Expand NATO
During the cold war there was no disagreement between America and its allies over NATO's purpose: It was Europe's shield against a common enemy.
The Serbs' war on Bosnia has exposed deep divisions among the Western powers over NATO's role and the question of European security.
Some U.S. policy makers believe that the way to revive NATO is to enlarge it by offering membership and the military guarantees that membership confers to a few countries in Eastern Europe.
Their rallying cry is "Expand or die."
That is a questionable idea.
If Washington continues to move in this direction, it is sure to generate more trans-Atlantic divisiveness.
It will burden NATO's existing members with risky new obligations.
Moreover, inviting Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic to join will affront those who are likely to be left out, like Ukraine and the Baltic republics.
Worse yet, expansion could strengthen Russian nationalists opposed to Boris Yeltsin and his Western-oriented reformers.
The net result is that a larger NATO could diminish rather than strengthen European security.


Town Rife With Corruption, Panel Says
This borough has only 5,800 residents and a 10-member police force, but the State Commission of Investigation said today that that was enough to produce a hotbed of official misconduct, nepotism and an abuse of the public trust so pervasive that it threatened the municipality's financial stability.
After a 21-month investigation resulting from residents' complaints, the commission said it found that:


Putting Politics Aside To Help the Homeless
To the Editor:
While some have demonized the poor for political gain, as you note in "Starving the Poor" (editorial, Nov. 24), countless Government employees still help the disadvantaged.


CHRONICLE
The Veteran Feminists of America will present its medal of honor to -- no surprise -- BELLA ABZUG at a dinner Friday in the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.
"My feeling is that the early feminists were all generals, so there is reluctance to accept four-star generals," said JACQUI CEBALLOS, the founder and director of the organization.
"But when I was planning this event, I found that 99.9 percent of women feminists love, honor, esteem and acknowledge Bella as their leader."


Brown Group Inc.(BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Confidence Index Has a Surge
One of the nation's two major consumer confidence indexes, which are intended to measure the optimism of Americans about their own financial situations, shot up in November to the highest level in more than four years.
The sudden surge in the index compiled by the Conference Board, to 101.3 from 89.1, might be an aberration.
But many pollsters and economists agreed on one point: Even without November's jump, the index shows that Americans feel better today about their circumstances than they did in 1993.
And they are not bracing for a recession -- although they might be expecting a slowdown next year.


Applied Materials Inc.(AMAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Off the Menu
A Rreally Big Deal
In one of the year's more hotly contested restaurant contracts, CBS has selected Earl Geer, the president of Hi-Life Restaurants on the Upper East and West sides, to create and run a restaurant in the Ed Sullivan Theater, the current home of "Late Show With David Letterman." Originally, 42 restaurant operators were in the running, but Mr.
Geer was selected because, unlike many of the others, he wanted to do a television theme restaurant.
"He shared my vision for a place that would focus on the history of television," said Ed Grebow, CBS's executive vice president for operations.
The new restaurant, to be called Sullivan's Restaurant and Broadcast Lounge, will replace McGee's Pub, the restaurant under the theater marquee, at 1699 Broadway (at West 54th Street), whose lease is up in February.


Polenta With Guilt-Reduced Sausage
OVER the last few years, sausage makers have learned how to lower the fat in sausages without ruining the flavor.
Now, these reduced-fat sausages are available in almost every supermarket.
The basic ingredient is either chicken or turkey.
Because they are well seasoned, a little goes a long way to flavor a dish, like this polenta recipe.
A good side dish is steamed brussels sprouts tossed with orange rind, orange juice and a touch of sugar.


A Man of the People, A Symbol of His Time
At his death at 56 in a 1935 Alaska plane crash, Will Rogers had been an unparalleled American phenomenon for more than two decades.
A career that included rodeos, vaudeville, radio, films, newspaper columns and a constantly touring form of stand-up comedy was capped with the distinction of being the highest-paid male movie star in Hollywood (and no matter the part, he always played Will Rogers).
Today, embalmed in the sad story of fated celebrity, Rogers is merely a curiosity, a corn-pone peg on which to hang a mediocre Broadway musical.


Jerry Rubin, 56, Flashy 60's Radical, Dies; 'Yippies' Founder and Chicago 7 Defendant
Jerry Rubin, the flamboyant 1960's radical who once preached distrust of "anyone over 30," died on Monday night in a Los Angeles hospital where he was being treated after having been struck by a car two weeks earlier.
He was 56 and lived in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
A hospital spokesman said the cause was cardiac arrest, but Mr.
Rubin had been unconscious and in critical condition since he was hit on the night of Nov. 14 while jaywalking across Wilshire Boulevard in the Westwood section of Los Angeles.
His former wife, Mimi Leonard Fleischman, said that he had suffered multiple injuries.


Horror, Horror on the Wall, Who's Etc.
Glenn Danzig sounds a little scarier than he looks.
His voice is a deep baritone, full of portentous Jim Morrison mannerisms, and his songs take up Satanism, death, sadomasochism and nearly everything else he could glean from old Black Sabbath records.
"I am a walking screaming hell/A thing of torture to behold" he vowed as his band, Danzig, started its set on Monday night at a sold-out Roseland.
Actually, he was a stocky, long-haired 35-year-old man with Elvis Presley sideburns, black jeans, cowboy boots and a rubber top that might have come from a wet suit, doing his best to glower as seriously as his songs required.
Mr.
Danzig first made his reputation in the 1970's leading the Misfits, a punk band with a horror-movie fixation.
Danzig is actually more old-fashioned; it draws on the blues-rock and heavy metal that punk-rock wanted to shake up.
The four-man band -- with John Christ on guitar, Eerie Von on bass and Joey Castillo on drums -- is breathtakingly predictable.
Every riff pounds its appointed number of times, every guitar solo delivers the appropriate squiggles.
The band knows its dynamics, inflating Mr.
Danzig's pronouncements with measured crescendos; its best gimmick, used sparingly, was to switch suddenly into double-time, which threw the mosh pit into a joyous frenzy.


METRO DIGEST
SOME LIMITS IN ANTI-SMOKING BILL EASED
After a campaign by the tobacco industry and local restaurants, City Council leaders offered a revised anti-smoking bill that would loosen some proposed restrictions on smoking in restaurants and offices.
But it would still be much tougher than the current law, banning smoking in virtually all public places.
A1.
AT LAST, GIULIANI AND PATAKI MEET
After all the bitterness and political comedy of manners, George E. Pataki and Rudolph W. Giuliani met for the first time as Governor-elect and Mayor, offering a display of cordiality, if not a heartfelt pledge to make up and be friends.
A1.


Magazine Barred From Using Nude Photos of Clinton's Accuser
In a case that pits the freedom of the press against an individual's claim of privacy, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered Penthouse magazine not to distribute photographs of a woman who has accused President Clinton of sexual harassment.
The magazine, which said the January 1995 issue was already on the way to subscribers and retailers, assailed the order by Judge Peter K. Leisure.
"It's obviously unconstitutional because it constitutes prior restraint," said Bob Guccione, the owner of Penthouse.


Corrections
A recipe for corn pudding on Nov. 16 with an article about traditional Thanksgiving recipes from Virginia omitted butter from the preparation.
Here is a corrected version:


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Feinstein Opponent Hopes To Uncover Ballot Fraud
Three weeks after Election Day, Representative Michael Huffington says he will still not concede defeat in his bid to unseat Senator Dianne Feinstein because he is certain a planned door-to-door canvass of voters will uncover "overwhelming" ballot fraud.
Ms.
Feinstein, a mainstream Democrat, has already claimed victory in the race.
State election officials, as well as one judge, have said there is no evidence of significant voter fraud.


Personal Health; Sex after cancer: planning can make a major difference.
WHEN cancer is diagnosed, a person's first order of concern is naturally and appropriately survival.
But experts who deal with cancer survivors urge that another issue be considered at the outset: the effects of the cancer and its treatment on the person's sexual and reproductive future.
With the number of cancer survivors growing by the tens of thousands each year, post-cancer sexuality and fertility are matters of growing concern.
Yet few specialists who treat cancer discuss these issues with patients either before the therapeutic decisions are made or afterward, when the cancer is under control and concerns surface about the quality of life.


Blood Clot Lodged in Lung Sends Quayle to Hospital
Former Vice President Dan Quayle was admitted to the intensive care unit of an Indianapolis hospital on Monday evening for treatment of a blood clot in the right lung.
At a news conference with three of his doctors, Mr.
Quayle's wife, Marilyn, said yesterday that she and they were "very optimistic" about his prognosis and that the ailment would not affect his political plans.
The 47-year-old former Vice President is expected to announce a bid for the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination in the next few weeks.


The Met Tries To Reinvent An Opera Classic
It was, nearly, one of the most touching scenes in one of the most blindly passionate of operas.
Cio-Cio San, abandoned and nearly penniless, knelt by a picture of her long-absent husband, urging her servant to faith with an elaborate fantasy of Benjamin Franklin Pinkerton's return.
Catherine Malfitano made the aria "Un bel di" a wrenching revelation of Butterfly's delusion and desperation.
And yet something was missing.
Suddenly, toward the end of the aria, a man slipped alongside Ms.
Malfitano, shadowing the soprano's movements.
In the final bars, he reached down and gripped Pinkerton's portrait with trembling hands.
He stepped forward.
"Io con sicura fede l'aspetto," he sang.
"With unalterable faith, I wait for him."


In a Bittersweet Reunion, A Rescuer Visits the Saved
Hobbling on a cane, his torso encased in a clear plastic brace, Firefighter Greg Smith said he had been told the two children were all right, but he wanted to see them with his own eyes.
Then, in a play area of Bellevue Hospital Center, he spotted Edwin Espinosa, the 4-year old boy whom he had tucked under his arm the week before and tried to protect as an aerial ladder collapsed and they tumbled six stories.


In America; Business Beats Brooklyn
Final approval of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade will tear a large hole in the Federal budget.
But this breach of the budget is not considered a major problem by Government leaders in Washington because the new GATT agreement will be a bonanza for big business, and that is something favored by Democrats and Republicans alike.
When benefits for working people or the poor are involved, the budget deficit is seen as an insurmountable problem.
There is no money for investments in ordinary Americans.
But the specter of $42 billion in lost tariff revenues over the next decade is met with a shrug by the movers and shakers in Congress and the White House.
As long as it's for business -- well, then, that's all right.


No Headline
"We will work together professionally in the interests of the people of this city and state." GEORGE E. PATAKI, the Governor-elect, after finally meeting with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.  [ A1:2. ] "The election is over." MAYOR GIULIANI.  [ A1:2. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about a sniper in Suffolk County who killed one person and wounded two misidentified the rifle used in the shootings.
It is a Remington .35-caliber Whelen, not a Marlin.


Defense in Murder Case Finds Surprise Witness
Defense lawyers said yesterday that they will call a surprise witness today in the trial of a Bronx man accused of killing a teen-ager during a carjacking in Rockland County early this year.
The defendant, Edward L. Summers, has maintained that the killing was committed by an elusive drug dealer from the Bronx named Dino, but prosecutors have said that Dino is a fiction, created by Mr.
Summers.


Tech Data Corp.(TECD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Banks Sees A Cure for The Blues For Browns
Carl Banks has experienced it all during his 11 years in the National Football League.
He won Super Bowls with the Giants in 1986 and 1990, and he endured a dismal 4-12 season last year as a member of the worst Redskins team in 30 years.
He went to the Pro Bowl in 1987 and was considered washed up last March when the Redskins released him with two years still remaining on his $5.4 million contract.
Now Banks, 32, is back on top again, a key member of a 9-3 Cleveland Browns team that appears headed for the playoffs and will meet the 5-7 Giants Sunday at Cleveland Stadium.
As the starting left outside linebacker, Banks is the fourth-leading tackler with 76, and he's being credited for providing the type of leadership and character that the Browns had been lacking.
Last Sunday, he earned a game ball for his six-tackle performance in the Browns' 34-10 victory over the Houston Oilers.


People
*
Jeffrey McClelland, executive vice president and client services director at McAdams, Richman &amp; Ong, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., was promoted to president and chief executive, succeeding Brian McAdams, who continues as chairman. *
Judy Fearing was named senior vice president for consumer marketing at ESPN Inc., New York, assuming responsibilities previously held by Harriet Seitler, vice president for marketing and creative services, who left.
Ms.
Fearing was previously vice president and general manager at Nabisco Foods, Parsippany, N.J.


Grand Union Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 15


Region Briefs; Corpse Found on Tracks, Delaying L.I. Service
A man's body was found lying across the eastbound tracks of the Long Island Rail Road here this morning, 300 feet east of the Meadowbrook Parkway overpass.
The discovery delayed train service for as long as an hour and a quarter, railroad officials said.
The police said that the man, who has not been identified, appeared to have been struck by a train sometime overnight.
Officials could not say whether he had been the victim of a fatal accident or had intended to kill himself.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.75
4.75
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.67
3.16
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.44
3.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.91
5.86
3.28
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.93
7.87
5.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.03
7.98
6.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.90
7.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.27
7.24
5.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


To Help Bolster Arafat, Donors Arrange $180 Million in Aid
Rushing to bolster Yasir Arafat's Palestinian Authority against simmering discontent among Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, the World Bank and a group of donor countries have signed or are close to signing emergency aid to the Palestinian government totaling $180 million.
Today, Mr.
Arafat and World Bank officials signed grants and loans totaling $58 million.
On Wednesday, officials involved in the negotiations said, donor countries are expected to sign similar aid totaling $122 million.


This Strike Is Going From Ugly to Uglier
The symbiotic relationship between baseball owners and baseball players, gnawed at over the years by free-agent and arbitration disputes, tested endlessly by contract negotiations and collusion, is about to be torn asunder.
In all likelihood, major league owners are less than a week from imposing the salary cap because of the continued failure by negotiators for the 28 clubs and 700 players to settle a strike that began on Aug. 12.


Last Words From a Speaker
On his last day as Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley said he regretted not communicating "some of the achievements that we have made and accomplished in this Congress." Page B10.


INSIDE
Consumers Confident
Americans are optimistic about finances, a surge to a four-year high in the Conference Board's consumer confidence index shows.
Page D1.
Ambiguous Law Is Upheld
The High Court edited a pornography law, ruling it meant to say there must be proof that a defendant knew the material's nature.
Page B9.
Quayle Is Hospitalized
Former Vice President Dan Quayle was under treatment for a blood clot in one of his lungs.
Page A18.
Jerry Rubin Is Dead
The flamboyant 1960's radical, who once preached distrust of "anyone over 30," was 56 years old.
Page B13.


Connecticut Uses Experience to Beat Blue Devils
Connecticut 90, Duke 86
Ray Allen, the player slotted to replace Donyell Marshall, scored 26 points last night to lead No. 16 Connecticut to a 90-86 victory over No. 6 Duke in the inaugural Great Eight Basketball Festival at Auburn Hills, Mich.


Steelmakers' Quest for a Better Way
Even as it enjoys one of its biggest booms in decades, the American steel industry is investing big money in technologies to carry it through the inevitable next downturn.
In the process, former adversaries -- old-line Big Steel and the mini-mills -- are finding that each has skills to learn from the other.


A Toppled Foley Gives Up the Gavel
Thomas S. Foley, who loved the House of Representatives too well to root out its failings, today surrendered the gavel for the last time.
The Speaker of the House told reporters in his final news conference that he left Congress today without bitterness over his defeat earlier this month, when he became the most prominent of the many Democratic powers toppled by a Republican tide.
Instead, he said, he departed with "gratitude to my constituents who have given me what I think is one of the greatest honors in public life, to represent them here in the Capitol of the United States, in the House of Representatives."


From Eric Clapton, Blues Without the Bell-Bottoms
It took an even dozen songs for Eric Clapton to warm up on Monday night at Irving Plaza.
Mr.
Clapton, touring to support his blues album, "From the Cradle" (Reprise), has been doing small club dates in addition to stadiums; Monday night's show, in front of 454 people, ended his tour.
And for a good portion of it, he was engrossing not for what he played, but for what he didn't.
He was the snake that everybody knows will bite.
It was just a matter of waiting.
Mr.
Clapton started out by playing a slew of acoustic pieces, including Leroy Carr's "How Long Blues." He's a decent enough scholar, and he and his band have clearly gone back to the original recordings to figure out how they work.
They often work with understatement, and Mr.
Clapton rarely soloed, handing in restrained and precise performances.
He subordinated his personality to the music, taking idol worship out of the event and making the performance casual, even intimate.
Dressed in a white T-shirt and blue jeans, Mr.
Clapton was milking the anti-hero angle; he wore the same clothes for all three performances at Irving Plaza.


Market Place; Selloff Fails to Shake Stock Fund Investors
American investors may be growing more nervous about their stock market investments, but they keep putting money into equity mutual funds.
Even last week's sharp fall in stock prices produced only a relatively small amount of withdrawals, fund managers said yesterday.
That reluctance to get out no doubt helped to stabilize stocks, which recovered part of their losses after the Thanksgiving holiday.
At least since 1988, individual investors have shown a willingness to buy on dips, and that behavior continues.


Major and Rebel Tory Backbenchers Square Off Over Europe
A day after using a political bludgeon to beat back opposition within his own Conservative Party to win a Parliamentary vote on which he had staked his leadership, Prime Minister John Major today confronted the fallout from his tactics, including a technical loss of his majority in the House of Commons.
Making good on his promise to punish any Conservatives who failed to support the Government in Monday night's vote on increasing financing for the European Union, Mr.
Major effectively suspended from the party eight rebel Tories who abstained.
The eight rebels kept their seats in Parliament, but cannot participate in Conservative Party business and are threatened with being replaced as the party's candidates in the next election.


Apache To Buy Fields From Texaco
Texaco Inc. agreed yesterday to sell some 300 domestic oil and gas fields to the Apache Corporation for about $600 million.
The sale would be one of the largest transactions in a trend that has been sweeping the oil industry in recent years.
Major oil companies have been increasing their attention abroad, investing billions of dollars in such areas as Russia and China, while leaving domestic fields to smaller and more nimble independent oil companies like Apache.


Breast Cancer Gene Isn't Making Screening Easy
LEST anybody nurse hopes that the wildly publicized discovery of the breast cancer gene two months ago will offer up new screening techniques or treatments any time soon, scientists caution that the gene is proving to be as frustrating and recalcitrant as the disease.
In today's issue of the journal Nature Genetics, three teams of scientists report on their studies of the gene, called BRCA1, which in its mutant form is thought to be responsible for about half the instances of hereditary breast cancer, or up to 5 percent of all breast cancer cases.


Rivers Rejoins Knicks' Rotation
Continuing to juggle their overcrowded roster, the Knicks activated Doc Rivers and Anthony Bonner today, and placed forward Ron Grandison and guard Charlie Ward on the injured list.
The move temporarily solved New York's roster problem, but it failed to end the speculation regarding Rivers, a 33-year-old point guard who is trying to come back from reconstructive left knee surgery.
It's unlikely that the Knicks will keep four point guards all season.
They may still make a deal involving Rivers or another guard, or Rivers might be waived if his knee doesn't hold up.
But being activated today was a pleasant surprise for Rivers, who wants to resume his career -- no matter where it leads him.


Comptroller Backs Council In Budget Fight With Mayor
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi sided yesterday with the City Council in its legal battle with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying he believed the Council had the power to pass its own version of budget changes intended to keep the city's spending plan in balance.
But with the Council poised to override Mr.
Giuliani's veto of its spending plan, Mr.
Hevesi questioned some of the Council's proposed cuts and urged the two sides to compromise rather than let the courts resolve their impasse.


How a Leader Emerged As if Called by History
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM
By Nelson Mandela
558 pages. Little, Brown. $24.95.
Nelson Mandela has already made history: now he has chosen to write it in the form of an autobiography.


Occidental Purchasing the Hunts' Oil Company
The Placid Oil Company, once the nucleus of the Hunt family's vast fortune, announced its sale today to the Occidental Petroleum Corporation for $250 million.
The Dallas-based company, founded by H. L. Hunt in 1936 and later run by his sons, became one of the nation's largest independent oil companies.
Despite depressed oil markets and a bankruptcy filing in the 1980's, it still has annual revenue of $450 million.


Eating Well; Easy Ways To Have Healthier Holidays
VERY few people swear allegiance to a fat-free diet during the holidays or choose this time to straighten up their eating habits.
In a survey of 771 adults conducted earlier this month by Prevention Magazine and CNN, more than two-thirds said they planned to eat whatever they wanted for Thanksgiving, Christmas and Hanukkah.
Forty percent thought they would gain weight -- an average of about four and a half pounds -- as a result.
Most men thought they would later shed those pounds; the women were less sure.


Wine Talk
THAT'S IT," the hostess says, pushing a stray hair back in place with a floury hand. "The table is set, the meat's almost done, and the first guests should arrive any minute.
You can start opening the wine."
"The wine?" the host says.


Pact in Spain Halts Airline Disruption
Spain's airports returned to normal today after the settlement of a paralyzing wildcat strike by Iberia airline employees on Monday that stranded more than 100,000 passengers.
The strike cost the financially troubled state airline $11.5 million in lost revenue and compensation to passengers and other carriers.
Unions representing 80 percent of Iberia's 24,000 employees reached a preliminary agreement with management at 3 A.M. after more than 11 hours of negotiations.
The cost-cutting compromises, which the unions had initially resisted, included scaled pay reductions averaging 8 percent and layoffs of 3,500 employees through early retirement and buyouts.


Majerle's First-Half Barrage Powers Suns' Rout of Bucks
Suns 123, Bucks 106
Dan Majerle scored 23 points, including 19 in the first half, and Charles Barkley made his first start of the season as the visiting Phoenix Suns beat the Milwaukee Bucks, 123-106, last night.


Left at Altar by Norway, Europe Tries Stiff Upper Lip
On Monday, Norway became the first country to say "no" to the European Union, and today the members of the club reacted with the frozen smiles of jilted suitors.
There were expressions of disappointment and regret and underneath the whispered message: it's going to hurt you more than it hurts me.
By resolutely rejecting membership in the European Union, Norwegian voters broke the union's winning steak.
In a series of referendums this year that were timed to exert maximum pressure on Oslo, voters in Austria, Finland and Sweden all decided to join.


Mets Obtain a Marlin For Help in Outfield
Ryan Thompson can already envision the Mets' outfield next spring.
He'll play right.
Bobby Bonilla will play left.
And Carl Everett, whom the Mets acquired from the Marlins in a trade yesterday, will play center.
Thompson, the incumbent center fielder, has no problem with that picture.


Ex-Police Chief Begins Drunken-Driving Term
Goshen's former police chief has begun serving a one-year sentence for driving drunk after an F.B.I. seminar and causing a traffic accident that left a motorist partly paralyzed.


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Home Entertaining; Having a Dinner Party And Peace of Mind, Too
THE thought of preparing a dinner party that requires more than one fork and one spoon turns a lot of people into a quivering mass of aspic.
But somewhere between a sit-on-the-floor chili supper and five courses with footmen is a 1990's version of the formal dinner party.


CHRONICLE
BERT LANCE (remember him?), President Jimmy Carter's budget director, looked around the bipartisan gathering in support of the GATT agreement at the White House on Monday and noticed four other clients of Milton Pitts's barbershop, where he had gone earlier in the day for a haircut.
They were James A. Baker 3d, Secretary of State under President Bush; Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's National Security Adviser; James C. Miller 3d, director of the Federal Office of Management and Budget under President Reagan, and James T. Lynn, who held the same post in the Ford Administration.


Carbide/Graphite Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Second Recount Ordered in Gejdenson's Election
A panel of judges from Connecticut's highest court, pushing into what it said was new legal territory, today ordered a second recount of the votes cast in Norwich in United States Representative Sam Gejdenson's razor-thin re-election victory this month over his Republican challenger, Edward W. Munster.
The court also ordered the Secretary of the State not to certify the election results, or forward Mr.
Gejdenson's name to Washington as the winner, until the judicial review of the election is completed.


Car-Rental Companies Ordered to Accept Young Drivers
A State Supreme Court justice has ruled that car rental companies cannot turn away young drivers because of age, as many do now.
But the effect of the ruling was unclear, since the justice also said that companies could pass along to young drivers the extra insurance costs of renting to them.
Those costs could come to "several hundred dollars a day," said Demetria Mudar, a spokeswoman for Avis.


High Court Backs Cities' Zoning of Sex Shops
To the Editor:
Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, states confidently that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to localize sex shops by moratorium and zoning violates the First Amendment and that his group will likely file suit on behalf of the adult-entertainment businesses (news article, Nov. 23).


